A/68/49 (Vol. I)

Resolutions and Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its sixty-eighth session
Volume I
Resolutions
17 September – 27 December 2013

General Assembly
Official Records  Sixty-eighth Session
Supplement No. 49

United Nations  New York, 2014

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly from
17 September to 27 December 2013, as well as the information requested by the Assembly
in section C, paragraph 3, of its resolution 54/248 of 23 December 1999. Decisions
adopted by the Assembly during this period appear in volume II. Resolutions and decisions
adopted subsequently during the sixty-eighth session will be published in volume III.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee...........................................................1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee...........................................................155
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee).......................................................................................................................253
IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee ......................................................335
V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee .........................................................479
VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee ..........................................................749
VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee .........................................................817
Annexes
I. Allocation of agenda items............................................................................................................883
II. Checklist of resolutions .................................................................................................................895

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/1.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic and
Social Council.......................................................................................................................................................... 3

68/2.

Extension of the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system....................................................................................... 7

68/3.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities: the way
forward, a disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond ............................................................. 8

68/4.

Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development ................................................. 11

68/6.

Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals ................................................................................................................................................ 14

68/7.

Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade ............................ 17

68/8.

Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba........................................................................................................................................................... 18

68/9.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal.................................................................. 20

68/10.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency................................................................................................... 23

68/11.

The situation in Afghanistan.................................................................................................................................... 24

68/12.

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People ........................................................... 38

68/13.

Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat....................................................................................................... 40

68/14.

Special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department of Public Information of
the Secretariat......................................................................................................................................................... 41

68/15.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine ........................................................................................................ 43

68/16.

Jerusalem............................................................................................................................................................... 49

68/17.

The Syrian Golan.................................................................................................................................................... 50

68/18.

Graduation of countries from the least developed country category............................................................................ 52

68/22.

Credentials of representatives to the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly...................................................... 53

68/70.

Oceans and the law of the sea .................................................................................................................................. 53

68/71.

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments............................. 88

68/98.

Global health and foreign policy ............................................................................................................................ 110

68/99.

Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and minimize the
consequences of the Chernobyl disaster ................................................................................................................. 114

68/100.

Assistance to the Palestinian people ....................................................................................................................... 117

68/101.

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel........................................ 121

68/102.

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations................................. 127

68/103.

International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development........ 133
1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/125.

Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace ......................................................... 139

68/126.

Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace................................ 142

68/127.

A world against violence and violent extremism..................................................................................................... 144

68/128.

The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts........................................................... 147

68/129.

Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of
sexual violence..................................................................................................................................................... 152

68/237.

Proclamation of the International Decade for People of African Descent .................................................................. 153

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/1
AR
/ ES6/8/1

Adopted at the 2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.2,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

68/1.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the
Economic and Social Council
The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 45/264 of 13 May 1991, 48/162 of 20 December 1993, 50/227 of 24 May 1996,
52/12 B of 19 December 1997, 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 60/265 of 30 June 2006, 61/16 of 20 November 2006
and 65/285 of 29 June 2011,
Recalling also its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, by which it endorsed the outcome document of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,
Recalling further its resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013,
Reaffirming the role that the Charter of the United Nations and the General Assembly have vested in the
Economic and Social Council, and recognizing the need for a more effective Council as a principal body for
coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and recommendations on issues of economic and social development,
as well as for implementation of the international development goals agreed at the major United Nations
conferences and summits, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Reaffirming also the commitment to and emphasizing the need to strengthen the Economic and Social
Council, within its mandate under the Charter as a principal organ of the United Nations, in the integrated and
coordinated follow-up of the outcomes of all major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social, environmental and related fields, and recognizing the key role of the Council in achieving a balanced
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development,
Recalling its resolution 67/199 of 21 December 2012, including the decision to hold open, transparent and
inclusive consultations to review and explore the modalities of the financing for development process, including
possible arrangements to strengthen the process, as well as options for bringing together the various processes
covering development financing in an integrated manner, taking into account the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General on modalities of the financing for development follow-up process,1
Noting the processes related to the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, the acceleration of the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals and the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda,
1. Takes note of the note by the President of the General Assembly on the review of the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council;2
2. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council;3
3. Adopts the text contained in the annex to the present resolution, and calls upon the Economic and Social
Council and other relevant bodies of the United Nations system to implement the measures contained therein in an
expeditious manner;
4. Decides that the arrangements contained in the present resolution and its annex will be reviewed at its
seventy-second session.

_______________
1

A/67/353.
A/67/975.
3
A/67/736-E/2013/7.
2

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Annex
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council
1. In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Economic and Social
Council should continue to strengthen its role as the central mechanism for coordination of the activities of the
United Nations system and its specialized agencies and supervision of subsidiary bodies in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields. It should provide overall guidance and coordination to the United Nations
development system and promote a coordinated follow-up to the outcomes of major international conferences and
summits in the economic, social, environmental and related fields. The working modalities of the Council should be
guided by the principles of inclusiveness, transparency and flexibility. The Council should aim at creating synergy
and coherence as well as avoiding duplication between its deliberations and those of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development.
2. The Economic and Social Council shall continue to consider reports of intergovernmental and inter-agency
bodies and mechanisms for coordination and recommend ways to enhance their efficiency, accountability,
interaction and complementarity of efforts.
3. In the follow-up to United Nations conferences and summits, the Economic and Social Council should ensure
the harmonization and coordination of the agendas and work programmes of the functional commissions by
promoting a clearer division of labour among them and providing clear policy guidance to them. To that end, better
preparation of the meetings of the Council should be pursued.
4. The arrangements set forth in the present annex should not lead to an increase in the number of meeting days
currently provided for the Economic and Social Council.
5. The Economic and Social Council shall adjust its programme of work to a July-to-July cycle with immediate
effect and is invited to consider transitional arrangements for the election of its Bureau, taking into account the
relevant rules, regulations and practices with regard to the work of the Council, its subsidiary bodies and United
Nations funds and programmes.
6. The Economic and Social Council needs a strengthened issues-based approach to enhance its lead role in
identifying emerging challenges and promoting reflection, debate and innovative thinking, as well as in achieving a
balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development.
7.

The Economic and Social Council shall base its annual programme of work on a main theme that will:
(a)

Be determined at the beginning of its cycle;

(b) Be selected taking into account the role of the Council in promoting the balanced integration of the
economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development, as well as the post-2015 development
agenda;
(c)

Be decided by the Council based on inputs from its subsidiary bodies, as well as Member States;

(d) Provide guidance to the work of its entire system while respecting the agenda, diversity of mandates and
specialized expertise of the various subsidiary bodies;
(e) Enable the Council to promote system-wide coherence and coordination of issues requiring the effective
response of the United Nations system.
8. The Economic and Social Council shall invite its subsidiary bodies and the governing bodies of the funds,
programmes and specialized agencies to contribute, as appropriate, to its work in keeping with the agreed theme.
9. A proposal for the annual theme will be made by the President of the Economic and Social Council in
consultation with the subsidiary bodies and Member States, initially for the two following cycles and subsequently
for the following year, in order to give ample time for input from subsidiary bodies and Member States.
10. The Economic and Social Council shall continue to have one substantive and one organizational session. To
ensure a more responsive Council, it may convene special sessions in accordance with its rules of procedure. The
Council, as a principal organ of the United Nations, is also entitled to hold ad hoc meetings as and when needed to
address urgent developments in the economic, social, environmental and related fields.
4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. The current segment structure of the substantive session of the Economic and Social Council will be revised,
with a redistribution of working days, as outlined below:
(a) An operational activities for development segment will be held immediately following the first regular
sessions of the executive boards of the funds and programmes of the United Nations system. Through this segment
the Council should provide overall coordination and guidance for operational development funds and programmes
on a system-wide basis. Such guidance should include objectives, priorities and strategies in the implementation of
the policies formulated by the General Assembly, including the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, and
should concentrate on cross-cutting and coordination issues related to operational activities. Efforts should focus on
improving the overall impact of operational activities of the United Nations system in support of national
development priorities. With a view to avoiding repetition of discussions, the governing boards that report to the
Council should be requested to highlight in their reports to the Council the issues requiring examination and identify
actions to be taken, guided by the chosen main theme. National officials directly involved in the implementation of
national development strategies, as well as field-level representatives of the United Nations system, should be
encouraged to participate in the segment in order for their contributions to be taken into account. Contribution of the
segment to the preparations for the quadrennial policy review of operational activities, through which the Assembly
establishes key system-wide policy orientations for the development cooperation and country-level modalities of the
United Nations system, should be continued;
(b) A humanitarian affairs segment will be held in June, through which the Council should continue to
contribute to strengthening the coordination and effectiveness of United Nations humanitarian assistance and
support and complement international efforts aimed at addressing humanitarian emergencies, including natural
disasters, in order to promote an improved, coordinated response by the United Nations. The Council should also
continue to hold a special event to discuss the transition from relief to development, to be convened immediately
preceding the humanitarian affairs segment and following the annual session of the executive boards of the funds
and programmes of the United Nations system;
(c) A high-level segment will be held in July. It will continue to discharge the functions of the high-level
segment of the Council as provided for in General Assembly resolutions 45/264 of 13 May 1991, 48/162 of
20 December 1993, 50/227 of 24 May 1996 and 61/16 of 20 November 2006, in particular the biennial two-day
Development Cooperation Forum, unless otherwise indicated in the present resolution or in resolution 67/290 of
9 July 2013. The segment will include the three-day ministerial meeting of the high-level political forum on
sustainable development provided for in resolution 67/290. The outcome of the segment will be a ministerial
declaration;
(d) Dedicated coordination and management meetings will be held regularly to perform the functions of the
coordination and general segments as provided for in the General Assembly resolutions mentioned in
paragraph 11 (c) above. The timing of these meetings shall be decided by the Council;
(e) An integration segment shall be held annually, the timing and modalities of which shall be decided by
the Council. The main functions of the segment will be to consolidate all the inputs of Member States, the subsidiary
bodies of the Council, the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders and to promote the balanced
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development. The integration segment will bring together the key
messages from the Council system on the main theme and develop action-oriented recommendations for follow-up.
12. The Economic and Social Council should conduct an annual dialogue with the Executive Secretaries of the
regional commissions.
13. The Economic and Social Council should continue to strengthen and further promote dialogue on and
implementation of the financing for development agenda, inter alia, by strengthening existing arrangements,
including the special high-level meeting with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade
Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to be held immediately following the
annual spring meeting of the Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund on
the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing Countries held in Washington, D.C. The Council should also continue
to allocate specific time for deliberation and consideration of the follow-up to the International Conference on
Financing for Development.
14. The Economic and Social Council should promote interaction with relevant international and regional forums,
organizations and groupings that make policy recommendations or take policy decisions with global implications, as
appropriate.
5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

15. In scheduling the above-mentioned sessions, meetings and consultations, the Economic and Social Council
should take into consideration meetings of other bodies dealing with economic, social and environmental issues to
avoid unnecessary overlapping and overburdening of their agendas.
16. The Economic and Social Council shall hold the regular meetings of its substantive sessions in New York and
the humanitarian affairs segment shall continue to alternate between New York and Geneva. On an ad hoc and costeffective basis, another United Nations location could be decided upon if that would contribute to a better discussion
on the chosen main theme.
17. With a view to continuously improving the interaction with and follow-up to the work of its subsidiary bodies,
the Economic and Social Council should conduct action-oriented reviews of the activities, reports and
recommendations of its subsidiary bodies, avoiding a repetition of the debates held in those bodies and focusing
attention on issues that require a prioritized and coordinated substantive response from the United Nations system as
a whole. The subsidiary bodies should include in their reports an executive summary, and the reports should be
concise, clearly identifying the conclusions and recommendations and issues that may require attention and/or
action by the Council.
18. The Economic and Social Council should make transitional arrangements for holding the annual ministerial
review during the high-level segments in 2014 and 2015.
19. The Economic and Social Council should devote time to the specific needs of countries in special situations,
namely the least developed countries, the landlocked developing countries, the small island developing States and
Africa and integrate their concerns into all segments as cross-cutting priorities. It will continue to address the
particular development challenges of middle-income countries.
20. In line with its earlier decision, the Economic and Social Council will include in its annual ministerial review
in 2015 a review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020 (Istanbul Programme of Action).4 The Development Cooperation Forum should continue to
take into consideration the Istanbul Programme of Action when it reviews the trends in international development
cooperation, as well as policy coherence for development. The Council also should continue to review and
coordinate the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action.
21. The Economic and Social Council should take steps to strengthen the consideration of issues affecting small
island developing States in keeping with the mandate of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States (Barbados Programme of Action)5 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States.6
22. The Economic and Social Council has an important role as a platform for multi-stakeholder participation and
for engaging all relevant stakeholders in the work of the Council, particularly with respect to its function related to
the integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development.
23. While retaining its intergovernmental nature, the Economic and Social Council shall seek to promote the
active participation of major groups, non-governmental organizations, other relevant stakeholders and regional
organizations in the activities of the Council and its functional and regional commissions, in accordance with the
provisions of their respective rules of procedure and the provisions of General Assembly resolution 67/290 insofar
as it pertains to the meetings of the high-level political forum on sustainable development under the auspices of the
Council.
24. The Economic and Social Council should further promote the integration of youth into its deliberations,
building on the past positive experiences of the informal youth forums. The Council should also continue with the
informal partnership forum.
_______________
4

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
5
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
6
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

6

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25. The Secretary-General should make proposals to promote collaboration across the United Nations system,
taking account of the functions of a strengthened Economic and Social Council, with the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs of the Secretariat serving as a central hub of support for the Council, in order to better utilize
existing resources of the United Nations system to broaden support to the Council and its Bureau. The proposals
should include measures to enable the Secretariat to better support the implementation of a unified development
agenda. Similarly, the Secretary-General should explore proposals to strengthen support to the Council, including to
the office of the President of the Council.
26. The Secretary-General should take steps to enable adequate institutional focus on the needs of small island
developing States and provide effective support for the third International Conference on Small Island Developing
States.
27. The annual programme of work of the Economic and Social Council should provide for enhancing regular
dialogue with the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, taking into account relevant
Council and General Assembly resolutions, including Assembly resolution 67/226 of 21 December 2012 on the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review.
28. Resolutions and decisions of the Economic and Social Council should be implemented and followed up fully
by all relevant parts of the United Nations system. This process should be monitored by the Council and the General
Assembly on a regular basis, as appropriate.
29. The Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, especially its Second and Third Committees,
need to consider and take steps towards the rationalization of their agendas, with a view to eliminating duplication
and overlap and promoting complementarity in the consideration and negotiation of similar or related issues.
30. The Presidents of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly are requested to coordinate
with the bureaux of relevant organs and intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations, including the
Peacebuilding Commission, in order to achieve maximum synergy and effectiveness.
31. The Bureau of the Economic and Social Council should convene regular open-ended informal consultations
of the Council to improve organizational and procedural as well as substantive aspects of the sessions of the
Council, with a view to highlighting the issues and recommendations that require consideration and action by the
Council in order to have more focused and well-prepared substantive sessions. This may involve, as appropriate,
dialogues with the chairs and the secretariats of the relevant functional commissions, other subsidiary and related
bodies and executive boards.
32. The Bureau of the Economic and Social Council should continue to meet on a regular basis to consider issues
such as recommendations on agenda items and subjects, the structure of meetings and lists of guest participants for
panel discussions, and should be kept informed, when appropriate and in the context of its organizational efforts, of
the deliberations of relevant intergovernmental mechanisms outside the United Nations system. The Bureau shall
regularly brief the Council on its deliberations.
33. Members of the Bureau should communicate to the next session of the Economic and Social Council the
working methods that have proved successful and the overall experience acquired.
34. The Economic and Social Council should further consider ways to improve its public profile, including by
effectively communicating its role, work and achievements to the public in a compelling manner.
RESOLUTION 68/2
AR
/ ES6/8/2

Adopted at the 2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.3,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

68/2.

Extension of the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system
The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 66/254 of 23 February 2012, by which it launched the intergovernmental process of
the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system, and its resolution 66/295 of 17 September 2012, by which it extended the intergovernmental process,
7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the participation and contributions of Member States during the intergovernmental process, as well as
experts of the human rights treaty bodies, national human rights institutions, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and non-governmental organizations,
Emphasizing that strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system is a common goal shared by stakeholders who have different legal competencies in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international human rights instruments establishing treaty bodies, and recognizing
in this regard the ongoing efforts of different treaty bodies towards strengthening and enhancing their effective
functioning,
1. Decides to extend the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system until the first half of February 2014, in
order to finalize the elaboration of an outcome document of the intergovernmental process;
2. Agrees to continue the consideration of elements for the substantive resolution, building upon, inter alia,
those contained in the report of the co-facilitators on the intergovernmental process presented during the sixtyseventh session of the General Assembly;7
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session to appoint two co-facilitators
to continue open, transparent and inclusive negotiations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, by 15 November 2013, a comprehensive and detailed cost
assessment to provide background context to support the intergovernmental process, based on, but not limited to, the
report of the co-facilitators.
RESOLUTION 68/3
AR
/ ES6/8/3

Adopted at the 3rd plenary meeting, on 23 September 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.1,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

68/3.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the
Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons
with disabilities: the way forward, a disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and
beyond
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document:

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities: the way
forward, a disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond
I.

Values and principles

1. We, the Heads of State and Government, have gathered at United Nations Headquarters in New York on
23 September 2013 to reaffirm our resolve to work together for disability-inclusive development and the
commitment of the international community to the advancement of the rights of all persons with disabilities, which
is deeply rooted in the goals of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.8
2. We reaffirm the need for the realization of the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally
agreed development goals for persons with disabilities towards 2015 and beyond, and recognize persons with
disabilities as agents and beneficiaries of development, acknowledging the value of their contribution to the general
well-being, progress and diversity of society.
_______________
7
8

8

A/67/995.
Resolution 217 A (III).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. We are concerned that this commitment has yet to be fully translated into the inclusion of disability in
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and, as 2015 approaches,
strongly reiterate our determination to ensure the timely realization of the Millennium Development Goals and other
internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities, who make up an estimated 15 per cent of the
world’s population, or 1 billion people, of whom an estimated 80 per cent live in developing countries. In this
regard, we stress the importance of ensuring accessibility for and inclusion of persons with disabilities in all aspects
of development and of giving due consideration to all persons with disabilities in the emerging post-2015 United
Nations development agenda.
II.

Realizing the development goals for persons with disabilities towards 2015 and beyond

4. We underline the need for urgent action by all relevant stakeholders towards the adoption and implementation
of more ambitious disability-inclusive national development strategies and efforts with disability-targeted actions,
backed by increased international cooperation and support, and resolve to undertake the following commitments
leading to 2015 and beyond:
(a) Achieve the full application and implementation of the international normative framework on disability
and development by encouraging the ratification and implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities9 and by considering the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention,10 as both human
rights and development instruments;
(b) Ensure that all development policies, including those regarding poverty eradication, social inclusion, full
and productive employment and decent work, and access to basic social services, and their decision-making
processes take into account the needs of and benefit all persons with disabilities, including women, children, youth,
indigenous peoples and older persons, who can be subject to violence and multiple or aggravated forms of
discrimination;
(c) Develop specific plans, including, when necessary, the enactment or amendment and enforcement of
national legislation, the harmonization of national legislative, policy and institutional structures and the adoption and
implementation of national plans relevant to the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed
development goals to advance the inclusion of persons with disabilities;
(d) Recognize the right to education on the basis of equal opportunity and non-discrimination by making
primary education accessible, free and compulsory, and available to all children with disabilities on an equal basis
with others, ensuring that all children have equal opportunity for access to an inclusive education system of good
quality and making early and secondary education generally available and accessible to all, in particular to children
with disabilities from low-income families;
(e) Ensure accessibility for persons with disabilities to health-care services, including primary health-care
and specialized services, inter alia, by investing in and improving the affordability of such services for persons with
disabilities;
(f) Strengthen social protection for meeting disability-related needs and promote access to relevant schemes
based on social protection floors, on an equal basis with others, including income support, and access to appropriate
and affordable services, devices and other assistance;
(g) Encourage Member States to take sustainable measures to ensure equal access to full and productive
employment and decent work on an equal basis and without discrimination to persons with disabilities, including by
promoting access to inclusive education systems, skills development and vocational and entrepreneurial training, in
order to enable persons with disabilities to attain and maintain maximum independence;
(h) Ensure accessibility, following the universal design approach, by removing barriers to the physical
environment, transportation, employment, education, health, services, information and assistive devices, such as
information and communications technologies, including in remote or rural areas, to achieve the fullest potential
throughout the whole life cycle of persons with disabilities;
_______________
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
Ibid., vol. 2518, No. 44910.

10

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(i) Improve disability data collection, analysis and monitoring for development policy planning,
implementation and evaluation, fully taking into account regional contexts, share, where appropriate, relevant data
and statistics with relevant agencies and bodies within the United Nations system, including the Statistical
Commission, through appropriate mechanisms, and underline the need for internationally comparable data and
statistics disaggregated by sex and age, including information on disability;
(j) Strengthen and support, in coordination with academic institutions and other relevant stakeholders,
research to promote knowledge and understanding of disability and development, and adequately and efficiently
allocate resources in this regard;
(k) Urge Member States, the United Nations system and humanitarian actors, in accordance with their
relevant mandates, to continue to strengthen the inclusion of and focus on the needs of persons with disabilities in
humanitarian programming and response, and include accessibility and rehabilitation as essential components in all
aspects and stages of humanitarian response, inter alia, by strengthening preparedness and disaster risk reduction;
(l) Encourage increased understanding, knowledge and the greatest social awareness about persons with
disabilities, inter alia, by developing and implementing communication and social media campaigns by and in
conjunction with persons with disabilities and organizations of persons with disabilities, in order to promote positive
perceptions of persons with disabilities, and seek to eliminate discriminatory social and attitudinal barriers so that
they participate fully in society;
(m) Strengthen national efforts, including with the appropriate support of international cooperation, upon
request, aimed at addressing the rights and needs of women and children with disabilities and the realization of the
internationally agreed development goals and commitments related to gender equality and to the rights of the child;
(n) Encourage regional and international development banks and financial institutions, consistent with their
mandates, to include disability in all their development efforts and lending mechanisms, taking into account that
persons with disabilities are disproportionately affected also during economic crises;
(o) Encourage the mobilization of public and private resources on a sustainable basis to mainstream
disability in development at all levels, and underline the need to promote and strengthen international cooperation
and the exchange of good practices, including regional and subregional, South-South and triangular cooperation as a
complement to rather than a substitute for North-South cooperation, and partnerships for disability-inclusive
development, in support of national efforts, inter alia, by ensuring that resources, capacity-building and technical
assistance, including by facilitating access to and sharing accessible and assistive technologies and through the
transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms and other interventions, advance disability-inclusive development,
ensure accessibility for persons with disabilities and promote their empowerment; special attention should be paid to
developing countries that are experiencing increasing difficulties in mobilizing adequate resources to meet pressing
needs in mainstreaming disability in development, including rehabilitation, habilitation, equalization of
opportunities for persons with disabilities, health promotion and public health campaigns for the prevention of
diseases, and in addressing social, environmental and health risk factors, inter alia, by improving health care,
maternal health and access to vaccination, clean water supply and sanitation and safe transport;
(p) Encourage private sector entities to partner with the public sector and civil society, in particular
organizations of persons with disabilities, to integrate, adopt and implement a disability perspective in accordance
with national plans, policies and priorities in their corporate social responsibility initiatives;
(q) Support the objectives of the United Nations Partnership to Promote the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Multi-Donor Trust Fund, including through voluntary contributions, and encourage other stakeholders to do so.
III. Follow-up of the outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization
of the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons
with disabilities: the way forward, a disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond
5. We urge the United Nations system as well as Member States to stay engaged in the realization of the
Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities
towards 2015 and beyond, and encourage the international community to seize every opportunity to include
disability as a cross-cutting issue in the global development agenda, to give due consideration to disability in the
emerging post-2015 United Nations development agenda with a view to enhancing cooperation, and to provide
relevant technical assistance to Member States upon their request.
10

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6. We call upon the Economic and Social Council to give due consideration to the issue of disability and
development, including within the framework of United Nations operational activities, in accordance with relevant
mandates, in order to enhance awareness and cooperation at all levels, including the participation, where
appropriate, of United Nations agencies, multilateral development banks and institutions and other relevant
stakeholders, while ensuring coordination and avoiding possible overlapping.
7. We note the inclusive preparatory process for this high-level meeting, including the online and regional
consultations.
8. We request the Secretary-General, in coordination with all the relevant United Nations entities, to include
information on progress made in the implementation of the present outcome document in his existing and already
mandated periodic reports on issues concerning disability and development, and to make recommendations, as
appropriate, for concrete and further steps to implement the present outcome document within the context of the
development agenda beyond 2015.
9. We underline the importance of closely consulting with and actively involving, as appropriate, persons with
disabilities, including through their representative organizations, as key actors and stakeholders in the elaboration,
implementation and monitoring of the emerging post-2015 development agenda.
10. We request the General Assembly to include in its final review on progress made towards the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals steps taken to implement the present outcome document. We also request the
President of the General Assembly at its seventieth session to follow up on the status of and progress made towards
the realization of the development goals for persons with disabilities.
RESOLUTION 68/4
A/RES/684/

Adopted at the 25th plenary meeting, on 3 October 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.5, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

68/4.

Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development
The General Assembly
Adopts the following declaration:

Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development
We, representatives of States and Governments, gathered at United Nations Headquarters in New York on
3 and 4 October 2013 on the occasion of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development,
1. Recognize that international migration is a multidimensional reality of major relevance for the
development of countries of origin, transit and destination, and in this regard recognize that international migration
is a cross-cutting phenomenon that should be addressed in a coherent, comprehensive and balanced manner,
integrating development with due regard for social, economic and environmental dimensions and respecting human
rights;
2. Acknowledge the important contribution made by migrants and migration to development in countries
of origin, transit and destination, as well as the complex interrelationship between migration and development;
3. Decide to work towards an effective and inclusive agenda on international migration that integrates
development and respects human rights by improving the performance of existing institutions and frameworks, as
well as partnering more effectively with all stakeholders involved in international migration and development at the
regional and global levels;
4. Reaffirm our commitment to address the opportunities and the challenges that international migration
presents to countries of origin, transit and destination;
5. Recognize the need for international cooperation to address, in a holistic and comprehensive manner, the
challenges of irregular migration to ensure safe, orderly and regular migration, with full respect for human rights;
11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6. Recognize the need to strengthen synergies between international migration and development at the
global, regional and national levels;
7. Recognize the efforts made by the international community in addressing relevant aspects of
international migration and development, through different initiatives, both within the United Nations system and in
other processes, particularly the Global Forum on Migration and Development and regional processes, as well as in
drawing on the expertise of the International Organization for Migration and other member agencies of the Global
Migration Group;
8. Acknowledge the important contribution of migration in realizing the Millennium Development Goals,
and recognize that human mobility is a key factor for sustainable development which should be adequately
considered in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
9. Acknowledge the important role that migrants play as partners in the development of countries of origin,
transit and destination and recognize the need to improve public perceptions of migrants and migration;
10. Reaffirm the need to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of women and children, and to address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and through a comprehensive and
balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in
promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants, and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their
vulnerability;
11. Recognize that women and girls account for almost half of all international migrants at the global level,
and the need to address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and girls by, inter alia,
incorporating a gender perspective into policies and strengthening national laws, institutions and programmes to
combat gender-based violence, including trafficking in persons and discrimination against women and girls;
12. Emphasize in this regard the need to establish appropriate measures for the protection of women migrant
workers in all sectors, including those involved in domestic work;
13. Express the commitment to protect the human rights of migrant children, given their vulnerability,
particularly unaccompanied migrant children, and to provide for their health, education and psychosocial
development, ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in policies of integration, return
and family reunification;
14. Emphasize the need to respect and promote international labour standards as appropriate, and respect the
rights of migrants in their workplaces;
15. Note the contribution of applicable international conventions, including the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,11 to the international system
for the protection of migrants;
16. Strongly condemn the acts, manifestations and expressions of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance against migrants and the stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion
or belief, and urge States to apply and, where needed, reinforce the existing laws when xenophobic or intolerant
acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants occur, in order to eradicate impunity for those who commit
those acts;
17. Reiterate our commitment to prevent and combat trafficking in persons, protect victims of trafficking,
prevent and combat migrant smuggling and protect migrants from exploitation and other abuses, stress the need to
establish or upgrade, as appropriate, national and regional anti-human trafficking policies and to reinforce
cooperation on prevention, the prosecution of traffickers and the protection of victims of trafficking, and encourage
Member States to ratify, accede to and implement relevant international instruments on preventing and combating
trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants;
18. Encourage Member States to cooperate on mobility programmes that facilitate safe, orderly and regular
migration, including through labour mobility;
_______________
11

12

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

19. Recognize the particular vulnerabilities, circumstances and needs of adolescents and young migrants, as
well as their potential to build social, economic and cultural bridges of cooperation and understanding across
societies;
20. Recognize also all efforts made by Governments, all relevant bodies, agencies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations system, other relevant intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations, including
the International Organization for Migration and other organizations within the Global Migration Group, and nongovernmental stakeholders, including the private sector, in addressing international migration and development for
the benefit of both migrants and societies; and bearing this goal in mind, further emphasize the need to strengthen
partnerships among all relevant stakeholders;
21. Stress the need to deepen the interaction between Governments and civil society to find responses to the
challenges and the opportunities posed by international migration, and recognize the contribution of civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, to promoting the well-being of migrants and their integration into
societies, especially at times of extreme vulnerable conditions, and the support of the international community to the
efforts of such organizations;
22. Acknowledge the complexity of migratory flows and that international migration movements also occur
within the same geographical regions, and in this context call for a better understanding of migration patterns across
and within regions;
23. Recognize the importance of coordinated efforts of the international community to assist and support
migrants stranded in vulnerable situations and facilitate, and cooperate on when appropriate, their voluntary return
to their country of origin, and call for practical and action-oriented initiatives aimed at identifying and closing
protection gaps;
24. Underline the right of migrants to return to their country of citizenship, and recall that States must ensure
that their returning nationals are duly received;
25. Recognize the need to consider the role that environmental factors may play in migration;
26. Recognize the necessity to consider how the migration of highly skilled persons, especially in the health,
social and engineering sectors, affects the development efforts of developing countries, and emphasize the need to
consider circular migration;
27. Recognize that remittances constitute an important source of private capital, and reaffirm the need to
promote conditions for cheaper, faster and safer transfers of remittances in both source and recipient countries;
28. Emphasize the need for reliable statistical data on international migration, including, when possible, on
the contributions of migrants to development in both countries of origin and countries of destination; this data could
facilitate the design of evidence-based policy- and decision-making in all relevant aspects of sustainable
development;
29. Acknowledge that the Global Forum on Migration and Development has proved to be a valuable forum
for holding frank and open discussions and that it has helped to build trust among participating stakeholders through
the exchange of experiences and good practices and by virtue of its voluntary, informal State-led character;
30. Acknowledge that the United Nations system can benefit from the discussions and outcomes of the
Global Forum on Migration and Development, in order to maximize the benefits of international migration for
development;
31. Call upon all relevant bodies, agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, other
relevant intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations, including the International Organization for
Migration and other Global Migration Group members, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
International Migration and Development, within their respective mandates, to strengthen their collaboration and
cooperation to better and fully address the issue of international migration and development, in order to adopt a
coherent, comprehensive and coordinated approach, and to consider migration issues in their contributions to the
preparatory process that will establish the post-2015 development agenda;
13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

32. Welcome the recent efforts made by the Global Migration Group to take measures to enhance its
functioning and to promote coherence and coordination among its member organizations, and in this regard stress
the importance of regular interaction between the Group and Member States;
33. Request the Secretary-General to continue his substantive work on international migration and
development and, in collaboration with the United Nations system and relevant organizations, including the
International Organization for Migration, to continue to assess the progress made in the field of migration and
development;
34. Also request the Secretary-General, in the elaboration of his report on international migration and
development to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, to give due consideration to the
results and deliberations of this High-level Dialogue.
RESOLUTION 68/6
A/RES/686/

Adopted at the 32nd plenary meeting, on 9 October 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.4, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

68/6.

Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document:

Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals
1. We, Heads of State and Government and heads of delegation, have gathered at United Nations Headquarters
in New York at the special event convened by the President of the General Assembly to review progress made
towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and to chart the way forward. Our deliberations
have taken account of the voices of people worldwide and of the concerns and priorities that they have conveyed.
2. We gather with a sense of urgency and determination, with less than 850 days remaining for the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals. We renew our commitment to the Goals and resolve to intensify all efforts
for their achievement by 2015.
3. We welcome what has been achieved so far. The Millennium Development Goals have provided a common
vision and have contributed to remarkable progress. Significant and substantial advances have been made in
meeting several of the targets.
4. However, we are concerned about unevenness and gaps in achievement and about the immense challenges
that remain. The Millennium Development Goals are critical for meeting the basic needs of people in developing
countries; as we approach the 2015 deadline, unrelenting efforts are required to accelerate progress across all
the Goals.
5. Among and within developing countries, those who have been left furthest behind require our most urgent
attention and support. We are conscious of the special challenges and needs of the least developed countries; of the
fact that, despite some impressive progress, most African countries remain off track in meeting the Millennium
Development Goals; and of the fact that conflict and post-conflict countries face the most challenges in achieving
any of the Goals by 2015.
6. We recognize the special challenges and needs of small island developing States and landlocked developing
countries, many of which are not on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. We also
recognize the special challenges in meeting the Goals faced by people living under foreign occupation. We
acknowledge the challenges in meeting the Goals for people living in areas affected by complex humanitarian
emergencies and in areas affected by terrorism. We also recognize the specific challenges that many middle-income
countries face.
14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Accelerating progress
7. We reaffirm our commitment to the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held in 2010.12 The annual reports on the Goals provide updated
assessments of where our efforts are most needed and will assist us in framing our approach and priorities.
8. We resolve to target in particular the most off-track Millennium Development Goals and those where progress
has stalled, including the Goals relating to poverty and hunger, universal access to primary education, child
mortality, universal access to reproductive health, including maternal health, environmental sustainability and access
to water and sanitation. In each of these areas, we are determined to take the purposeful and coordinated action
required. We will scale up proven interventions, fulfil the pledges that we have made and strengthen our support for
the range of valuable initiatives under way, including international support for the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development.13
9. Across all our acceleration efforts, we will emphasize inclusivity and accessibility for all and will place a
particular focus on those who are most vulnerable and disadvantaged. We will, for example, seek to build the
resilience of the poorest in combating hunger, to improve support for women giving birth in areas of greatest
deprivation and to improve educational opportunities and learning outcomes for the most vulnerable children.
10. Where efforts are broadly on track and momentum exists, we will do everything possible to sustain and
reinforce it. For example, in combating HIV/AIDS, we will step up efforts to meet the goal of universal access to
HIV prevention, treatment, care and support services by 2015. We will sustain and build on the remarkable gains in
the fight against malaria and tuberculosis.
11. We will place a strong emphasis on all approaches that have a cross-cutting and multiplier effect. In particular,
we recognize that promoting gender equality and empowering women and girls underpins and advances progress
across all the Millennium Development Goals. We will resolutely promote gender equality and eliminate the range
of barriers to the empowerment of women and girls in our societies.
Global partnership for development
12. We underline the central role of a strengthened global partnership for development. We recognize the
importance of national ownership and emphasize that, if the Millennium Development Goals are to be achieved by
2015, national efforts need to be assisted by international support and an enabling international environment. The
mobilization and effective use of all resources, public and private, domestic and international, will be vital.
13. We reaffirm the importance of promoting human rights, good governance, the rule of law, transparency and
accountability at all levels.
14. We call for the urgent implementation of all commitments under the global partnership for development so as
to overcome the gaps identified in the reports of the Millennium Development Goals Gap Task Force. We
emphasize the need to accelerate progress towards the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income as official
development assistance by 2015, including 0.15 per cent to 0.20 per cent for the least developed countries. We call
upon developed countries to urgently fulfil the official development assistance commitments that they have made,
individually and collectively.
15. We underline the need for the business sector to engage in responsible business practices.
Post-2015 development agenda
16. In parallel with the intensification of efforts to accelerate the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals, we are determined to craft a strong post-2015 development agenda that will build on the foundations laid by
the Goals, complete the unfinished business and respond to new challenges.
_______________
12
13

Resolution 65/1.
A/57/304, annex.

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

17. As we take the work forward, we reaffirm our commitment to the United Nations Millennium Declaration,14
the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,15 the Monterrey Consensus
of the International Conference on Financing for Development, 16 the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to
Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus17 and the outcomes of all the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and environmental fields. We will continue to be guided by the
values and principles enshrined in those texts.
18. We reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,18 including, inter alia,
the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, as set out in principle 7 thereof.
19. We are resolved that the post-2015 development agenda should reinforce the commitment of the international
community to poverty eradication and sustainable development. We underline the central imperative of poverty
eradication and are committed to freeing humanity from poverty and hunger as a matter of urgency. Recognizing the
intrinsic interlinkage between poverty eradication and the promotion of sustainable development, we underline the
need for a coherent approach that integrates in a balanced manner the three dimensions of sustainable development.
This coherent approach involves working towards a single framework and set of goals, universal in nature and
applicable to all countries, while taking account of differing national circumstances and respecting national policies
and priorities. It should also promote peace and security, democratic governance, the rule of law, gender equality
and human rights for all.
20. We decide today to launch a process of intergovernmental negotiations at the beginning of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, which will lead to the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
21. We acknowledge with appreciation the processes mandated in the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development that are now under way, in particular the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals and the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing, as well as the process to develop options for a technology facilitation mechanism. We urge that these
processes complete their work in a comprehensive, balanced and expeditious manner by September 2014.
22. The report submitted by the Secretary-General in advance of the present meeting,19 which draws on inputs
from the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, United Nations
Development Group consultations, the Global Compact and the Sustainable Development Solutions Network, is a
useful input to our deliberations.
23. Over the coming year, the preparation of the post-2015 development agenda will benefit from the General
Assembly events to be convened by the President of the Assembly under the theme “The post-2015 development
agenda: setting the stage”.
24. In arriving at an inclusive and people-centred post-2015 development agenda, we look forward to a
transparent intergovernmental process that will include inputs from all stakeholders, including civil society,
scientific and knowledge institutions, parliaments, local authorities and the private sector.
25. We count on the strong support of the United Nations system throughout all our work. As an input to the
intergovernmental negotiations to be launched at the beginning of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
we call upon the Secretary-General to synthesize the full range of inputs then available and to present a synthesis
report before the end of 2014.
_______________
14

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
16
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
17
Resolution 63/239, annex.
18
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
19
A/68/202 and Corr.1.
15

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

26. The final phase of the intergovernmental work will culminate in a summit at the level of Heads of State and
Government in September 2015 for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda. We request the President of
the General Assembly to convene, in a timely manner, intergovernmental consultations to achieve agreement on
organizational modalities for the summit.
RESOLUTION 68/7
A/RES/687/

Adopted at the 35th plenary meeting, on 21 October 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.7 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

68/7.

Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade
The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 61/19 of 28 November 2006, entitled “Commemoration of the two-hundredth
anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade”, and subsequent resolutions entitled “Permanent
memorial to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”,
Recalling also the designation of 25 March as the annual International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade,
Recognizing how little is known about the transatlantic slave trade and its lasting consequences, felt
throughout the world, and welcoming the increased attention that the annual commemoration by the General
Assembly has brought to the issue, including raising awareness in many States,
Noting the initiatives undertaken by States in reaffirming their commitment to implement paragraphs 101 and
102 of the Durban Declaration of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance, aimed at countering the legacy of slavery and contributing to the restoration of the dignity of
the victims of slavery and the slave trade,20
Recalling, in particular, paragraph 101 of the Durban Declaration, which, inter alia, invited the international
community and its members to honour the memory of the victims,
Stressing the importance of educating and informing current and future generations about the causes,
consequences and lessons of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade,
Recalling that the permanent memorial initiative complements the work being done at the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the Slave Route Project, including its commemorative
activities,
1. Endorses the initiative of Member States to erect, at a place of prominence at United Nations
Headquarters that is easily accessible to delegates, United Nations staff and visitors, a permanent memorial in
acknowledgement of the tragedy and in consideration of the legacy of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade;
2. Recalls the establishment of a committee of interested States to oversee the permanent memorial project,
drawn from all geographical regions of the world, with Member States from the Caribbean Community and the
African Union playing a primary role, in collaboration with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, representatives of the Secretariat, the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture of the
New York Public Library and civil society;
_______________
20

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Also recalls the establishment of a trust fund for the permanent memorial, referred to as the United
Nations Trust Fund for Partnerships – Permanent Memorial, administered by the United Nations Office for
Partnerships, and notes the current status of contributions to the Trust Fund;21
4.

Expresses sincere appreciation to those Member States that have made contributions to the Trust Fund;

5. Recognizes the necessity of sustained voluntary contributions in order to achieve in a timely manner the
goal of erecting a permanent memorial in honour of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, and in
this regard, encourages Member States and other interested parties to make further voluntary contributions to the
Trust Fund;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to organize a series of activities annually to commemorate the
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, including a
commemorative meeting of the General Assembly at United Nations Headquarters and, as appropriate, activities
through the network of United Nations information centres;
7. Requests the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in cooperation with the countries
concerned and with relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to continue to take appropriate
steps to enhance world public awareness of the commemorative activities and the permanent memorial initiative,
and to facilitate efforts to erect the permanent memorial at United Nations Headquarters;
8. Reiterates its request, in resolution 64/15 of 16 November 2009, for Member States to develop, in
accordance with their national legislation, educational programmes, including through school curricula, designed to
educate and inculcate in future generations an understanding of the lessons, history and consequences of slavery and
the slave trade, and to provide such information to the Secretary-General for inclusion in his report;
9. Notes with satisfaction the successful conclusion of the international design competition for the
permanent memorial and the selection of the design “Ark of Return” as the model for the permanent memorial;
10. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the programme of educational outreach on the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery22 relating to the diverse educational outreach strategy to increase awareness of
and to educate future generations about the causes, consequences, lessons and legacy of the transatlantic slave trade
and to communicate the dangers of racism and prejudice, and encourages continued action in this regard;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on continued
action to implement the programme of educational outreach, including actions taken by Member States in
implementing the present resolution, as well as steps to enhance world public awareness of the commemorative
activities and the permanent memorial initiative;
12. Requests the United Nations Office for Partnerships, through the Secretary-General, to submit a
comprehensive report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the status of the Trust Fund and, in
particular, on contributions received and their utilization;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Follow-up to the
commemoration of the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade”.
RESOLUTION 68/8
A/RES/688/

Adopted at the 38th plenary meeting, on 29 October 2013, by a recorded vote of 188 to 2, with 3 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/68/L.6, sponsored by Cuba
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,

_______________
21
22

18

A/68/135.
A/68/291.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau

68/8.

Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba
The General Assembly,

Determined to encourage strict compliance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming, among other principles, the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in
their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, which are also enshrined in many
international legal instruments,
Recalling the statements of the Heads of State or Government at the Ibero-American Summits concerning the
need to eliminate the unilateral application of economic and trade measures by one State against another that affect
the free flow of international trade,
Concerned about the continued promulgation and application by Member States of laws and regulations, such
as that promulgated on 12 March 1996 known as “the Helms-Burton Act”, the extraterritorial effects of which affect
the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction and the freedom
of trade and navigation,
Taking note of declarations and resolutions of different intergovernmental forums, bodies and Governments
that express the rejection by the international community and public opinion of the promulgation and application of
measures of the kind referred to above,
Recalling its resolutions 47/19 of 24 November 1992, 48/16 of 3 November 1993, 49/9 of 26 October 1994,
50/10 of 2 November 1995, 51/17 of 12 November 1996, 52/10 of 5 November 1997, 53/4 of 14 October 1998,
54/21 of 9 November 1999, 55/20 of 9 November 2000, 56/9 of 27 November 2001, 57/11 of 12 November 2002,
58/7 of 4 November 2003, 59/11 of 28 October 2004, 60/12 of 8 November 2005, 61/11 of 8 November 2006, 62/3
of 30 October 2007, 63/7 of 29 October 2008, 64/6 of 28 October 2009, 65/6 of 26 October 2010, 66/6 of
25 October 2011 and 67/4 of 13 November 2012,
Concerned that, since the adoption of its resolutions 47/19, 48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10, 53/4, 54/21,
55/20, 56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12, 61/11, 62/3, 63/7, 64/6, 65/6, 66/6 and 67/4, further measures of that nature
aimed at strengthening and extending the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba continue to be
promulgated and applied, and concerned also about the adverse effects of such measures on the Cuban people and
on Cuban nationals living in other countries,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 67/4;23

_______________
23

A/68/116.

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Reiterates its call upon all States to refrain from promulgating and applying laws and measures of the
kind referred to in the preamble to the present resolution, in conformity with their obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, which, inter alia, reaffirm the freedom of trade and navigation;
3. Once again urges States that have and continue to apply such laws and measures to take the steps
necessary to repeal or invalidate them as soon as possible in accordance with their legal regime;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the appropriate organs and agencies of the United
Nations system, to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution in the light of the purposes and
principles of the Charter and international law and to submit it to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
RESOLUTION 68/9
A/RES/68/9

Adopted at the 44th plenary meeting, on 6 November 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.8,
sponsored by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

68/9.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal
The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 66/5 of 17 October 2011, in which it decided to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixty-eighth session the sub-item entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic
ideal”, and recalling also its prior decision to consider the sub-item every two years, in advance of the Summer and
Winter Olympic Games,
Recalling also its resolution 48/11 of 25 October 1993, which, inter alia, revived the ancient Greek tradition of
ekecheiria (“Olympic Truce”) calling for a truce during the Olympic Games to encourage a peaceful environment
and ensure safe passage, access and participation for athletes and relevant persons at the Games, thereby mobilizing
the youth of the world to the cause of peace,
Recalling further that the core concept of ekecheiria, historically, has been the cessation of hostilities from
seven days before until seven days after the Olympic Games, which, according to the legendary oracle of Delphi,
was to replace the cycle of conflict with a friendly athletic competition every four years,
Recalling the recognition of the valuable contribution of sport in promoting education, development, peace,
cooperation, solidarity, fairness, social inclusion and health at the local, regional and international levels, and noting
that, as declared in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,24 sports can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance and
understanding among peoples and nations,
Welcoming the designation of 6 April as the International Day of Sport for Development and Peace,

_______________
24

20

Resolution 60/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the inclusion in the United Nations Millennium Declaration25 of an appeal for the observance of the
Olympic Truce now and in the future and for support for the International Olympic Committee in its efforts to
promote peace and human understanding through sport and the Olympic ideal,
Acknowledging the valuable contribution that the appeal launched by the International Olympic Committee on
21 July 1992 for an Olympic Truce could make towards advancing the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Welcoming the joint statement dated 28 May 2012 of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation and the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland26 to promote the ideals of the Olympic Truce during the XXX Olympic Summer
Games and the XIV Paralympic Summer Games in London in 2012 and the XXII Olympic Winter Games and the
XI Paralympic Winter Games in Sochi, Russian Federation, in 2014, and recognizing the importance of partnerships
with the International Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic Committee, the International Olympic
Truce Foundation, the International Olympic Truce Centre, future hosts of the Games and other Member States, as
well as the United Nations system, National Olympic and Paralympic Committees and other relevant stakeholders
in supporting the implementation of the Olympic Truce,
Noting that the XXII Olympic Winter Games will take place from 7 to 23 February 2014 and that the
XI Paralympic Winter Games will take place from 7 to 16 March 2014, in Sochi,
Recalling that one of the main goals of the Olympic Winter Games and Paralympic Winter Games in Sochi is
to symbolize peaceful and constructive dialogue among peoples through the realization of the Sochi 2014 cultural
and educational programmes, aimed at promoting key values of different cultures through art, enhancing better
understanding among diverse communities and encouraging mutual respect, and contributing to peaceful
coexistence, and acknowledging in this regard the creation of the Russian International Olympic University in Sochi
to serve as an educational platform for spreading Olympic knowledge, ideals and traditions, including the Olympic
Truce, worldwide,
Welcoming the significant impetus that the Olympic Summer Games, Paralympic Summer Games, Olympic
Winter Games and Paralympic Winter Games give to the volunteer movement around the world, acknowledging the
contributions of volunteers to the success of the Games, and in this regard calling upon host countries to promote
social inclusion without discrimination of any kind,
Noting the successful conclusion of the XXX Olympic Summer Games and the XIV Paralympic Summer
Games, held in London from 27 July to 12 August and from 29 August to 9 September 2012, respectively, and
welcoming the XXXI Olympic Summer Games and the XV Paralympic Summer Games, to be held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, from 5 to 21 August and from 7 to 18 September 2016, respectively, the XXIII Olympic Winter Games and
the XII Paralympic Winter Games, to be held in Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea, from 9 to 25 February and from
9 to 18 March 2018, respectively, and the XXXII Olympic Summer Games and the XVI Paralympic Summer
Games, to be held in Tokyo from 24 July to 9 August and from 25 August to 6 September 2020, respectively,
Welcoming the partnerships that many United Nations system organizations have established with the
International Olympic Committee, including the International Forum on Sport, Peace and Development, jointly
organized by the Committee and the United Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace,
Acknowledging the joint endeavours of the International Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic
Committee, the United Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace and relevant United Nations entities in
such fields as human development, poverty alleviation, humanitarian assistance, health promotion, HIV and AIDS
prevention, child and youth education, gender equality, peacebuilding and sustainable development,
Acknowledging also the importance of the Youth Olympic Games in inspiring youth through integrated sports
and cultural and educational experiences, noting in this regard the successful conclusion of the first Youth Winter
Olympic Games, held in Innsbruck, Austria, from 13 to 22 January 2012, and welcoming the second Youth Summer
Olympic Games, to be held in Nanjing, China, from 16 to 28 August 2014 and the second Youth Winter Olympic
Games, to be held in Lillehammer, Norway, from 12 to 21 February 2016,
_______________
25
26

Resolution 55/2.
A/66/831, annex.

21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the articles on leisure, recreation, sport and play of relevant international conventions, including
article 30 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,27 in which States parties recognized the right
of persons with disabilities to take part on an equal basis with others in cultural life, recreation, leisure and sport, and
noting in this regard plans to stage integrated and inclusive Games for Everyone in 2014,
Welcoming the commitment made by various States Members of the United Nations and other relevant
stakeholders to developing national and international programmes that promote peace and conflict resolution, the
Olympic and Paralympic values and the Olympic Truce ideals through sport and through culture, education,
sustainable development and wider public engagement, and acknowledging the contribution of former hosts of the
Olympic Games in this regard,
Recognizing the humanitarian opportunities presented by the Olympic Truce and by other initiatives supported
by the United Nations to achieve the cessation of conflict,
Noting with satisfaction the flying of the United Nations flag at the Olympic stadium and in the Olympic
villages of the Olympic Winter Games and Paralympic Winter Games,
1. Urges Member States to observe the Olympic Truce individually and collectively, within the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations, during the period from the seventh day before the start of the XXII Olympic
Winter Games, to be held in Sochi, Russian Federation, from 7 to 23 February 2014, until the seventh day following
the end of the XI Paralympic Winter Games, to be held in Sochi from 7 to 16 March 2014;
2. Underlines the importance of cooperation among Member States to collectively implement the values of
the Olympic Truce around the world, and emphasizes the important role of the International Olympic Committee,
the International Paralympic Committee and the United Nations in this regard;
3. Welcomes the work of the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic
Committee, as well as the International Olympic Truce Foundation and the International Olympic Truce Centre, in
mobilizing national and international sports federations and organizations, National Olympic and Paralympic
Committees and associations of National Olympic Committees to undertake concrete actions at the local, national,
regional and international levels to promote and strengthen a culture of peace based on the spirit of the Olympic
Truce, and invites those organizations and national committees to cooperate and share information and best
practices, as appropriate;
4. Also welcomes the leadership of Olympic and Paralympic athletes in promoting peace and human
understanding through sport and the Olympic ideal;
5. Calls upon all Member States to cooperate with the International Olympic Committee and the
International Paralympic Committee in their efforts to use sport as a tool to promote peace, dialogue and
reconciliation in areas of conflict during and beyond the period of the Olympic and Paralympic Games;
6. Welcomes the cooperation among Member States, the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, and the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic Committee, to
work towards a meaningful and sustainable contribution through sport to raising awareness of and to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, and encourages the Olympic and Paralympic movements to
work closely with national and international sports organizations on the use of sport to contribute to the achievement
of the Goals;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly to promote the observance of
the Olympic Truce among Member States and support for human development initiatives through sport and to
continue to cooperate effectively with the International Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic
Committee and the sporting community in general in the realization of those objectives;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session the sub-item entitled “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal” and to consider the sub-item before the
XXXI Olympic Summer Games and the XV Paralympic Summer Games, to be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from
5 to 21 August and from 7 to 18 September 2016, respectively.
_______________
27

22

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/10
A/RES/681/0

Adopted at the 45th plenary meeting, on 6 November 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.10 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Viet Nam

68/10.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency for 2012,28
Taking note of the statement by the Director General of the Agency, in which he provided additional
information on the main developments in the activities of the Agency during 2013,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency,
Recognizing also the cooperation between the United Nations and the Agency and the Agreement governing
the relationship between the United Nations and the Agency as approved by the General Conference of the Agency
on 23 October 1957 and by the General Assembly in the annex to its resolution 1145 (XII) of 14 November 1957,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency;28

2. Takes note of resolutions GC(57)/RES/9 on measures to strengthen international cooperation in nuclear,
radiation, transport and waste safety; GC(57)/RES/10 on nuclear security; GC(57)/RES/11 on the strengthening of
the Agency’s technical cooperation activities; GC(57)/RES/12 on strengthening the Agency’s activities related to
nuclear science, technology and applications, comprising GC(57)/RES/12 A on non-power nuclear applications and
GC(57)/RES/12 B on nuclear power applications; GC(57)/RES/13 on strengthening the effectiveness and
improving the efficiency of Agency safeguards; GC(57)/RES/14 on the implementation of the Agreement between
the Agency and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for the application of safeguards in connection with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; GC(57)/RES/15 on the application of Agency safeguards in
the Middle East; and GC(57)/RES/16 on personnel matters, comprising GC(57)/RES/16 A on the staffing of the
Agency’s secretariat and GC(57)/RES/16 B on women in the secretariat; and decisions GC(57)/DEC/10 on the
amendment to article XIV.A of the Statute of the Agency; GC(57)/DEC/11 on the promotion of efficiency and
effectiveness of the Agency’s decision-making process; and GC(57)/DEC/12 on the amendment to article VI of the
Statute, adopted by the General Conference of the Agency at its fifty-seventh regular session, held from 16 to
20 September 2013;
3. Reaffirms its strong support for the indispensable role of the Agency in encouraging and assisting the
development and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses, in technology transfer to developing
countries and in nuclear safety, verification and security;
4. Welcomes resolution GC(57)/RES/3 approving the appointment of Mr. Yukiya Amano as Director
General of the Agency until 30 November 2017;
5.

Appeals to Member States to continue to support the activities of the Agency;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Director General of the Agency the records of the
sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly relating to the activities of the Agency.
_______________
28

See A/68/324.

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/11
A/RES/681/1

Adopted at the 55th plenary meeting, on 20 November 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.11 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritius,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam

68/11.

The situation in Afghanistan

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/16 of 27 November 2012 and all its previous relevant resolutions,
Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions and statements by the President of the Council on the
situation in Afghanistan, in particular resolutions 2096 (2013) of 19 March 2013 and 2120 (2013) of 10 October 2013,
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and respecting its multicultural, multi-ethnic and historical heritage,
Recalling the long-term commitment of the international community to Afghanistan with the aim of
strengthening national ownership and leadership consistent with the Kabul process, and taking into account the
evolving nature of the presence of the international community,
Welcoming the conclusions of the International Afghanistan Conference on Afghanistan and the International
Community: From Transition to the Transformation Decade, held in Bonn, Germany, on 5 December 2011,29 in
which it was declared that the process of transition, to be completed by the end of 2014, should be followed by a
transformation decade (2015–2024) in which Afghanistan consolidates its sovereignty through strengthening a fully
functioning, sustainable State in the service of its people,
Welcoming also the Tokyo Declaration: Partnership for Self-Reliance in Afghanistan – From Transition to
Transformation adopted at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan, held on 8 July 2012,30 including the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework,31 which reaffirms the partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community based on their mutual commitments,
Recognizing once again the interconnected nature of the challenges in Afghanistan, reaffirming that
sustainable progress on security, governance, human rights, the rule of law and development, as well as on the crosscutting issues of counter-narcotics, anti-corruption and accountability, are mutually reinforcing and that governance
and development programmes prioritized for implementation in transition should be consistent with the goals set
forth in the Tokyo Declaration and the national priority programmes, and underlining the importance of the
continuing efforts of the Government of Afghanistan and the international community to address these challenges,
Welcoming and supporting the outcome of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia,
held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 2 November 2011, and the follow-up Heart of Asia Ministerial Conferences, held in
Kabul on 14 June 2012 and in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 26 April 2013, which launched and furthered the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan32 whereby Afghanistan and its
regional partners, with the support of the international community, affirmed their commitment to strengthen regional
security and cooperation for a secure and stable Afghanistan, including through enhanced regional dialogue and
confidence-building measures, and looking forward to the fourth Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference, to be held in
Tianjin, China, in 2014,
_______________
29

A/66/597-S/2011/762, annex.
A/66/867-S/2012/532, annex I.
31
Ibid., annex II.
32
A/66/601-S/2011/767, annex.
30

24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Stressing the crucial importance of advancing regional cooperation as an effective means of promoting
security, stability and economic and social development in Afghanistan, recognizing in this regard the importance of
the contribution of neighbouring and regional partners, as well as regional organizations, recalling the importance of
the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly Relations of 22 December 2002, 33 welcoming in this regard the
continued commitment of the international community to support stability and development in Afghanistan, and
noting international and regional initiatives, such as those of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan process, the European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe,
Welcoming the process by which Afghanistan and its regional and international partners are entering into longterm strategic partnerships and other agreements aimed at achieving a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan,
Underlining the significance of the agreement reached between the Government of Afghanistan and countries
contributing to the International Security Assistance Force at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization summit, held in
Lisbon on 19 and 20 November 2010, to gradually transfer full security responsibility in Afghanistan to the
Government countrywide by the end of 2014, welcoming the continued progress towards the completion of the
security transition, notably the milestone reached on 18 June 2013 when all areas of Afghanistan entered into the
transition process and the Afghan National Security Forces assumed the lead for security nationwide, and
underlining also the continuing role of the International Security Assistance Force in support of the Government and
in promoting a responsible transition and the importance of the enhancement of the operational capabilities of the
Afghan National Security Forces,
Welcoming the joint Chicago Summit Declaration on Afghanistan, which stresses the long-term commitment
of countries contributing to the International Security Assistance Force, beyond 2014, to lasting peace, security and
stability in Afghanistan, noting the responsibility of the Government of Afghanistan to sustain sufficient and capable
Afghan National Security Forces, supported by the international community, welcoming in this context the decision
of the international community, taken at the Bonn Conference, to support the training, equipping, financing, and
development of the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces beyond the end of the transition period,
welcoming also the decision of the Government and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization that the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization will work towards continuing to train, advise and assist the Afghan National Security Forces
after 2014, and noting that any new mission should have a sound legal basis, as stated in paragraph 14 of the joint
Chicago Summit Declaration,
Reiterating the urgent need to tackle the challenges in Afghanistan, in particular the ongoing violent criminal
and terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and criminals, including
those involved in the narcotics trade, and the development of Government of Afghanistan institutions, including at
the subnational level, the strengthening of the rule of law and democratic processes, the fight against corruption, the
acceleration of justice sector reform, the promotion of national reconciliation, without prejudice to the fulfilment of
the measures introduced by the Security Council in resolutions 1267 (1999) of 15 October 1999, 1988 (2011) and
1989 (2011) of 17 June 2011, and 2082 (2012) and 2083 (2012) of 17 December 2012 and other relevant
resolutions, an Afghan-led transitional justice process, the safe and voluntary return of Afghan refugees and
internally displaced persons in an orderly and dignified manner, the promotion and protection of human rights and
the advancement of economic and social development,
Deeply concerned about the high level of violence in Afghanistan, especially the number of civilian casualties,
condemning in the strongest terms all violent attacks, recalling that the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and
extremist groups and illegal armed groups are responsible for the significant majority of the civilian casualties in
Afghanistan, expressing particular serious concern about increased targeted killing of women and girls, and calling
for compliance with international humanitarian and human rights law and for all appropriate measures to be taken to
ensure the protection of civilians,
Noting the importance of the national Government being inclusive and representative of the ethnic diversity of
the country and ensuring also the full and equal participation of women,
_______________
33

S/2002/1416, annex.

25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process of peace and reconciliation, supported by the
international community, is essential for achieving long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan,
Emphasizing the central and impartial role of the United Nations in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
expressing its appreciation and strong support for all efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Afghanistan in this regard, expressing its appreciation also for the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in accordance with Security Council resolution 2096 (2013), and stressing the leading and
coordinating role of the Assistance Mission in seeking to further improve the coherence and coordination of
international civilian efforts, guided by the principle of reinforcing Afghan ownership and leadership,
Welcoming the reports of the Secretary-General34 and the recommendations contained therein,
1. Pledges its continued support to the Government and people of Afghanistan as they rebuild a stable,
secure, economically self-sufficient State, free of terrorism and narcotics, and strengthen the foundations of a
constitutional democracy as a responsible member of the international community;
2. Encourages all partners to support constructively the Kabul process, building upon a deep and broad
international partnership towards further increased Afghan responsibility and ownership in security, governance and
development, aiming at a secure, prosperous and democratic Afghanistan, focusing on strengthening the
constitutional checks and balances that guarantee citizens’ rights and obligations and implementing structural reform
to enable an accountable and effective Government to deliver concrete progress to its people;
3. Supports the continuing and growing ownership of reconstruction and development efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan, emphasizes the crucial need to achieve ownership and accountability in all fields of
governance and to improve institutional capabilities, including at the subnational level, in order to use aid more
effectively, and underscores in this regard the importance of the commitments of the international community, as
reiterated in the Tokyo Declaration: Partnership for Self-Reliance in Afghanistan – From Transition to
Transformation;30
Security and transition
4. Reiterates once again its serious concern about the security situation in Afghanistan, stresses the need to
continue to address the threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan caused by the ongoing violent and terrorist
activity by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and other illegal armed groups and
criminals, including those involved in the narcotics trade, and reiterates in this regard its call for the full
implementation of measures and the application of procedures introduced in relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolutions 1267 (1999), 1988 (2011), 1989 (2011), 2082 (2012) and 2083 (2012);
5. Condemns in the strongest terms all unlawful acts of violence, intimidation and attacks, including
improvised explosive device attacks, suicide attacks, assassinations, including of public figures, abductions,
indiscriminate attacks against civilians, attacks against individuals, groups and organs of society engaged in the
promotion and protection of universally recognized human rights, attacks against humanitarian workers and the
targeting of Afghan and international forces, which have a deleterious effect on stabilization and development
efforts in Afghanistan, and also condemns the use, by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups
and illegal armed groups, of civilians as human shields;
6. Stresses the need for the Government of Afghanistan and the international community to continue to
work closely together in countering these acts, which are threatening peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
democratic process, the achievements and continued implementation of the Afghanistan development process as
well as humanitarian aid measures, and calls upon all Member States to deny those groups any form of sanctuary or
financial, material and political support;
7. Expresses deep regret at the resulting loss of life and physical harm inflicted upon Afghan civilians and
civilians of other nationalities, including the personnel of Afghan and international agencies and all other
humanitarian workers and the diplomatic corps, the United Nations Assistance Mission, as well as upon the
personnel of the Afghan National Security Forces, the International Security Assistance Force and the Operation
Enduring Freedom coalition, and pays homage to all those who have lost their lives;
_______________
34

26

A/67/619-S/2012/907, A/67/778-S/2013/133, A/67/889-S/2013/350 and A/68/609-S/2013/535.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Stresses the importance of providing the Afghan people with security, notes that the responsibility for
providing security and law and order throughout the country resides with the Government of Afghanistan, supported
by the international community, and underlines the importance of further strengthening the operational capabilities
of Afghan security forces in all provinces of Afghanistan, consistent with the goal of transition;
9. Welcomes, in this regard, the progress in the transition process and the assumption of lead security
responsibility by the Afghan National Security Forces nationwide with the milestone event of 18 June 2013, calls
upon the international community to provide the support necessary to increase security, including public order, law
enforcement, the security of Afghanistan’s borders and the preservation of the constitutional rights of Afghan
citizens, as well as to provide continued support by training, equipping and contributing to the financing of the
Security Forces to take on the task of securing their country, with a clear view to the assumption, no later than 2024,
of full financial responsibility for its own security forces by the Government of Afghanistan, and underscores the
importance of the joint Chicago Summit Declaration on Afghanistan and other relevant agreements with regional
and international partners in this regard;
10. Also welcomes, in this regard, the presence of the International Security Assistance Force and the
Operation Enduring Freedom coalition, expresses its appreciation for the support they have provided to the Afghan
National Army, as well as for the assistance provided to the Afghan National Police by all international partners, in
particular by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization through its training mission in Afghanistan, as well as other
bilateral training programmes, and encourages further coordination where appropriate;
11. Further welcomes the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan, with a view to ensuring
stability and providing conditions for the effective rule of law, to continue the implementation of the Afghan
National Police Strategy and the National Police Plan underpinning it, as well as the 10-year vision presented by
the Ministry of the Interior, focusing, inter alia, on community-based policing (Police-e Mardumi) to increase
police accountability and responsiveness, strengthening crime detection and prevention, safeguarding human
rights and combating violence against women and children to build a strong, professional police force evolving
towards sustainable, credible and accountable civilian law enforcement that will be capable of providing policing
services to the Afghan population as part of the broader rule of law system, with a focus on the ongoing
institutional and administrative reforms of the Ministry of the Interior, including the implementation of its anticorruption action plan, and leadership development, as well as to progressively enhance the quality of the Afghan
National Police, with the necessary continued financial and technical support of the international community,
recognizes the significant contribution that has been made by international and regional partners, including the
International Police Coordination Board, to achieve that aim, and also recognizes in this context the significant
contribution of the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan;
12. Calls upon Member States to continue, and expresses its appreciation to Member States for, contributing
personnel, equipment and other resources to the International Security Assistance Force and their adequate support
to the provincial reconstruction teams and their changing mission, in close coordination with the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance Mission;
13. Notes, in the context of the comprehensive approach and the ongoing transition process, the continued
importance of the synergies in the objectives of the Assistance Mission and the International Security Assistance
Force, and emphasizes, in particular, the continued need to maintain, strengthen and review civil-military relations
among international actors, as appropriate, at all levels in order to ensure complementarity of action based on the
different mandates and comparative advantages of the humanitarian, development, law enforcement and military
actors present in Afghanistan;
14. Urges the Afghan authorities, with the support of the international community, to take all possible steps
to ensure the safety, security and free movement of all United Nations, development and humanitarian personnel
and their full, safe and unhindered access to all affected populations, and to protect the property of the United
Nations and of development or humanitarian organizations, and notes the efforts made in regulating private security
contractors operating in Afghanistan;
15. Recognizes the efforts of the Afghan authorities, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 60/123
of 15 December 2005 on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations
personnel, to bring to justice the perpetrators of attacks, and calls upon the Afghan authorities to continue its efforts
in this regard;
27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16. Remains deeply concerned about the persistent problem of anti-personnel landmines and explosive
remnants of war, which constitute a great danger to the population and a major obstacle to the resumption of social
and economic activities and to the delivery of humanitarian assistance, early recovery and reconstruction efforts,
welcomes the achievements to date in the implementation of the Mine Action Programme for Afghanistan,
underscores the importance of sustained international assistance for the implementation of the 10-year operational
workplan of the Mine Action Programme, aimed at declaring Afghanistan mine-free by 2023, encourages the
Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the United Nations and all relevant actors, to continue its efforts to
meet its responsibilities under the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,35 to eliminate all known or new stock of anti-personal landmines,
and to cooperate fully with the Mine Action Programme, and to continue removal of anti-personnel landmines, antivehicle landmines and explosive remnants of war, and expresses the need to provide assistance for the care,
rehabilitation, and economic and social reintegration of victims, including persons with disabilities;
Peace, reconciliation and reintegration
17. Welcomes the continuing efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to advance peace and reconciliation,
including by the High Peace Council, and the implementation of the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme to
promote an inclusive, Afghan-led dialogue on reconciliation and political participation, as set forth in the 20 July
2010 Kabul Conference communiqué on dialogue for all those who renounce violence, have no links to
international terrorist organizations, including Al-Qaida, respect the Constitution, including its human rights
provisions, notably the rights of women, and are willing to join in building a peaceful Afghanistan, and further
elaborated in the Bonn Conference conclusions,29 supported by the Government and the international community,
with full respect for the implementation of measures and application of the procedures introduced by the Security
Council in its resolutions 1267 (1999), 1988 (2011) and 2082 (2012), as well as other relevant resolutions of the
Council, calls upon all relevant States, especially neighbouring countries, and international organizations to remain
engaged in the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process, and recognizes the impact terrorist
attacks have on the Afghan people and risk having on future prospects for a peace settlement;
18. Reiterates its firm commitment to support the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to advance the peace
and reconciliation process, in line with the Kabul Conference communiqué and the Bonn Conference conclusions, and
within the framework of the Afghan Constitution and the application of the procedures introduced by the Security
Council in its resolutions 1988 (2011) and 2082 (2012) as well as other relevant resolutions of the Council, and
recalls that women play a vital role in the peace process, as recognized by the Council in its resolution 1325 (2000)
of 31 October 2000 and in related resolutions, including Council resolution 2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013;
19. Underlines the fact that reconciliation and reintegration efforts should enjoy the support and
participation of all Afghans, including civil society, minorities and women’s groups, as reinforced most recently in
the Bonn Conference conclusions and the Tokyo Declaration, welcomes the steps taken towards greater cooperation
between the High Peace Council and civil society, and encourages further cooperation in the future;
20. Expresses its appreciation for the progress made by the Government of Afghanistan in the Afghan Peace
and Reintegration Programme in reintegrating former combatants throughout the country and under Afghan
ownership, while ensuring coordination and coherence with other relevant efforts, welcomes the continued
commitment and efforts of the Government to work actively at the national, provincial and local levels to advance
this commitment, and calls for continued international support for these efforts;
21. Calls upon the Government of Afghanistan to ensure that the Afghan Peace and Reintegration
Programme is implemented in an inclusive manner, regardless of gender or social status and consistent with the
Afghan Constitution and the international legal obligations of Afghanistan, while upholding the human rights of all
Afghans and countering impunity;
22. Welcomes the establishment of the Peace and Reintegration Trust Fund, recalls the respective
commitments made at the London and Kabul Conferences, and encourages the international community to assist the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in this regard, including through continued support and contributions to
the Trust Fund;
_______________
35

28

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

23. Recognizes the increased number of reintegrees who have joined the Afghan Peace and Reintegration
Programme, encourages further efforts to address remaining operational challenges, including through an
appropriate vetting mechanism and by ensuring that this work is linked to wider efforts to address conflict and
grievance resolution at the local level, and also encourages the international community to support this Afghan-led
effort;
Governance, rule of law and human rights
24. Emphasizes that good governance, the rule of law and human rights form the foundation for the
achievement of a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, and notes the importance of building the capacity of the
Government of Afghanistan to promote and protect human rights, the rule of law and good governance in an
accountable and effective manner;
A.

Democracy

25. Recognizes the importance of holding free, fair, transparent, credible, secure and inclusive elections as
crucial steps towards consolidating democracy for all Afghans and facilitating a successful and peaceful political
transition and for sustaining international support, stresses the responsibility of the Afghan authorities in this regard,
also stresses the need for the timely and orderly preparation of elections according to the timetable presented by the
Independent Electoral Commission for the upcoming presidential and provincial elections, welcomes in this regard
the adoption of a legal framework to govern elections, the appointment of new members and the election of new
Chairs for the Independent Electoral Commission and Electoral Complaints Commission, calls upon the
Government of Afghanistan to continue its preparations, welcomes the efforts made by the Government in this
regard, calls upon the international community to continue to provide financial and technical assistance, stresses the
leading role of the Assistance Mission in coordinating these efforts, and calls upon the international community and
the United Nations to support the Government and the relevant Afghan institutions;
26. Recalls the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan, reiterated at the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan, to strengthen and improve Afghanistan’s electoral process, including through long-term electoral
reform, and to promote the participation of women in order to ensure that future elections will be transparent,
credible, inclusive and democratic, and reaffirms the profound importance of the forthcoming elections and that
Afghanistan’s peaceful future lies in strengthened and transparent democratic institutions, respect for the separation
of powers, reinforced constitutional checks and balances and the guarantee and enforcement of citizens’ rights and
obligations;
B.

Justice

27. Welcomes the steps taken by the Government of Afghanistan on justice sector reform and the
commitment to improve access to the delivery of justice throughout Afghanistan made by the Government at the
Kabul Conference, welcomes in this regard the completion of the National Priority Programme on Law and Justice
for All, urges the international community to continue to support the efforts of the Government in those areas in a
coordinated manner, and urges the Government to implement the National Priority Programme in a timely manner,
in coordination with the relevant organizations and Government departments;
28. Acknowledges the progress made by the Government of Afghanistan and the international community in
devoting adequate resources to the reconstruction and reform of the prison sector in order to improve respect for the
rule of law and human rights therein, while reducing physical and mental health risks to inmates;
29. Welcomes and encourages further efforts by the Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the
Assistance Mission, the international community and other partners, including the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission, to protect and promote the human rights of all detainees and prevent violations thereof in all
Afghan prisons and detention facilities, consistent with the Afghan Constitution, Afghan laws and international
obligations, welcomes the cooperation of the Government, as well as the efforts of the international community to
provide support in this regard, takes note of the recommendations contained in the reports of the Assistance Mission
of 10 October 2011 and 20 January 2013, notes the progress made in this regard, including the establishment by the
Government of a commission to investigate Afghan detention facilities, encourages further progress on addressing
allegations of human rights abuses of detainees, and reiterates the importance of respecting the rule of law and
established legal processes and procedures;
29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

30. Welcomes the commitment by the Government of Afghanistan to provide unimpeded access for relevant
organizations to all prisons in Afghanistan, emphasizes the importance of ensuring access for relevant organizations,
and calls for full respect for relevant international law, including humanitarian law and human rights law, where
applicable, including with regard to minors, if detained;
C.

Public administration

31. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to continue to effectively reform the public administration sector
in order to implement the rule of law and to ensure good governance and accountability, in accordance with the
Kabul process and the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,31 at both the national and subnational levels, with
the support of the international community, welcomes the efforts of the Government and commitments made, most
recently at the Tokyo Conference, in this regard stresses the importance of transparent appointment and promotion
procedures for civil servants, and continues to encourage the Government to make active use of the Senior
Appointments Panel;
32. Encourages the international community, including all donor nations as well as international institutions
and organizations, governmental and non-governmental, to assist the Government of Afghanistan in making
capacity-building and human resources development a cross-cutting priority and to align, in a coordinated manner,
with efforts by the Government, including the work of the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission, to build administrative capacity at the national and subnational levels;
33. Reiterates the importance of institution-building in complementing and contributing to the development
of an economy characterized by sound macroeconomic policies, the development of a financial sector that provides
services, inter alia, to microenterprises, small and medium-sized enterprises and households, transparent business
regulations and accountability, and emphasizes the connection between generating economic growth, including
through infrastructural projects, and the creation of job opportunities in Afghanistan;
34. Recalls the ratification by Afghanistan of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,36 reiterates
its appreciation for the anti-corruption commitments made by the Government of Afghanistan at the Tokyo
Conference, calls for decisive action by the Government to fulfil those commitments in order to establish a more
effective, accountable and transparent administration at the national, provincial and local levels of government,
welcomes the efforts of the Government in this regard, including the issuance of the presidential decree in July
2012, and also welcomes continued international support for Afghanistan’s governance objectives, while noting
with deep concern the effects of corruption with regard to security, good governance, the combating of the narcotics
industry and economic development;
35. Welcomes the Subnational Governance Policy, underscores the importance of more visible, accountable
and capable subnational institutions and actors in reducing the political space for insurgents, emphasizes the
importance of the Kabul process being accompanied by the implementation of national programmes at the
subnational level, encourages the capacity-building and empowerment of local institutions in a phased and fiscally
sustainable manner, and calls for the predictable and regular allocation of more resources to provincial authorities,
including continued vital support from the Assistance Mission and the international community;
36. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to address, with the assistance of the international community, the
question of claims for land property through a comprehensive land-titling programme, including formal registration
of all property and improved security of property rights, including for women, and welcomes the steps already taken
by the Government in this regard;
D.

Human rights

37. Recalls the constitutional guarantee of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
Afghans as a significant political achievement, calls for full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all, without discrimination of any kind, and stresses the need to fully implement the human rights provisions of
the Afghan Constitution, in accordance with obligations under applicable international law, in particular those
regarding the full enjoyment by women and children of their human rights;
_______________
36

30

Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

38. Acknowledges and encourages the efforts made by the Government of Afghanistan in promoting respect
for human rights, expresses its concern at the harmful consequences of violent and terrorist activities, including
against persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities, by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and
extremist groups and other illegal armed groups and criminals for the enjoyment of human rights and for the
capacity of the Government to ensure human rights and fundamental freedoms for all Afghans, notes with concern
reports of incidents in which violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law have occurred,
including violations committed against women and children, in particular girls, stresses the need to further promote
tolerance and religious freedom and to ensure respect for the right to freedom of expression and the right to freedom
of thought, conscience or belief as enshrined in the Afghan Constitution, emphasizes the necessity of investigating
allegations of current and past violations, stresses the importance of facilitating the provision of efficient and
effective remedies to the victims and of bringing the perpetrators to justice in accordance with national and
international law, calls for full implementation of the mass media law, while noting with concern and condemning
the continuing intimidation and violence targeting Afghan journalists, such as cases of abduction and even killing of
journalists by terrorist as well as extremist and criminal groups, and urges that harassment and attacks on journalists
be investigated by Afghan authorities and that those responsible be brought to justice;
39. Commends the Government of Afghanistan for its active participation in the universal periodic review
process, calls for continued active participation of Afghan civil society in this process, and encourages the timely
implementation of the recommendations addressed in the relevant report;
40. Reiterates the important role of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission in the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, stresses the need to guarantee its constitutional status and
implement its mandate, focusing on communities across Afghanistan, so as to foster a more informed public and
increase Government accountability, notes the initial concerns of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights with respect to the new appointments to the Commission, emphasizes the importance of the Government of
Afghanistan’s reaffirmation of its commitment to maintaining the standards regarding Human Rights Commissioners
in accordance with article 11 of the law on the Commission and the Paris Principles37 to retaining the Commission’s
“A” status, welcomes the decision of the Government to take full responsibility for the core funding of the
Commission, urges the Government to implement this decision, urges the Commission to cooperate closely with
Afghan civil society, and calls upon the international community for continued support in this regard;
41. Recalls Security Council resolutions 1674 (2006) of 28 April 2006, 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006
and 1894 (2009) of 11 November 2009 and the midyear report of July 2013 on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, prepared by the Assistance Mission, expresses its serious concern at the continued high number of civilian
casualties, including women and children, and their impact on local communities, notes that the Taliban, Al-Qaida
and other violent and extremist groups and illegal armed groups remain responsible for the significant majority of
civilian casualties, reiterates its call for all feasible steps to be taken to ensure the protection of civilians, and calls for
additional appropriate steps in this regard and for full compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law;
42. Recognizes the further progress made by the International Security Assistance Force, authorized by the
Security Council, and other international forces to ensure the protection of the civilian population and to minimize
civilian casualties, and calls upon them to continue to make enhanced efforts in this regard, notably through the
continuous review of tactics and procedures and the conduct of afteraction reviews and investigations in cooperation
with the Government of Afghanistan in cases where civilian casualties have occurred and when the Government
finds these joint investigations appropriate;
43. Reiterates the importance of upholding international obligations for the advancement of women’s rights,
as enshrined in the Afghan Constitution, in this context also reiterates the importance of implementing Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), and recalls Council resolutions 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008, 1888 (2009) of
30 September 2009, 1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009 and 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010 on women and peace
and security;
44. Emphasizes its steadfast and unwavering commitment to achieving the full and equal participation of
women in all spheres of Afghan life, the need for absolute equality of women before the law, equal access to
_______________
37

Resolution 48/134, annex.

31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

education and employment and the participation and empowerment of women in Afghan politics, public life,
government administration and security sector at all levels, especially in leadership positions;
45. Commends the achievements and efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to counter discrimination
and to mainstream gender issues, including into the national priority programmes, and to protect and promote the
equal rights of women and men as guaranteed, inter alia, by its ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women38 and by the Afghan Constitution as well as the National Action Plan
for the Women of Afghanistan and the law on the elimination of violence against women, notes the progress
reported by the Assistance Mission in the implementation of the law, stresses the importance of its full
implementation, a key commitment under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, and underlines the need
for continued progress on gender issues in accordance with the obligations of Afghanistan under international law;
46. Strongly condemns all incidents of discrimination and violence against women and girls and other forms
of gender-based and sexual violence, including “honour killings”, underscores the importance of countering
impunity for these incidents, especially against women activists and women prominent in public life, takes note of
the important progress made by the Government of Afghanistan in this regard, and reiterates its appreciation for all
measures taken to address targeted violence against women, including the contribution of the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women);
47. Stresses the need to ensure respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of children in
Afghanistan, and recalls the need for the full implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,39 its
Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography40 and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict 41 by all States parties, as well as of Security Council resolution
1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005, and all other subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, and takes note of
the report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in Afghanistan42 and the conclusions of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict;43
48. Expresses its strong concern, in this regard, about the ongoing recruitment and use of children by illegal
armed and terrorist groups in Afghanistan, as well as the killing and maiming of children as a result of the conflict,
stresses in this regard the importance of ending the recruitment and use of children in violation of applicable
international law and all other violations and abuses committed against children, expresses appreciation for the
progress made by and the firm commitment of the Government of Afghanistan to the protection of children,
including its strong condemnation of any exploitation of children, as indicated by the establishment of the InterMinisterial Steering Committee for the Protection of the Rights of Children, the appointment of a focal point on
child protection, the signing by the Government, in January 2011, of an action plan, including the annexes thereto,
on children associated with national security forces in Afghanistan and the endorsement by the Government of a
road map to accelerate compliance with the action plan, welcomes progress made in the implementation of the
action plan, and calls for the full implementation of its provisions, in close cooperation with the Assistance Mission;
49. Recognizes the special needs of girls, strongly condemns continued terrorist attacks as well as threats of
attacks on educational facilities, especially on those for Afghan girls, and/or hospitals and protected persons in
relation to them in Afghanistan, in contravention of applicable international law, and expresses deep concern about
the high number of school closures as a result of terrorist attacks or threats of attacks;
50. Welcomes the adoption by the Government of Afghanistan of the National Plan of Action on Combating
Child Trafficking, calls for the comprehensive implementation of the Plan of Action, welcomes initiatives to amend
and enforce legislation on human trafficking, guided by the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime,44 and stresses the importance of considering becoming a party to the Protocol;
_______________
38

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
40
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
41
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
42
A/67/845-S/2013/245, paras. 23–34.
43
S/AC.51/2011/3.
44
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
39

32

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Social and economic development
51. Takes note with appreciation of the Afghanistan National Development Strategy and the ideas outlined
by the Government of Afghanistan in its strategy document entitled “Towards self-reliance: strategic vision for the
transformation decade”, as well as of the national priority programmes contained therein, with their focus on
economic growth, revenue generation, job creation, governance and human development;
52. Urgently appeals to all States, the United Nations system and international and non-governmental
organizations, including the international and regional financial institutions, to continue to provide, in close
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and in accordance with the National Development Strategy and
the strategy document entitled “Towards self-reliance: strategic vision for the transformation decade”, as well as the
national priority programmes contained therein, all possible and necessary humanitarian, recovery, reconstruction,
development, financial, educational, technical and material assistance for Afghanistan, underlines the crucial
importance of continued and sequenced implementation of the national priority programmes and the development
and governance goals of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, and recalls in this regard the leading role of
the Assistance Mission in seeking to further improve the coherence and coordination of international efforts;
53. Recognizes the substantial development and the notable progress made by Afghanistan with the steadfast
support of the international community in the past years, expresses its support for the decision taken at the Bonn
Conference to implement a transformation decade (2015–2024), in which Afghanistan will consolidate its
sovereignty through strengthening a fully functioning, sustainable State in the service of its people, and urges the
Government of Afghanistan to involve all elements of Afghan society, in particular women, in the development and
implementation of relief, rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction programmes;
54. Also recognizes the challenges that lie ahead for Afghanistan, and welcomes the generous pledges
totalling over 16 billion United States dollars made by the international community during the Tokyo Conference
through 2015 and the commitment of the international community to sustain support through 2017 at or near levels
of the past decade, thereby renewing its commitment to long-term support for the economic development of
Afghanistan on the basis of mutual accountability, welcomes the continued resolve of the Government of
Afghanistan to fulfil the commitments made by the Government under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, and stresses that sustained international support in the years ahead requires resolute action by both the
international community and the Government;
55. Welcomes the continued progress in implementing the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework and the
monitoring mechanism included therein, in which the Government of Afghanistan reaffirmed its commitment to
strengthen governance, grounded in human rights, the rule of law and adherence to the Afghan Constitution, and
held it as integral to sustained growth and economic development, and in which the international community
committed to enhance efficiency of development aid by aligning assistance with the Afghan national priority
programmes and by channelling assistance through the national budget of the Government, as outlined in the Tokyo
Declaration;
56. Also welcomes the outcome of the Senior Officials Meeting of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, held in Kabul on 3 July 2013, and the Co-Chairs’ statement thereon, which acknowledged both the
achievements of the Government of Afghanistan and the international community in the implementation of their
respective commitments under the Framework and the need for more rapid progress within a realistic but
accelerated time frame, and looks forward to further meetings, including the meeting of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board and the next ministerial meeting in 2014, to be co-chaired by the Governments of Afghanistan
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, to review progress of the implementation of the
Framework;
57. Further welcomes the significant progress made by the Government of Afghanistan towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals, in particular the considerable progress in enabling boys and girls to enrol in
school and in enabling women and men to access basic health services, and acknowledges that quality
improvements across basic service delivery will require attention and adequate national budget allocations;
58. Expresses its appreciation for the humanitarian and development assistance work of the international
community in the stabilization and development of Afghanistan and to the United Nations system and to all States
and international and non-governmental organizations whose international and local staff continue to respond
positively to the humanitarian, transition and development needs of Afghanistan, despite security concerns and
difficulty of access in certain areas;
33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

59. Recognizes the necessity for further improvement in the living conditions of the Afghan people, and
emphasizes the need to strengthen and support the development of the capacity of the Government of Afghanistan
to deliver basic social services at the national, provincial and local levels, in particular education and public health
services, and to promote development;
60. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to enhance efforts to reform key service delivery sectors, such as
energy and drinking water supply, as preconditions for progress in social and economic development;
61. Commends the Government of Afghanistan for improving budgetary transparency and for its efforts to
date to reach fiscal sustainability, notes the challenges ahead, and urges continued efforts be made to meet revenue
targets, as agreed with the International Monetary Fund;
62. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the provincial reconstruction teams as they work within the
provincial context to support national priorities to build the capacities of local institutions;
63. Encourages the international community and the corporate sector to support the Afghan economy as a
measure for long-term stability and to explore possibilities for increased trade and investments and enhanced local
procurement, and further encourages the Government of Afghanistan to continue to promote an economic
environment and legal framework favourable for private-sector investments at both the national and subnational
levels;
64. Emphasizes, in this regard, the importance of strengthening local and regional networks of transportation
that will facilitate connectivity for economic development, stability and self-sustainability, particularly the
completion and maintenance of local railroad and land routes, the development of regional projects to foster further
connectivity and the enhancement of international civil aviation capabilities;
65. Urgently encourages all States as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
expand agricultural cooperation with Afghanistan, within the National Agricultural Development Framework and in
line with the National Development Strategy and the relevant national priority programme, respectively, with a view
to helping to eradicate poverty and ensure social and economic development, including in rural communities;
66. Reiterates the necessity of providing Afghan children, especially Afghan girls, with educational and
health facilities in all parts of the country, welcomes the progress achieved in the sector of public education, recalls
the National Education Strategic Plan as a promising basis for further achievements, encourages the Government of
Afghanistan, with the assistance of the international community, to expand those facilities, train professional staff
and promote full and equal access to them by all members of Afghan society, including in remote areas, and
reiterates further the need to provide vocational training for adolescents;
67. Commends the relief efforts by the Government of Afghanistan and donors, but continues to express its
concern at the overall humanitarian situation, stresses the continued need for food assistance, ensuring that the basic
needs of internally displaced persons are met, and calls for continued international support in this regard, as well as
for the early fulfilment, before the approaching winter, of the urgent humanitarian needs in the 2013 Common
Humanitarian Action Plan for Afghanistan;
68. Recognizes that underdevelopment and lack of capacity increase the vulnerability of Afghanistan to
natural disasters and to harsh climate conditions, and in this regard urges the Government of Afghanistan, with the
support of the international community, to increase its efforts aimed at strengthening disaster risk reduction at the
national and subnational levels and at modernizing the agricultural sector and strengthening its agricultural
production, thereby reducing the vulnerability of Afghanistan to adverse external conditions such as drought,
flooding and other natural disasters;
69. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that continue to host Afghan refugees, in particular
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran, acknowledging the huge burden they have so far shouldered in this
regard, and asks for continued generous support by the international community, with a view to facilitating their
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return, rehabilitation and reintegration;
70. Welcomes the outcome of the International Conference on the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to
Support Voluntary Repatriation, Sustainable Reintegration and Assistance to Host Countries, held in Geneva on
2 and 3 May 2012, and looks forward to the further implementation of the joint communiqué of the Conference,
aimed at increased sustainability of returns and continued support for host countries, through the sustained support
and the directed efforts of the international community;
34

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

71. Reiterates to host countries and the international community the obligations under international refugee
law with respect to the protection of refugees, the principle of voluntary return and the right to seek asylum and to
ensure full, safe and unhindered access for humanitarian relief agencies in order to provide protection and assistance
to the refugees, and calls upon countries to continue to accept an appropriate number of Afghan refugees for
resettlement, as a manifestation of their shared responsibility and solidarity;
72. Welcomes the continued return of Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons, in a voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable manner, while noting with concern that conditions in parts of Afghanistan are not yet
conducive to a safe and sustainable return to some places of origin;
73. Urges the Government of Afghanistan, acting with the support of the international community, to
continue to strengthen its efforts to create the conditions for sustainable return by continuing to strengthen its
absorption capacity for the full rehabilitation and reintegration of the remaining Afghan refugees and internally
displaced persons;
74. Notes, in this regard, the continued constructive work between the countries of the region, as well as the
tripartite and quadripartite agreements between the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the Government of Afghanistan and the Governments of countries hosting refugees from Afghanistan, in particular
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran;
Regional cooperation
75. Stresses the crucial importance of advancing constructive regional cooperation as an effective means to
promote peace, security, stability and economic and social development in Afghanistan, encourages further
improved relations and enhanced engagement between Afghanistan and its neighbours, and calls for further efforts
in this regard, including by regional organizations;
76. Commends the continuing efforts of the signatories to the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly
Relations33 to implement their commitments under the Declaration, calls upon all other States to respect and support
the implementation of those provisions, and welcomes the reaffirmation, in the Kabul Conference communiqué, of
the principles set out in the Declaration;
77. Welcomes and encourages further efforts by the Government of Afghanistan and its neighbouring
partners to foster trust and cooperation with each other, and looks forward, where appropriate, to increasing
cooperation between Afghanistan, all its neighbouring and regional partners and regional organizations against the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist and criminal groups and illegal armed groups and in promoting peace and
prosperity in Afghanistan, in the region and beyond;
78. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Government of Afghanistan, its neighbouring and regional partners
and international organizations, including the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to foster trust and cooperation
with each other, as well as recent cooperation initiatives developed by the countries concerned and by regional
organizations, including the trilateral summit of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey, the trilateral summit of
Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan and the trilateral summit of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the
United Kingdom;
79. Reaffirms support to the ongoing Afghan-led regional effort within the framework of the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan,32 welcomes the outcomes of the
Heart of Asia Ministerial Conferences held in Kabul and Almaty in 2012 and in 2013, respectively, as follow-up to
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia, held in Istanbul in 2011, and the Istanbul Process
Senior Officials Meeting held in New York on 23 September 2013, welcomes the adoption of the implementation
plans of all six confidence-building measures in the areas of disaster management, counter-terrorism, counternarcotics, regional infrastructure, and trade, commerce and investment opportunities as well as education, prioritized
for implementation, commends the progress of the Istanbul Process since its inception, looks forward to the fourth
Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference to be held in Tianjin, notes with appreciation efforts to enhance regional
dialogue and confidence through the Istanbul Process, and recalls that the Istanbul Process is intended to
complement and cooperate with, and not substitute for, existing efforts of regional organizations, particularly where
they relate to Afghanistan;
35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

80. Expresses its appreciation for all efforts to increase regional economic cooperation aimed at promoting
economic cooperation between Afghanistan, regional neighbours, international partners and financial institutions,
and recognizes, inter alia, the important role of the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, the
Delhi Investment Summit on Afghanistan and its recommendations for promoting foreign investment and private
sector development and partnerships of Afghanistan, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Central Asian
Regional Economic Cooperation Programme and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, as well as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in promoting the development of Afghanistan;
81. Welcomes the decision of the States members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization to grant
Afghanistan observer status in the Organization;
82. Welcomes and urges further efforts to strengthen the process of regional economic cooperation,
including measures to facilitate regional trade and transit, including through regional and bilateral transit trade
agreements, expanded consular visa cooperation and facilitation of business travel, to expand trade, to increase
foreign investments and to develop infrastructure, including infrastructural connectivity, energy supply, transport
and integrated border management, with a view to promoting sustainable economic growth and the creation of jobs
in Afghanistan, noting the historical role of Afghanistan as a land bridge in Asia;
83. Encourages the Group of Eight countries to continue to stimulate and support cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours through mutual consultation and agreement, including on development projects in
areas such as infrastructural connectivity, border management and economic development;
Counter-narcotics
84. Welcomes the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in fighting drug production in Afghanistan,
takes note of the report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime entitled “Afghanistan Opium Survey
2012”, released in May 2013, reiterates its deep concern about the increase in the cultivation and production of illicit
narcotic drugs in Afghanistan, mainly concentrated in areas where the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and
extremist groups and criminals are particularly active, as well as the ongoing drug trafficking, and, based on the
principle of common and shared responsibility, stresses the need for strengthened joint, more coordinated and
resolute efforts by the Government, supported by the international and regional actors as well as the International
Security Assistance Force, within their designated responsibilities, to fight this menace;
85. Stresses the importance of a comprehensive and balanced approach in addressing the drug problem of
Afghanistan, which, to be effective, must be integrated into the wider context of efforts carried out in the areas of
security, governance, the rule of law and human rights, and economic and social development;
86. Also stresses, in this regard, that the development of alternative livelihood programmes is of key
importance in the success of the counter-narcotics efforts in Afghanistan and that sustainable strategies require
international cooperation, and urges the Government of Afghanistan, assisted by the international community, to
promote the development of sustainable livelihoods in the formal production sector, as well as in other sectors, and
to improve access to reasonable and sustainable credit and financing in rural areas, thus improving substantially the
lives, health and security of the people, particularly in rural areas;
87. Notes with great concern the strong nexus between the drug trade and terrorist activities by the Taliban,
Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and criminal groups, which pose a serious threat to security, the
rule of law and development in Afghanistan, and stresses the importance of the full implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions in this regard, including resolutions 1735 (2006) of 22 December 2006 and
1822 (2008) of 30 June 2008;
88. Calls upon all Member States, in this regard, to further intensify their efforts to reduce the demand for
drugs in their respective countries and globally in order to contribute to the sustainability of the elimination of illicit
cultivation in Afghanistan;
89. Stresses the need to prevent trafficking in and diversion of chemical precursors used in the illicit
manufacturing of drugs in Afghanistan, and calls for the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1817 (2008) of 11 June 2008 in this regard;
36

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

90. Supports the fight against the illicit trafficking in drugs from and precursors to Afghanistan and
neighbouring States and countries along trafficking routes, including increased cooperation among them in
strengthening anti-narcotic controls and the monitoring of the international trade in chemical precursors, and
underlines the importance of technical assistance and support to the most affected transit States to support their
capacities in this regard;
91. Urges the Government of Afghanistan, supported by the international community, to work to
mainstream counter-narcotics throughout all the national programmes and to ensure that counter-narcotics is a
fundamental part of the comprehensive approach, as well as to increase its efforts against opium cultivation and
drug trafficking in accordance with the balanced plan of the updated Afghan National Drug Control Strategy;
92. Commends the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in this regard, as well as the efforts to update
and carry out the National Drug Control Strategy, including the Prioritized Implementation Plan and benchmarks,
urges the Government and the international community to take decisive action, in particular to stop the processing of
and trade in drugs, by pursuing the concrete steps set out in the Strategy and through initiatives such as the Good
Performers Initiative established to provide incentives for governors to reduce cultivation in their provinces, and
encourages the Afghan authorities to work at the provincial level on elaborating counter-narcotics implementation
plans;
93. Calls upon the international community to continue to assist the Government of Afghanistan in
implementing its National Drug Control Strategy, aimed at eliminating the cultivation, production, trafficking in and
consumption of illicit drugs, including through increased support for Afghan law enforcement and criminal justice
agencies, agricultural and rural development for the creation of alternative livelihoods for farmers, demand
reduction, the elimination of illicit crops, increased public awareness and the building of the capacity of drug control
institutions and care and treatment centres for drug addicts, and reiterates its call upon the international community
to channel counter-narcotics funding through the Government, to the extent possible;
94. Recalls the need to strengthen international and regional cooperation with Afghanistan in its sustained
efforts to address drug production and trafficking, recognizes the threat posed by the production, trade and
trafficking in illicit drugs to international peace and stability in the region and beyond, also recognizes the progress
achieved by relevant initiatives within the framework of the Paris Pact initiative of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, stresses the importance of further progress in the implementation of these initiatives, and
welcomes the results of the ministerial meeting of the Paris Pact initiative, held in Vienna on 16 February 2012, in
continuation of the “Paris-Moscow” process, as one of the most important frameworks in the fight against opiates,
underscores the importance of the effective implementation of the Vienna Declaration45 by its partner countries,
working in consultation with the Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
encourages further sustained efforts of the Government in this regard, as well as the intent of the Government to
strengthen international and regional cooperation in this regard, and welcomes the progress made in the Heart of
Asia process in this regard;
95. Welcomes initiatives to enhance border management cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours in ensuring comprehensive measures for drug control, including the financial dimension, emphasizes the
importance of pursuing such cooperation, especially through bilateral arrangements and those launched by the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia,
the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Central Asian Anti-Drug
Quartet and others, and welcomes the intention of the Government of Afghanistan to strengthen international and
regional cooperation with relevant partners in the field of border control;
96. Stresses the importance of further, effective cooperative support by relevant international and regional
actors, including the United Nations and the International Security Assistance Force, within its designated
responsibilities, to Afghan-led sustained efforts to address the threat posed by the illicit production of and trafficking
in drugs, welcomes in this regard the regional programme on Afghanistan and neighbouring countries of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and encourages the respective countries to continue to participate;

_______________
45

See E/CN.7/2012/17.

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

97. Acknowledges the regional activities carried out by Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Pakistan within the framework of their triangular initiative to counter narcotics;
98. Stresses the need for coordinated regional efforts to combat the drug problem, and in this regard
welcomes the holding of the Regional Ministerial Conference on Counter-Narcotics in Islamabad on 12 and
13 November 2012, aimed at enhancing regional cooperation to counter narcotics;
99. Pays homage to all those who have innocently lost their lives in the fight against drug traffickers, in
particular members of the security forces of Afghanistan and its neighbours;
Coordination
100. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the Assistance Mission, as mandated by the Security Council
in its resolution 2096 (2013), and stresses the continued importance of the central and impartial coordinating role of
the United Nations in promoting a more coherent international engagement;
101. Welcomes the evolving presence of the Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, which ensures that the United
Nations can fulfil its essential coordinating and support role, as requested by the Government of Afghanistan,
security conditions permitting;
102. Stresses the need to ensure that the Assistance Mission is adequately resourced and protected by the
Afghan authorities, with international support, as appropriate, to fulfil its mandate;
103. Acknowledges the central role played by the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, stresses that the
role of the Board is to support Afghanistan by, inter alia, monitoring and supporting the Kabul process and
coordinating international assistance and development programmes, and welcomes further efforts to provide
appropriate guidance and promote a more coherent international engagement;
104. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly every three months on developments
in Afghanistan, as well as on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
105. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”.
RESOLUTION 68/12
A/RES/681/2

Adopted at the 58th plenary meeting, on 26 November 2013, by a recorded vote of 110 to 7, with 56 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/68/L.12 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Guyana, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

38

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

68/12.

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 3236 (XXIX) of
22 November 1974, 3375 (XXX) and 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/20 of 24 November 1976 and all its
subsequent relevant resolutions, including those adopted at its emergency special sessions and its resolution 67/20 of
30 November 2012,
Recalling also its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,46
Recalling the mutual recognition between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, as well as the existing agreements between the two sides
and the need for full compliance with those agreements,
Affirming its support for the Middle East peace process on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at its fourteenth session47 and the Quartet road map to a
permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution
1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003,48
Welcoming the resumption, on 29 July 2013, of Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations aimed at resolving all
core final status issues and concluding a final peace agreement within the agreed time frame of nine months, and
expressing appreciation for the efforts and support of the United States of America, the European Union, the
Russian Federation and the United Nations, as the members of the Quartet, and of the League of Arab States and all
other concerned States,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,49 and recalling also its resolutions
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Taking note of the application of Palestine for admission to membership in the United Nations, submitted on
23 September 2011,50
Recalling its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, by which, inter alia, Palestine was accorded non-member
observer State status in the United Nations, and taking note of the follow-up report of the Secretary-General,51
Reaffirming that the United Nations has a permanent responsibility towards the question of Palestine until the
question is resolved in all its aspects in a satisfactory manner in accordance with international legitimacy,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the General Assembly, and takes note of its annual
report,46 including the conclusions and valuable recommendations contained in chapter VII thereof;
2. Requests the Committee to continue to exert all efforts to promote the realization of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination, to support the Middle East peace process for the
achievement of the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders and the just resolution of all final status
issues and to mobilize international support for and assistance to the Palestinian people, and in this regard authorizes
the Committee to make such adjustments in its approved programme of work as it may consider appropriate and
necessary in the light of developments and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session and
thereafter;
_______________
46

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/68/35).
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
48
S/2003/529, annex.
49
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
50
A/66/371-S/2011/592, annex I.
51
A/67/738.
47

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Also requests the Committee to continue to keep under review the situation relating to the question of
Palestine and to report and make suggestions to the General Assembly, the Security Council or the SecretaryGeneral, as appropriate;
4. Further requests the Committee to continue to extend its cooperation and support to Palestinian and
other civil society organizations and to continue to involve additional civil society organizations and
parliamentarians in its work in order to mobilize international solidarity and support for the Palestinian people,
particularly during this critical period of political instability, humanitarian hardship and financial crisis, with the
overall aim of promoting the achievement by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights and a just, lasting and
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative47 and the Quartet road map;48
5. Welcomes, in this regard, the reactivation of the Working Group of the Committee, the mandate of which is
to coordinate the efforts of international and regional civil society organizations regarding the question of Palestine;
6. Requests the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, established under General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), and other United Nations bodies associated with the question of Palestine to continue
to cooperate fully with the Committee and to make available to it, at its request, the relevant information and
documentation that they have at their disposal;
7. Invites all Governments and organizations to extend their cooperation to the Committee in the
performance of its tasks, recalling its repeated call for all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system to continue to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their right to
self-determination, including the right to their independent State of Palestine;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the report of the Committee to all the competent bodies of
the United Nations, and urges them to take the necessary action, as appropriate;
9. Decides to proclaim 2014 the International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, and requests
the Committee to organize activities to be held during the year, in cooperation with Governments, relevant
organizations of the United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations and civil society organizations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Committee with all the facilities necessary for
the performance of its tasks.
RESOLUTION 68/13
A/RES/681/3

Adopted at the 58th plenary meeting, on 26 November 2013, by a recorded vote of 108 to 7, with 59 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/68/L.13 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Guyana, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zimbabwe, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

40

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

68/13.

Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,52
Taking note, in particular, of the action taken by the Committee and the Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat in accordance with their mandates,
Recalling its resolution 32/40 B of 2 December 1977 and all its subsequent relevant resolutions, including its
resolution 67/21 of 30 November 2012,
1.

Notes with appreciation the action taken by the Secretary-General in compliance with its resolution 67/21;

2. Considers that, by providing substantive support to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People in the implementation of its mandate, the Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat continues to make a most useful and constructive contribution to raising international awareness of the
question of Palestine and of the urgency of a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine in all its aspects on the
basis of international law and United Nations resolutions and the efforts being exerted in this regard and to
generating international support for the rights of the Palestinian people;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Division with the necessary resources and to
ensure that it continues to carry out its programme of work as detailed in relevant earlier resolutions, in consultation
with the Committee and under its guidance;
4. Requests the Division, in particular, to continue to monitor developments relevant to the question of
Palestine, to organize international meetings and conferences in various regions with the participation of all sectors
of the international community and to ensure, within existing resources, the continued participation of eminent
persons and international renowned experts in these meetings and conferences, to be invited on a par with the
members of the Committee, to liaise and cooperate with civil society and parliamentarians, including through the
revitalized Working Group of the Committee, to develop and expand the “Question of Palestine” website and the
documents collection of the United Nations Information System on the Question of Palestine, to prepare and widely
disseminate publications and information materials on various aspects of the question of Palestine and to develop
and enhance the annual training programme for staff of the Government of the State of Palestine in contribution to
Palestinian capacity-building efforts;
5. Also requests the Division, as part of the observance of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People on 29 November, to continue to organize, under the guidance of the Committee, an annual
exhibit on Palestinian rights or a cultural event in cooperation with the Permanent Observer Mission of the State of
Palestine to the United Nations, and encourages Member States to continue to give the widest support and publicity
to the observance of the Day of Solidarity;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the continued cooperation with the Division of the United
Nations system entities with programme components addressing various aspects of the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
7. Invites all Governments and organizations to extend their cooperation to the Division in the performance
of its tasks.
RESOLUTION 68/14
A/RES/681/4

Adopted at the 58th plenary meeting, on 26 November 2013, by a recorded vote of 163 to 7, with 7 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/68/L.14 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Guyana, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,

_______________
52

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/68/35).

41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Niger, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zimbabwe, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Honduras, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga

68/14.

Special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department of Public
Information of the Secretariat

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,53
Taking note, in particular, of the information contained in chapter VI of that report,
Recalling its resolution 67/22 of 30 November 2012,
Convinced that the worldwide dissemination of accurate and comprehensive information and the role of civil
society organizations and institutions remain of vital importance in heightening awareness of and support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination and independence, and for the
efforts to achieve a just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,
Recalling the mutual recognition between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, as well as the existing agreements between the two sides,
Affirming its support for the Middle East peace process on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at its fourteenth session,54 and the Quartet road map to a
permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution
1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003, 55 and welcoming the resumption of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on
29 July 2013,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,56
Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
_______________
53

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/68/35).
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
55
S/2003/529, annex.
56
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
54

42

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming that the United Nations has a permanent responsibility towards the question of Palestine until the
question is resolved in all its aspects in a satisfactory manner in accordance with international legitimacy,
1. Notes with appreciation the action taken by the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat in
compliance with resolution 67/22;
2. Considers that the special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department is very
useful in raising the awareness of the international community concerning the question of Palestine and the situation
in the Middle East and that the programme is contributing effectively to an atmosphere conducive to dialogue and
supportive of the peace process and should receive the necessary support for the fulfilment of its tasks;
3. Requests the Department, in full cooperation and coordination with the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to continue, with the necessary flexibility as may be required by
developments affecting the question of Palestine, its special information programme for 2014–2015, in particular:
(a) To disseminate information on all the activities of the United Nations system relating to the question of
Palestine and the peace process, including reports on the work carried out by the relevant United Nations
organizations, as well as on the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy vis-à-vis the peace process;
(b) To continue to issue, update and modernize publications and audiovisual materials on the various
aspects of the question of Palestine in all fields, including materials concerning relevant recent developments, in
particular the efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine;
(c) To expand its collection of audiovisual material on the question of Palestine, to continue the production
and preservation of such material and to update, on a periodic basis, the public exhibit on the question of Palestine
displayed in the General Assembly Building as well as at United Nations headquarters in Geneva and Vienna;
(d) To organize and promote fact-finding news missions for journalists to the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and Israel;
(e) To organize international, regional and national seminars or encounters for journalists aimed in particular
at sensitizing public opinion to the question of Palestine and the peace process and at enhancing dialogue and
understanding between Palestinians and Israelis for the promotion of a peaceful settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, including by fostering and encouraging the contribution of the media in support of peace between the two
sides;
(f) To continue to provide assistance to the Palestinian people in the field of media development, in
particular to strengthen the annual training programme for Palestinian broadcasters and journalists;
4. Encourages the Department to formulate ways for the media and representatives of civil society to
engage in open and positive discussions to explore means for encouraging people-to-people dialogue and promoting
peace and mutual understanding in the region.
RESOLUTION 68/15
A/RES/681/5

Adopted at the 58th plenary meeting, on 26 November 2013, by a recorded vote of 165 to 6, with 6 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/68/L.15 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Guyana, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Niger, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zimbabwe, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,

43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Tonga

68/15.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including those adopted at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling also its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Recalling further relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967, 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002, 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003,
1544 (2004) of 19 May 2004 and 1850 (2008) of 16 December 2008,
Recalling the affirmation by the Security Council of the vision of a region where two States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side within secure and recognized borders,
Noting with concern that it has been 66 years since the adoption of its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November
1947 and 46 years since the occupation of Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in 1967,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to the request made in its resolution
67/23 of 30 November 2012,57
Reaffirming the permanent responsibility of the United Nations with regard to the question of Palestine until
the question is resolved in all its aspects in accordance with international law and relevant resolutions,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,58 and recalling also its resolutions
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Convinced that achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine, the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, is imperative for the attainment of comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East,
Stressing that the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples is among the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war,
Recalling its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Reaffirming the illegality of the Israeli settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem,
Expressing grave concern about the extremely detrimental impact of Israeli settlement policies, decisions and
activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, including on the contiguity, integrity and
viability of the Territory and the efforts to advance the peace process and to achieve peace in the Middle East,
Expressing grave concern also about all acts of violence, intimidation and provocation by Israeli settlers
against Palestinian civilians and properties, including homes, mosques, churches and agricultural lands, and calling
for accountability for the illegal actions perpetrated in this regard,
_______________
57
58

44

A/68/363-S/2013/524.
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming the illegality of Israeli actions aimed at changing the status of Jerusalem, including settlement
construction and expansion, home demolitions, evictions of Palestinian residents, excavations in and around
religious and historic sites, and all other unilateral measures aimed at altering the character, status and demographic
composition of the city and of the Territory as a whole,
Reaffirming also that the construction by Israel, the occupying Power, of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and its associated regime are contrary to international law,
Encouraging all States and international organizations to continue to actively pursue policies to ensure respect
for their obligations under international law with regard to all illegal Israeli practices and measures in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly Israeli settlements,
Expressing deep concern about the continuing Israeli policies of closures and severe restrictions on the
movement of persons and goods, including medical and humanitarian, via the imposition of prolonged closures and
severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade, as well as of checkpoints and a
permit regime throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Expressing deep concern also about the consequent negative impact of such policies on the contiguity of the
Territory and the serious socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people, which is critical in the
Gaza Strip, and on the efforts aimed at rehabilitating and developing the damaged Palestinian economy, despite
some measures taken by Israel in 2012 and 2013,
Recalling the mutual recognition 20 years ago between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people,59 and the need for full compliance with the
agreements concluded between the two sides,
Recalling also the endorsement by the Security Council, in resolution 1515 (2003), of the Quartet road map to
a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict60 and the call in Council resolution 1850 (2008) for
the parties to fulfil their obligations under the road map and to refrain from any steps that could undermine
confidence or prejudice the outcome of negotiations, and recalling further in this regard the relevant Quartet
statements, including those of 23 September 2011 and 27 September 2013,
Stressing the road map obligation upon Israel to freeze settlement activity, including so-called “natural
growth”, and to dismantle all settlement outposts erected since March 2001,
Recalling the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at its fourteenth
session, held in Beirut on 27 and 28 March 2002,61
Expressing support for the agreed principles for bilateral negotiations, as affirmed by the parties in the IsraeliPalestinian Joint Understanding reached at the international conference held in Annapolis, United States of America,
on 27 November 2007, aimed at concluding a peace treaty resolving all outstanding issues, including all core issues,
without exception, for the achievement of a just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
ultimately of the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole for the realization of a comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
Reiterating support for the convening of an international conference in Moscow, as envisioned by the Security
Council in resolution 1850 (2008) and the Quartet statement of 23 September 2011, for the advancement and
acceleration of a resumed peace process towards the fulfilment of its stated objectives,
Noting the important contribution to the peace process of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, including within the framework of the activities of the Quartet,
Noting also the continuing efforts of the Quartet’s Special Representative, in particular the efforts to strengthen
Palestinian institutions, promote Palestinian economic development and mobilize donor support,
_______________
59

See A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
S/2003/529, annex.
61
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
60

45

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the ongoing efforts of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, under the chairmanship of Norway, and noting its recent meeting at United Nations
Headquarters on 25 September 2013, at which donor countries reaffirmed the necessity of continued and increased
donor support in this critical period,
Recognizing the efforts being undertaken by the Government of the State of Palestine, with international
support, to reform, develop and strengthen its institutions, emphasizing the need to preserve and further develop
Palestinian institutions and infrastructure, and commending in this regard the implementation of the August 2009
plan of the Palestinian Authority for constructing the institutions of an independent Palestinian State and the ongoing
implementation of the National Development Plan on governance, economy, social development and infrastructure
and the significant achievements made, as confirmed by the positive assessments made by international institutions
regarding readiness for statehood, including by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the United
Nations and the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, while also expressing concern about the negative impact of the current
financial crisis being faced by the Government of the State of Palestine,
Welcoming the launch, on 15 August 2013, of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, which
is aimed, inter alia, at enhancing developmental support and assistance to the Palestinian people and strengthening
institutional capacity in line with Palestinian national priorities,
Welcoming also the continued efforts and tangible progress made in the Palestinian security sector, calling
upon the parties to continue cooperation that benefits both Palestinians and Israelis, in particular by promoting
security and building confidence, and expressing the hope that such progress will be extended to all major
population centres,
Reiterating its concern over the negative developments that have continued to occur in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, including the large number of deaths and injuries, mostly among
Palestinian civilians, the construction and expansion of settlements and the wall, the arbitrary arrest and detention of
more Palestinian civilians, the acts of violence, vandalism and brutality committed against Palestinian civilians by
Israeli settlers in the West Bank, the widespread destruction of public and private Palestinian property, including
religious sites, and infrastructure, the internal forced displacement of civilians and the consequent deterioration of
the socioeconomic and humanitarian conditions of the Palestinian people,
Expressing grave concern, in particular, over the continuing crisis in the Gaza Strip as a result of the prolonged
Israeli closures and severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade and the
continuing negative repercussions of the military operations in the Gaza Strip in November 2012 and between
December 2008 and January 2009, which caused extensive loss of life and injury, particularly among Palestinian
civilians, including children and women, widespread damage and destruction to Palestinian homes, properties, vital
infrastructure, public institutions, including hospitals and schools, and United Nations facilities, and internal
displacement of civilians,
Stressing the need for the full implementation by all parties of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of
8 January 2009 and General Assembly resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009,
Expressing concern over the continued imposition of hundreds of checkpoints and obstacles to movement in
and around Palestinian population centres by the Israeli occupying forces, and emphasizing in this regard the need
for the implementation by both sides of the Sharm el-Sheikh understandings,
Expressing grave concern about the imprisonment and detention by Israel of thousands of Palestinians,
including children, under harsh conditions,
Emphasizing the importance of the safety, protection and well-being of all civilians in the whole Middle East
region, and condemning all acts of violence and terror against civilians on both sides, including the firing of rockets,
Expressing the hope for tangible progress towards Palestinian reconciliation for the restoration of Palestinian
unity, under the leadership of the President, Mahmoud Abbas, and consistent with Palestine Liberation Organization
commitments, and of the situation in the Gaza Strip to that which existed prior to June 2007, and calling for the
continuation of the serious efforts being exerted by Egypt, the League of Arab States and other concerned parties
towards the achievement of this aim,
Stressing the urgent need for sustained and active international involvement, including by the Quartet,
including through the proposed monthly meetings of its envoys and initiatives to support the parties in building a
46

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

climate for peace, to assist the parties in advancing and accelerating the peace process negotiations for the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement that ends the occupation which began in 1967
and results in the independence of a democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security with Israel and its other neighbours, on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative,
Taking note of the application of Palestine for admission to membership in the United Nations, submitted on
23 September 2011,62
Taking note also of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, by which, inter alia, Palestine was accorded
non-member observer State status in the United Nations, and taking note of the follow-up report of the SecretaryGeneral,63
Acknowledging the efforts being undertaken by civil society to promote a peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine,
Recalling the findings by the International Court of Justice, in its advisory opinion, including on the urgent
necessity for the United Nations as a whole to redouble its efforts to bring the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
continues to pose a threat to international peace and security, to a speedy conclusion, thereby establishing a just and
lasting peace in the region,64
Affirming once again the right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders,
1. Reaffirms the necessity of achieving a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine, the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, in all its aspects, and of intensifying all efforts towards that end, and stresses in this regard the
urgency of salvaging the prospects for realizing the two-State solution of Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967 borders;
2. Reaffirms its full support for the Middle East peace process and the establishment of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace, based on the relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by the Council of the
League of Arab States at its fourteenth session,61 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict,60 and for the existing agreements between the Israeli and Palestinian sides;
3. Welcomes the resumption, on 29 July 2013, of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations aimed at resolving all core
final status issues and concluding a final peace agreement within the agreed nine-month time frame, and expresses
appreciation in this regard for the efforts and support of the United States of America, the European Union, the
Russian Federation and the United Nations, as the members of the Quartet, and of the League of Arab States and all
other concerned States;
4. Encourages, in this regard, continued serious regional and international efforts to follow up and promote
the Arab Peace Initiative, including by the Ministerial Committee formed at the Riyadh summit in March 2007;
5. Urges the parties to undertake, with the support of the Quartet and the international community,
immediate and concrete steps in follow-up to the Israeli-Palestinian Joint Understanding reached at the international
conference held in Annapolis;
6. Calls for, in this regard, the timely convening of an international conference in Moscow, as envisioned
by the Security Council in resolution 1850 (2008), for the advancement and acceleration of the resumed peace
process;
7. Calls upon both parties to act on the basis of international law and their previous agreements and
obligations, in particular adherence to the road map, irrespective of reciprocity, in order to create the conditions
necessary for the advancement of negotiations within the nine-month time frame agreed to at the resumption of
negotiations;
_______________
62

A/66/371-S/2011/592, annex I.
A/67/738.
64
A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1, advisory opinion, para. 161.
63

47

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Calls upon the parties themselves, with the support of the Quartet and other interested parties, to exert all
efforts necessary to halt the deterioration of the situation, to reverse all unilateral and unlawful measures taken on
the ground since 28 September 2000, to take every possible step to promote conditions conducive to the success of
the negotiating process and to refrain from actions that undermine trust or prejudge final status issues;
9. Calls upon the parties to observe calm and restraint and to refrain from provocative actions, incitement
and inflammatory rhetoric, especially in areas of religious and cultural sensitivity, including in East Jerusalem;
10. Underscores the need for the parties to take confidence-building measures aimed at improving the
situation on the ground, promoting stability and fostering the peace process, including the need for the further
release of prisoners, and notes in this regard the exchange of prisoners in October and December 2011 and the
release of prisoners by Israel in August and October 2013;
11. Stresses the need for the removal of checkpoints and other obstructions to the movement of persons and
goods throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the need for respect and
preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem;
12. Also stresses the need for an immediate and complete cessation of all acts of violence, including military
attacks, destruction and acts of terror;
13. Reiterates its demand for the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009);
14. Reiterates the need for the full implementation by both parties of the Agreement on Movement and
Access and of the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, of 15 November 2005, and the need, specifically, to
allow for the sustained opening of all crossings into and out of the Gaza Strip for humanitarian supplies, movement
and access, as well as for commercial flows and all necessary construction materials, and stresses the urgent need to
promote reconstruction, including through the implementation of United Nations-led projects and civilian
reconstruction activities, all of which are essential for alleviating the humanitarian crisis, improving the living
conditions of the Palestinian people and promoting the recovery of the Palestinian economy;
15. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply strictly with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law, and to cease all of its measures that are contrary to international law and
all unilateral actions in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, that are aimed at altering the
character, status and demographic composition of the Territory, including via the confiscation and de facto
annexation of land, and thus at prejudging the final outcome of peace negotiations;
16. Reiterates its demand for the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan, and calls for the full
implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions;
17. Stresses, in this regard, the need for Israel forthwith to abide by its road map obligation to freeze
all settlement activity, including so-called “natural growth”, and to dismantle settlement outposts erected since
March 2001;
18. Calls for the cessation of all provocations, including by Israeli settlers, in East Jerusalem, including in
and around religious sites;
19. Demands, accordingly, that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal obligations under
international law, as mentioned in the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of
Justice58 and as demanded in General Assembly resolutions ES-10/13 of 21 October 2003 and ES-10/15, and, inter
alia, that it immediately cease its construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and calls upon all States Members of the United Nations to comply with their legal obligations, as
mentioned in the advisory opinion;
20. Reaffirms its commitment, in accordance with international law, to the two-State solution of Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967 borders;
21. Stresses the need for:
(a)

The withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem;

(b) The realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, primarily the right to selfdetermination and the right to their independent State;
48

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

22. Also stresses the need for a just resolution of the problem of Palestine refugees in conformity with its
resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948;
23. Calls upon the parties to continue urgently direct peace negotiations towards the conclusion of a final
peaceful settlement on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, especially of the Security Council, the terms
of reference of the Madrid Conference, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative;
24. Urges Member States to expedite the provision of economic, humanitarian and technical assistance to
the Palestinian people and the Government of the State of Palestine during this critical period in order to help to
alleviate the serious humanitarian situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, which is
critical in the Gaza Strip, to rehabilitate the Palestinian economy and infrastructure and to support the development
and strengthening of Palestinian institutions and Palestinian State-building efforts in preparation for independence;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts with the parties concerned, and in consultation
with the Security Council, towards the attainment of a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine and the
promotion of peace in the region and to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on these
efforts and on developments on this matter.
RESOLUTION 68/16
A/RES/681/6

Adopted at the 58th plenary meeting, on 26 November 2013, by a recorded vote of 162 to 6, with 8 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/68/L.16 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zimbabwe, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga

68/16.

Jerusalem

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, in particular its provisions regarding the City of
Jerusalem,
Recalling also its resolution 36/120 E of 10 December 1981 and all its subsequent relevant resolutions,
including resolution 56/31 of 3 December 2001, in which it, inter alia, determined that all legislative and
administrative measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, which have altered or purported to alter
the character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in particular the so-called “Basic Law” on Jerusalem and the
proclamation of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, were null and void and must be rescinded forthwith,
Recalling further the Security Council resolutions relevant to Jerusalem, including resolution 478 (1980) of
20 August 1980, in which the Council, inter alia, decided not to recognize the “Basic Law” on Jerusalem,
49

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,65 and recalling its resolution
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,
Expressing its grave concern about any action taken by any body, governmental or non-governmental, in
violation of the above-mentioned resolutions,
Expressing its grave concern also, in particular, about the continuation by Israel, the occupying Power, of
illegal settlement activities, including provocations regarding the so-called E-1 plan, its construction of the wall in
and around East Jerusalem, its restrictions on Palestinian access to and residence in East Jerusalem and the further
isolation of the city from the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, which are having a detrimental effect on the
lives of Palestinians and could prejudge a final status agreement on Jerusalem,
Expressing its grave concern further about the continuing Israeli demolition of Palestinian homes, the
revocation of residency rights and the eviction and displacement of numerous Palestinian families from East
Jerusalem neighbourhoods, as well as other acts of provocation and incitement, including by Israeli settlers, in the
city, including desecration of mosques and churches,
Expressing its concern about the Israeli excavations undertaken in the Old City of Jerusalem, including in and
around religious sites,
Reaffirming that the international community, through the United Nations, has a legitimate interest in the
question of the City of Jerusalem and in the protection of the unique spiritual, religious and cultural dimensions of
the city, as foreseen in relevant United Nations resolutions on this matter,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Middle East,66
1. Reiterates its determination that any actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the Holy City of Jerusalem are illegal and therefore null and void and have no
validity whatsoever, and calls upon Israel to immediately cease all such illegal and unilateral measures;
2. Stresses that a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question of the City of Jerusalem should
take into account the legitimate concerns of both the Palestinian and Israeli sides and should include internationally
guaranteed provisions to ensure the freedom of religion and of conscience of its inhabitants, as well as permanent,
free and unhindered access to the holy places by people of all religions and nationalities;
3. Also stresses the need for the parties to observe calm and restraint and to refrain from provocative
actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, especially in areas of religious and cultural sensitivity, and expresses
its grave concern in particular about the recent series of negative incidents in East Jerusalem;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/17
A/RES/681/7

Adopted at the 58th plenary meeting, on 26 November 2013, by a recorded vote of 112 to 6, with 58 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/68/L.17 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei
Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zimbabwe, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,

_______________
65
66

50

See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
A/68/371.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

68/17.

The Syrian Golan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “The situation in the Middle East”,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Middle East,67
Recalling Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
Reaffirming the fundamental principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming once more the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,68 to the occupied Syrian Golan,
Deeply concerned that Israel has not withdrawn from the Syrian Golan, which has been under occupation
since 1967, contrary to the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
Stressing the illegality of the Israeli settlement construction and other activities in the occupied Syrian Golan
since 1967,
Noting with satisfaction the convening in Madrid on 30 October 1991 of the Peace Conference on the Middle
East, on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973
and 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 and the formula of land for peace,
Expressing grave concern over the halt in the peace process on the Syrian track, and expressing the hope that
peace talks will soon resume from the point they had reached,
1.

Declares that Israel has failed so far to comply with Security Council resolution 497 (1981);

2. Also declares that the Israeli decision of 14 December 1981 to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration on the occupied Syrian Golan is null and void and has no validity whatsoever, as confirmed by the
Security Council in its resolution 497 (1981), and calls upon Israel to rescind it;
3. Reaffirms its determination that all relevant provisions of the Regulations annexed to the Hague
Convention IV of 1907, and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,68
continue to apply to the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since 1967, and calls upon the parties thereto to respect
and ensure respect for their obligations under those instruments in all circumstances;
4. Determines once more that the continued occupation of the Syrian Golan and its de facto annexation
constitute a stumbling block in the way of achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the region;
_______________
67
68

A/68/371.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

51

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Calls upon Israel to resume the talks on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks and to respect the commitments
and undertakings reached during the previous talks;
6. Demands once more that Israel withdraw from all the occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967
in implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions;
7. Calls upon all the parties concerned, the co-sponsors of the peace process and the entire international
community to exert all the necessary efforts to ensure the resumption of the peace process and its success by
implementing Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973);
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/18
A/RES/681/8

Adopted at the 59th plenary meeting, on 4 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.20,
sponsored by Fiji (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and
China)

68/18.

Graduation of countries from the least developed country category

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2012/32 of 27 July 2012 on the report of the Committee
for Development Policy on its fourteenth session,
Taking into account its resolutions 59/209 of 20 December 2004, 65/286 of 29 June 2011 and 67/221 of
21 December 2012 on a smooth transition for countries graduating from the list of least developed countries,
Recalling paragraph 10 of its resolution 67/221, in which the General Assembly decided to take note of the
decisions of the Economic and Social Council regarding the graduation of countries from the least developed
country category, as well as the inclusion of countries in that category, at the first session of the Assembly following
the adoption of the decisions,
Emphasizing that graduation from the least developed country category is a major milestone for the country
involved as it means that significant progress has been made towards reaching at least some of its development
goals,
1. Reaffirms that graduating from the category of least developed countries should not result in a disruption
of development plans, programmes and projects;
2. Takes note of the endorsement by the Economic and Social Council of the recommendation of the
Committee for Development Policy that Equatorial Guinea be graduated from the least developed country category,
and decides to provide Equatorial Guinea, on an exceptional basis, with an additional preparatory period of six
months before the start of the three-year preparatory period leading to graduation;
3. Invites Equatorial Guinea to prepare, during the three and a half year period between the adoption of the
present resolution and its graduation from the least developed country category, its national smooth-transition
strategy, with the support of the United Nations system and in cooperation with its bilateral and multilateral
development and trading partners;
4. Takes note of the endorsement by the Council of the recommendation of the Committee that Vanuatu be
graduated from the least developed country category, and decides to provide Vanuatu, on an exceptional basis, with
an additional preparatory period of one year before the start of the three-year preparatory period leading to
graduation;
5. Invites Vanuatu to prepare, during the four-year period between the adoption of the present resolution
and its graduation from the least developed country category, its national smooth-transition strategy, with the
support of the United Nations system and in cooperation with its bilateral and multilateral development and trading
partners.
52

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/22
A/RES/682/2

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of the report of the Credentials
Committee (A/68/630)

68/22.

Credentials of representatives to the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Credentials Committee69 and the recommendation contained therein,
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee.69
RESOLUTION 68/70
A/RES/687/0

Adopted at the 63rd plenary meeting, on 9 December 2013, by a recorded vote of 115 to 1, with 2 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/68/L.18 and Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Bahamas, Barbados, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, Slovenia, Sweden, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United
States of America
* In favour: Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Turkey
Abstaining: Colombia, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

68/70.

Oceans and the law of the sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its annual resolutions on the law of the sea and on oceans and the law of the sea, including
resolution 67/78 of 11 December 2012, and other relevant resolutions concerning the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (the Convention),70
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,71 the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction (the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group)72 and the reports
on the work of the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
(the Informal Consultative Process) at its fourteenth meeting,73 on the twenty-third Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention,74 and on the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the Regular Process for Global
Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects (the Regular
Process),75
_______________
69

A/68/630.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
71
A/68/71 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1.
72
A/68/399, annex, sect. I.
73
A/68/159.
74
SPLOS/263.
75
A/68/82 and Corr.1.
70

53

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the pre-eminent contribution provided by the Convention to the strengthening of peace, security,
cooperation and friendly relations among all nations in conformity with the principles of justice and equal rights and
to the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples of the world, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as to the
sustainable development of the oceans and seas,
Emphasizing the universal and unified character of the Convention, and reaffirming that the Convention sets
out the legal framework within which all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out and is of strategic
importance as the basis for national, regional and global action and cooperation in the marine sector, and that its
integrity needs to be maintained, as recognized also by the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development in chapter 17 of Agenda 21,76
Recognizing the important contribution of sustainable development and management of the resources and uses
of the oceans and seas to the achievement of international development goals, including those contained in the
United Nations Millennium Declaration,77
Noting with satisfaction that, in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,78 as endorsed
by the General Assembly in resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, States recognized that oceans, seas and coastal areas
form an integrated and essential component of the Earth’s ecosystem and are critical to sustaining it, and that
international law, as reflected in the Convention, provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable
use of the oceans and their resources, and stressed the importance of the conservation and sustainable use of the
oceans and seas and of their resources for sustainable development, including through their contributions to poverty
eradication, sustained economic growth, food security and creation of sustainable livelihoods and decent work,
while at the same time protecting biodiversity and the marine environment and addressing the impacts of climate
change,
Reiterating the importance of oceans and seas for sustainable development, and noting, taking into account the
different positions of Member States, that the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals established
by the General Assembly79 will consider the issue of oceans and seas at its eighth session,
Recalling that, in “The future we want”, States underscored that broad public participation and access to
information and judicial and administrative proceedings were essential to the promotion of sustainable development
and that sustainable development required the meaningful involvement and active participation of regional, national
and subnational legislatures and judiciaries, and all major groups, and, in this regard, that they agreed to work more
closely with major groups and other stakeholders and encouraged their active participation, as appropriate, in
processes that contribute to decision-making, planning and implementation of policies and programmes for
sustainable development at all levels,
Conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole
through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral approach, and reaffirming the need to improve cooperation
and coordination at the national, regional and global levels, in accordance with the Convention, to support and
supplement the efforts of each State in promoting the implementation and observance of the Convention and the
integrated management and sustainable development of the oceans and seas,
Reiterating the essential need for cooperation, including through capacity-building and transfer of marine
technology, to ensure that all States, especially developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and
small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, are able both to implement the Convention and to
benefit from the sustainable development of the oceans and seas, as well as to participate fully in global and regional
forums and processes dealing with oceans and law of the sea issues,
_______________
76

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
77
Resolution 55/2.
78
Resolution 66/288, annex.
79
See decision 67/555.

54

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Emphasizing the need to strengthen the ability of competent international organizations to contribute, at the
global, regional, subregional and bilateral levels, through cooperation programmes with Governments, to the
development of national capacity in marine science and the sustainable management of the oceans and their resources,
Recalling that marine science is important for eradicating poverty, contributing to food security, conserving the
world’s marine environment and resources, helping to understand, predict and respond to natural events and
promoting the sustainable development of the oceans and seas, by improving knowledge, through sustained
research efforts and the evaluation of monitoring results, and applying such knowledge to management and
decision-making,
Reiterating its deep concern at the serious adverse impacts on the marine environment and biodiversity, in
particular on vulnerable marine ecosystems and their physical and biogenic structure, including coral reefs, cold
water habitats, hydrothermal vents and seamounts, of certain human activities,
Emphasizing the need for the safe and environmentally sound recycling of ships,
Expressing deep concern at the adverse economic, social and environmental impacts of the physical alteration
and destruction of marine habitats that may result from land-based and coastal development activities, in particular
those land reclamation activities that are carried out in a manner that has a detrimental impact on the marine
environment,
Reiterating its serious concern at the current and projected adverse effects of climate change and ocean
acidification on the marine environment and marine biodiversity, and emphasizing the urgency of addressing these
issues,
Expressing concern that climate change continues to increase the severity and incidence of coral bleaching
throughout tropical seas and weakens the ability of reefs to withstand ocean acidification, which could have serious
and irreversible negative effects on marine organisms, particularly corals, as well as to withstand other pressures,
including overfishing and pollution,
Reiterating its deep concern at the vulnerability of the environment and the fragile ecosystems of the polar
regions, including the Arctic Ocean and the Arctic ice cap, particularly affected by the projected adverse effects of
climate change and ocean acidification,
Recognizing the need for a more integrated and ecosystem-based approach to, further study of and the
promotion of measures for enhanced cooperation, coordination and collaboration relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biodiversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction,
Recognizing also that the realization of the benefits of the Convention could be enhanced by international
cooperation, technical assistance and advanced scientific knowledge, as well as by funding and capacity-building,
Recognizing further that hydrographic surveys and nautical charting are critical to the safety of navigation and
life at sea, environmental protection, including the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems, and the economics
of the global shipping industry, and encouraging further efforts towards electronic charting, which not only provides
significantly increased benefits for safe navigation and management of ship movement, but also provides data and
information that can be used for sustainable fisheries activities and other sectoral uses of the marine environment,
the delimitation of maritime boundaries and environmental protection, and noting that under the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974,80 ships on international voyages are required to carry an electronic
chart display and information system, in accordance with the implementation schedule as set out in that Convention,
Recognizing that ocean data buoys deployed and operated in accordance with international law are critical for
improving understanding of weather, climate and ecosystems, and that certain types of ocean data buoys contribute
to saving lives by detecting tsunamis, and reiterating its serious concern at intentional and unintentional damage to
such buoys,
Emphasizing that underwater archaeological, cultural and historical heritage, including shipwrecks and
watercraft, holds essential information on the history of humankind and that such heritage is a resource that needs to
be protected and preserved,
_______________
80

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1184, No. 18961.

55

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with concern the continuing problem of transnational organized crime committed at sea, including
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons and
illicit trafficking in firearms, and threats to maritime safety and security, including piracy, armed robbery at sea,
smuggling and terrorist acts against shipping, offshore installations and other maritime interests, and noting the
deplorable loss of life and adverse impact on international trade, energy security and the global economy resulting
from such activities,
Recognizing that fibre-optic submarine cables transmit most of the world’s data and communications and hence
are vitally important to the global economy and the national security of all States, conscious that these cables are
susceptible to intentional and accidental damage from shipping and other activities and that the maintenance, including
the repair, of these cables is important, noting that these matters have been brought to the attention of States at
various workshops and seminars, and conscious of the need for States to adopt national laws and regulations to
protect submarine cables and render their wilful damage or damage by culpable negligence punishable offences,
Noting the importance of the delineation of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles and
that it is in the broader interest of the international community that coastal States with a continental shelf beyond
200 nautical miles submit information on the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles to the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (the Commission), and welcoming the submissions to the
Commission by a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention on the outer limits of their continental shelf
beyond 200 nautical miles, that the Commission has continued to fulfil its role, including of making recommendations
to coastal States, and that the summaries of recommendations are being made publicly available,81
Noting also that many coastal States Parties have submitted preliminary information indicative of the outer
limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, as provided for in the decision of the eighteenth Meeting of
States Parties to the Convention regarding the workload of the Commission and the ability of States, particularly
developing States, to fulfil the requirements of article 4 of annex II to the Convention, as well as the decision
contained in SPLOS/72, paragraph (a),82
Noting further that some coastal States may continue to face particular challenges in relation to preparing and
presenting submissions to the Commission,
Noting that financial and technical assistance may be sought by developing countries for activities in relation
to preparing and presenting submissions to the Commission, including through the voluntary trust fund established
by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/7 of 30 October 2000 for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of
submissions to the Commission for developing States, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, and compliance with article 76 of the Convention, as well as other accessible international
assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the trust funds established pursuant to resolution 55/7 in facilitating the
participation of members of the Commission from developing States in the meetings of the Commission and in
fulfilling the requirements of article 4 of annex II to the Convention, while noting with appreciation the recent
contributions made to them,
Reaffirming the importance of the work of the Commission for coastal States and for the international
community,
Recognizing that practical difficulties can arise when there is a considerable delay between the preparation of
submissions and their consideration by the Commission, including in retaining expertise up to and during the
consideration of the submissions by the Commission,
Recognizing also the significant workload of the Commission in view of the large number of submissions already
received and a number of submissions yet to be received, which places additional demands and challenges on its
members and the secretariat as provided by the Secretary-General of the United Nations through the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat (the Division), and welcoming the
decision of the twenty-first Meeting of States Parties to the Convention regarding the workload of the Commission,83
_______________
81

Available from the web page of the Commission maintained by the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea.
SPLOS/183.
83
SPLOS/229.
82

56

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with concern the projected timetable of the work of the Commission on the submissions already
received by it and those yet to be received,81 and in this regard noting with appreciation the implementation of the
decision of the Commission at its thirtieth session concerning the arrangements for its sessions and the meetings of
its subcommissions, taking into account the decision of the twenty-first Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention,84
Recognizing the need to ensure that the Commission can perform its functions under the Convention
expeditiously, efficiently and effectively and maintain its high level of quality and expertise,
Noting, in this regard, the decision of the twenty-third Meeting of States Parties to the Convention to establish
an open-ended working group to consider the conditions of service of the members of the Commission,74
Concerned about the implications of the workload of the Commission for the conditions of service of its
members,
Recalling its decision, in resolutions 57/141 of 12 December 2002 and 58/240 of 23 December 2003, to
establish a regular process under the United Nations for global reporting and assessment of the state of the marine
environment, including socioeconomic aspects, both current and foreseeable, building on existing regional
assessments, as recommended by the World Summit on Sustainable Development, 85 and noting the need for
cooperation among all States to this end,
Recalling also its decisions, in paragraphs 202, 203 and 209 of resolution 65/37 A of 7 December 2010,
regarding the Regular Process, as established under the United Nations and accountable to the General Assembly,
Recalling further that the Division has been designated to provide secretariat support to the Regular Process,
including its established institutions,
Recognizing the importance and the contribution of the work of the Informal Consultative Process established
by the General Assembly in its resolution 54/33 of 24 November 1999 to facilitate the annual review of
developments in ocean affairs by the Assembly,
Noting the responsibilities of the Secretary-General under the Convention and related resolutions of the
General Assembly, in particular resolutions 49/28 of 6 December 1994, 52/26 of 26 November 1997, 54/33,
65/37 A, 65/37 B of 4 April 2011, 66/231 of 24 December 2011 and 67/78, and in this context the substantial
increase in activities of the Division, in particular in view of the growing number of requests to the Division for
additional outputs and servicing of meetings, its increasing capacity-building activities, the need for enhanced
support and assistance to the Commission and the role of the Division in inter-agency coordination and cooperation,
Reaffirming the importance of the work of the International Seabed Authority (the Authority) in accordance
with the Convention and the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (the Part XI Agreement),86
Reaffirming also the importance of the work of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (the Tribunal)
in accordance with the Convention,
I
Implementation of the Convention and related agreements and instruments
1. Reaffirms its annual resolutions on the law of the sea and on oceans and the law of the sea, including
resolution 67/78, and other relevant resolutions concerning the Convention;70
2. Also reaffirms the unified character of the Convention and the vital importance of preserving its
integrity;
_______________
84

See CLCS/76.
See Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
86
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1836, No. 31364.
85

57

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Welcomes the recent ratification of and accession to the Convention, and calls upon all States that have
not done so, in order to achieve the goal of universal participation, to become parties to the Convention and the
Part XI Agreement;86
4. Calls upon States that have not done so, in order to achieve the goal of universal participation, to become
parties to the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks (the Fish Stocks Agreement);87
5. Calls upon States to harmonize their national legislation with the provisions of the Convention and,
where applicable, relevant agreements and instruments, to ensure the consistent application of those provisions and
to ensure also that any declarations or statements that they have made or make when signing, ratifying or acceding
to the Convention do not purport to exclude or to modify the legal effect of the provisions of the Convention in their
application to the State concerned and to withdraw any such declarations or statements;
6. Calls upon States Parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to deposit with the SecretaryGeneral charts or lists of geographical coordinates, as provided for in the Convention, preferably using the generally
accepted and most recent geodetic datums;
7. Urges all States to cooperate, directly or through competent international bodies, in taking measures to
protect and preserve objects of an archaeological and historical nature found at sea, in conformity with the
Convention, and calls upon States to work together on such diverse challenges and opportunities as the appropriate
relationship between salvage law and scientific management and conservation of underwater cultural heritage,
increasing technological abilities to discover and reach underwater sites, looting and growing underwater tourism;
8. Notes the recent deposit of instruments of ratification and acceptance of the 2001 Convention on the
Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage,88 calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming
parties to that Convention, and notes in particular the rules annexed to that Convention, which address the
relationship between salvage law and scientific principles of management, conservation and protection of
underwater cultural heritage among Parties, their nationals and vessels flying their flag;
II
Capacity-building
9. Emphasizes that capacity-building is essential to ensure that States, especially developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, are able
to fully implement the Convention, benefit from the sustainable development of the oceans and seas and participate
fully in global and regional forums on ocean affairs and the law of the sea;
10. Recalls, in this regard, that in “The future we want”,78 States recognized the importance of building the
capacity of developing countries to be able to benefit from the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and
seas and their resources, and in this regard emphasized the need for cooperation in marine scientific research to
implement the provisions of the Convention and the outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development, as
well as for the transfer of technology, taking into account the Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine
Technology adopted by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its twenty-second session, in 2003;
11. Emphasizes the need for international cooperation for capacity-building, including cross-sectoral
cooperation, at national, regional and global levels, to address, in particular, gaps in capacity-building in ocean
affairs and the law of the sea, including marine science;
12. Calls for capacity-building initiatives to take into account the needs of developing countries, and calls
upon States, international organizations and donor agencies to make efforts to ensure the sustainability of such
initiatives;
_______________
87
88

58

Ibid., vol. 2167, No. 37924.
Ibid., vol. 2562, No. 45694.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

13. Calls upon donor agencies and international financial institutions to keep their programmes
systematically under review to ensure the availability in all States, particularly in developing States, of the
economic, legal, navigational, scientific and technical skills necessary for the full implementation of the Convention
and the objectives of the present resolution, as well as the sustainable development of the oceans and seas nationally,
regionally and globally, and in so doing to bear in mind the interests and needs of landlocked developing States;
14. Encourages intensified efforts to build capacity for developing countries, in particular for the least
developed countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, to improve hydrographic
services and the production of nautical charts, including electronic charts, as well as the mobilization of resources
and building of capacity with support from international financial institutions and the donor community;
15. Calls upon States and international financial institutions, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes and technical partnerships, to continue to strengthen capacity-building activities, in
particular in developing countries, in the field of marine scientific research by, inter alia, training personnel to
develop and enhance relevant expertise, providing the necessary equipment, facilities and vessels and transferring
environmentally sound technologies;
16. Also calls upon States and international financial institutions, including through bilateral, regional and
global cooperation programmes and technical partnerships, to strengthen capacity-building activities in developing
countries, in particular least developed countries and small island developing States, to develop their maritime
administration and appropriate legal frameworks to establish or enhance the necessary infrastructure, legislative and
enforcement capabilities to promote effective compliance with and implementation and enforcement of their
responsibilities under international law;
17. Further calls upon States and international financial institutions, including through bilateral, regional
and global cooperation programmes and technical partnerships, to develop capacity-building activities in and to
transfer to developing countries, in particular least developed countries and small island developing States, on
mutually agreed terms, and taking into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and
Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology, environmentally sound technologies to study and minimize the
impacts of ocean acidification;
18. Emphasizes the need to focus on strengthening South-South cooperation as an additional way to build
capacity and as a cooperative mechanism to further enable countries to set their own priorities and needs;
19. Recognizes the importance of the work of the International Maritime Law Institute of the International
Maritime Organization as a centre of education and training of government legal advisers, mainly from developing
States, confirms its effective capacity-building role in the field of international law, and urges States,
intergovernmental organizations and financial institutions to make voluntary financial contributions to the budget of
the Institute;
20. Also recognizes the importance of the World Maritime University of the International Maritime
Organization, which celebrated its thirtieth anniversary in 2013, as a centre of excellence for maritime education and
research, confirms its effective capacity-building role in the field of maritime transportation, policy, administration,
management, safety, security and environmental protection, as well as its role in the international exchange and
transfer of knowledge, and urges States, intergovernmental organizations and other bodies to make voluntary
financial contributions to the University;
21. Welcomes ongoing activities for capacity-building so as to address maritime security and safety needs
and the protection of the marine environment of developing States, and encourages States and international financial
institutions to provide additional funding for capacity-building programmes, including for transfer of technology,
including through the International Maritime Organization and other competent international organizations;
22. Recognizes the considerable need to provide sustained capacity-building assistance, including on
financial and technical aspects, by relevant international organizations and donors to developing States, with a view
to further strengthening their capacity to take effective measures against the multiple facets of international criminal
activities at sea, in line with the relevant international instruments, including the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto;89
_______________
89

Ibid., vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.

59

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

23. Also recognizes the need to build the capacity of developing States to raise awareness of and support the
implementation of improved waste management practices, noting the particular vulnerability of small island
developing States to the impact of marine pollution from land-based sources and marine debris;
24. Further recognizes the importance of assisting developing States, in particular the least developed
countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, in implementing the Convention,
urges States, intergovernmental organizations and agencies, national institutions, non-governmental organizations
and international financial institutions, as well as natural and juridical persons, to make voluntary financial or other
contributions to the trust funds, as referred to in resolutions 55/7, 57/141 and 64/71 of 4 December 2009, established
for this purpose, and expresses its appreciation to those that have contributed;
25. Acknowledges the importance of capacity-building for developing States, in particular the least
developed countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, for the protection of the
marine environment and the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources;
26. Recognizes that promoting the voluntary transfer of technology is an essential aspect of building
capacity in marine science;
27. Encourages States to use the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on
the Transfer of Marine Technology, and recalls the important role of the secretariat of that Commission in the
implementation and promotion of the Criteria and Guidelines;
28. Also encourages States to consider additional opportunities for capacity-building at the regional level;
29. Welcomes, in this regard, the efforts of the Tribunal in holding regional workshops, including the latest
workshop, on the role of the Tribunal in the settlement of disputes relating to the law of the sea in the Caribbean
region, held in Mexico City on 5 and 6 June 2013 in collaboration with the Government of Mexico and the
Association of Caribbean States;
30. Notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Division to compile information on capacity-building initiatives,
requests the Secretary-General to continue to regularly update such information provided by States, international
organizations and donor agencies and include it in his annual report to the General Assembly, invites States,
international organizations and donor agencies to submit such information to the Secretary-General for this purpose,
and requests the Division to post the information on capacity-building initiatives from the annual report of the
Secretary-General on the website of the Division in an easily accessible manner so as to facilitate the matching of
capacity-building needs with opportunities;
31. Calls upon States to continue to assist developing States, and especially the least developed countries
and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, at the bilateral and, where appropriate,
multilateral levels, in the preparation of submissions to the Commission regarding the establishment of the outer
limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, including the assessment of the nature and extent of the
continental shelf of a coastal State, and recalls that coastal States can make requests to the Commission for scientific
and technical advice in the preparation of data for their submissions, in accordance with article 3 of annex II to the
Convention;
32. Calls upon the Division to continue to disseminate information on relevant procedures related to the
trust fund established for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of submissions to the Commission and to
continue its dialogue with potential beneficiaries with a view to providing financial support to developing countries
for activities to facilitate their submissions in accordance with the requirements of article 76 of the Convention and
with the Rules of Procedure90 and the Scientific and Technical Guidelines of the Commission;91
33. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with States and relevant international organizations and
institutions, to continue to support training and other activities to assist developing States in the preparation and
presentation of their submissions to the Commission;
_______________
90
91

60

CLCS/40/Rev.1.
CLCS/11 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

34. Notes with appreciation the contribution of the Division to capacity-building activities at the national
and regional levels;
35. Invites Member States and others in a position to do so to support the capacity-building activities of the
Division, including, in particular, the training and other activities to assist developing States in the preparation of
their submissions to the Commission, also invites Member States and others in a position to do so to contribute to
the trust fund established by the Secretary-General for the Office of Legal Affairs to support the promotion of
international law, and expresses its appreciation to those who have contributed;
36. Recognizes with appreciation the important contribution to the capacity-building of developing countries
and the promotion of the law of the sea made by the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the
Law of the Sea, which was established by the General Assembly in 1981 in honour of the first President of the Third
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea and which, relying on its network of 17 host institutions, has
awarded to date 28 fellowships to individuals from 25 Member States, welcomes the fact that the twenty-sixth
award, in 2013, will be made possible thanks to the generous contributions of Member States, urges Member States
and others in a position to do so to contribute generously to the further development of the Fellowship, and
acknowledges the provisions of its resolution on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law;92
37. Also recognizes with appreciation the important contribution of the United Nations-Nippon Foundation
of Japan Fellowship Programme, which has awarded 100 fellowships to individuals from 64 Member States since
2004, to human resources development for developing Member States in the field of ocean affairs and the law of the
sea and related disciplines, as well as the fostering of global interlinkages through the alumni programme, which
held its fourth meeting in New York from 10 to 12 December 2012 and its fifth meeting, hosted by the secretariat of
the Pacific Islands Forum, in Suva from 14 to 18 October 2013;
38. Encourages the competent international organizations, the United Nations Development Programme
and international financial institutions and funds to consider expanding their programmes within their respective
fields of competence for assistance to developing countries and to coordinate their efforts, and recognizes the
funding set aside by the Global Environment Facility as well as other funds allocated for projects relating to oceans;
III
Meeting of States Parties
39. Welcomes the report on the twenty-third Meeting of States Parties to the Convention,74 also welcomes
the election of one member of the Commission from Eastern European States on 19 December 2012,93 and further
welcomes the decisions taken by the twenty-third Meeting;
40. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the twenty-fourth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention,
in New York from 9 to 13 June 2014, and to provide full conference services, including documentation, as required;
IV
Peaceful settlement of disputes
41. Notes with satisfaction the continued and significant contribution of the Tribunal to the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means in accordance with Part XV of the Convention, and underlines the important role and
authority of the Tribunal concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention and the Part XI Agreement;
42. Pays tribute to the important and long-standing role of the International Court of Justice with regard to
the peaceful settlement of disputes concerning the law of the sea;
43. Notes that States parties to an international agreement related to the purposes of the Convention may
submit to, inter alia, the Tribunal or the International Court of Justice any dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of that agreement submitted in accordance with that agreement, and also notes the possibility, provided
for in the Statutes of the Tribunal and the Court, to submit disputes to a chamber;
_______________
92
93

Resolution 68/110.
See SPLOS/255.

61

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

44. Encourages States Parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to consider making a written
declaration, choosing from the means set out in article 287 of the Convention for the settlement of disputes
concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention and the Part XI Agreement, bearing in mind the
comprehensive character of the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in Part XV of the Convention;
V
The Area
45. Reiterates the importance of the ongoing elaboration by the Authority, pursuant to article 145 of the
Convention, of rules, regulations and procedures to ensure the effective protection of the marine environment, for,
inter alia, the protection and conservation of the natural resources of the Area and for the prevention of damage to
the flora and fauna of the marine environment from harmful effects that may arise from activities in the Area;
46. Notes the decision taken at the nineteenth session of the Authority to approve amendments to the
Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area;94
47. Also notes the increase in the number of contracts with the Authority for exploration for polymetallic
nodules and polymetallic sulphides, and further notes the attention being given by the Council of the Authority to
the drafting of a mining code;
48. Further notes the approval of the first two applications for a plan of work for exploration for cobalt-rich
ferromanganese crusts in the Area;95
49. Recalls the relevance of the advisory opinion on the responsibilities and obligations of States sponsoring
persons and entities with respect to activities in the Area, issued by the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the Tribunal on
1 February 2011;96
50. Notes the importance of the responsibilities entrusted to the Authority by articles 143 and 145 of the
Convention, which refer to marine scientific research and protection of the marine environment, respectively;
51. Recalls that the environmental management plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone, including the
designation, on a provisional basis, of a network of areas of particular environmental interest, was approved in 2012,
to be implemented over an initial three-year period so that it may be improved as more scientific, technical and
environmental baseline and resource assessment data become available and that, for that purpose, the conduct of
marine scientific research in those areas and the supply of available results to the Authority was encouraged,97 and
invites the Authority to consider developing and approving environmental management plans in other international
seabed area zones, in particular where there are currently exploration contracts;
VI
Effective functioning of the Authority and the Tribunal
52. Commends the progress in the work of the Authority;
53. Also commends the work of the Tribunal since its establishment;
54. Appeals to all States Parties to the Convention to pay their assessed contributions to the Authority and to
the Tribunal in full and on time, and also appeals to States Parties in arrears with their contributions to fulfil their
obligations without delay;
55. Notes the decision taken at the nineteenth session of the Authority concerning overhead charges for the
administration and supervision of exploration contracts;98
_______________
94

See ISBA/19/A/9.
See ISBA/19/C/13 and ISBA/19/C/15.
96
See ISBA/17/A/9.
97
See ISBA/18/C/22.
98
See ISBA/19/A/12.
95

62

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

56. Expresses concern about the low attendance at the annual sessions of the Assembly of the Authority,
noting also the concerns expressed with regard to the scheduling of annual sessions of the Authority, and taking into
consideration the great strides made by the Authority in adopting regulations for the prospecting and exploration of
minerals in the Area, and invites the Authority to consider measures to improve the attendance at its annual sessions,
including the holding of the sessions at an earlier time;
57. Recalls that the next annual session of the Authority will mark the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of the Authority, and urges the full membership of the Authority to attend the commemorative session
to be held in Kingston from 7 to 25 July 2014;
58. Notes the international workshop on the implementation of article 82 of the Convention convened by the
Authority in collaboration with the China Institute for Marine Affairs in Beijing from 26 to 30 November 2012, and
encourages in this regard the further study of the issues connected to the implementation of article 82;
59. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Agreement on the
Privileges and Immunities of the Tribunal99 and to the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the Authority;100
60. Emphasizes the importance of the rules and staff regulations of the Tribunal in promoting the
recruitment of a geographically representative staff in the Professional and higher categories, and welcomes the
actions taken by the Tribunal in observance of those rules and regulations;
VII
The continental shelf and the work of the Commission
61. Recalls that, in accordance with article 76, paragraph 8, of the Convention, information on the limits of
the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is
measured shall be submitted by the coastal State to the Commission set up under annex II to the Convention on the
basis of equitable geographical representation, that the Commission shall make recommendations to coastal States
on matters related to the establishment of the outer limits of their continental shelf, and that the limits of the shelf
established by a coastal State on the basis of these recommendations shall be final and binding;
62. Also recalls that, in accordance with article 77, paragraph 3, of the Convention, the rights of the coastal
State over the continental shelf do not depend on occupation, effective or notional, or on any express proclamation;
63. Notes with satisfaction that a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention have submitted
information to the Commission regarding the establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond
200 nautical miles, in conformity with article 76 of the Convention and article 4 of annex II to the Convention,
taking into account the decision of the eleventh Meeting of States Parties to the Convention contained in SPLOS/72,
paragraph (a);
64. Also notes with satisfaction that a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention have
submitted to the Secretary-General, pursuant to the decision of the eighteenth Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention,101 preliminary information indicative of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical
miles and a description of the status of preparation and intended date of submission in accordance with the
requirements of article 76 of the Convention and with the Rules of Procedure and the Scientific and Technical
Guidelines of the Commission, and notes with satisfaction that additional submissions referred to in preliminary
information have been filed with the Commission;
65. Further notes with satisfaction the progress in the work of the Commission102 and that it is giving
current consideration to a number of submissions that have been made regarding the establishment of the outer
limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles;
_______________
99

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2167, No. 37925.
Ibid., vol. 2214, No. 39357.
101
SPLOS/183, para. 1 (a).
102
See CLCS/78, CLCS/80 and CLCS/81.
100

63

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

66. Notes with satisfaction that the Commission, taking into account the decision of the eighteenth Meeting
of States Parties to the Convention,103 has compiled lists of websites of organizations, data/information portals and
data holders where general information and publicly available scientific and technical data can be accessed that may
be relevant to the preparation of submissions, and has made this information available on its website;
67. Takes note of the 18 recommendations made by the Commission on the submissions of a number of
coastal States, and welcomes the fact that summaries of recommendations are being made publicly available in
accordance with paragraph 11.3 of annex III to the Rules of Procedure of the Commission;
68. Notes that the consideration by the Commission of submissions by coastal States in accordance with
article 76 of and annex II to the Convention is without prejudice to the application of other parts of the Convention
by States Parties;
69. Also notes the considerable number of submissions yet to be considered by the Commission and the
demands that this places on its members and the secretariat as provided by the Division, and emphasizes the need to
ensure that the Commission can perform its functions expeditiously, efficiently and effectively and maintain its high
level of quality and expertise;
70. Takes note with appreciation of the decision of the Commission at its thirty-second session regarding the
workload of the Commission, including to continue to extend the duration of its sessions for 2014 to three sessions
of seven weeks each, including plenary meetings, and further notes the decision of the Commission at its thirtysecond session to establish new subcommissions so that nine subcommissions would actively consider
submissions;104
71. Reiterates the obligation of States under the Convention whose experts are serving on the Commission
to defray the expenses of the experts they have nominated while in performance of Commission duties;
72. Urges, in this regard, States to provide medical coverage for the experts they have nominated while in
performance of Commission duties and to do their utmost to ensure the full participation of those experts in the
work of the Commission, including the meetings of subcommissions, in accordance with the Convention;
73. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take appropriate measures, within overall existing
resource levels, to further strengthen the capacity of the Division, serving as the secretariat of the Commission, in
order to ensure enhanced support and assistance to the Commission and its subcommissions in their consideration of
submissions, as required by paragraph 9 of annex III to the Rules of Procedure of the Commission, in particular its
human resources, taking into account the need for simultaneous work on several submissions;
74. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to provide all necessary secretariat services to the Commission
in accordance with article 2, paragraph 5, of annex II to the Convention;
75. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate and timely measures to ensure secretariat services for
the Commission and its subcommissions for the extended duration of time requested in the decision of the twentyfirst Meeting of States Parties to the Convention;83
76. Also requests the Secretary-General, consequently, to continue to allocate appropriate and sufficient
resources to the Division to provide adequate services and assistance to the Commission in view of the increase in
the number of its working weeks;
77. Expresses its appreciation to States that have made contributions to the voluntary trust fund established
pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of submissions to the Commission and to
the voluntary trust fund also established pursuant to that resolution for the purpose of defraying the cost of
participation of the members of the Commission from developing States in the meetings of the Commission,
encourages States to make additional contributions to these funds, and authorizes the use, as appropriate, of the latter
trust fund, and in accordance with the purpose of its terms of reference, to defray the cost of the participation of the
Chair of the Commission who is a member of the Commission nominated by a developing country in the Meetings
of States Parties to the Convention;
_______________
103
104

64

SPLOS/183, para. 3.
See CLCS/80.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

78. Requests the Secretary-General to explore options for providing medical insurance coverage to members
of the Commission from developing States, whose participation may be facilitated through the voluntary trust fund
for the participation of the members of the Commission from developing States in the meetings of the Commission,
while in performance of Commission duties at United Nations Headquarters, and to circulate his findings to
Member States in advance of the twenty-fourth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention;
79. Approves the convening by the Secretary-General of the thirty-fourth, thirty-fifth and thirty-sixth
sessions of the Commission, in New York, from 27 January to 14 March 2014, from 21 July to 5 September 2014
and from 13 October to 28 November 2014, respectively, with full conference services, including documentation,
for the plenary parts of these sessions,105 as well as any resumed sessions as may be required by the Commission,
and requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to meet these requirements within overall existing
resources;
80. Expresses its firm conviction about the importance of the work of the Commission, carried out in
accordance with the Convention, including with respect to the participation of coastal States in relevant proceedings
concerning their submissions, and recognizes the continued need for active interaction between coastal States and
the Commission;
81. Expresses its appreciation to States that have exchanged views in order to increase understanding of
issues, including expenditures involved, arising from the application of article 76 of the Convention, thus facilitating
the preparation of submissions by States, in particular developing States, to the Commission, and encourages States
to continue to exchange views;
82. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with Member States, to continue to support workshops
or symposiums on scientific and technical aspects of the establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf
beyond 200 nautical miles, taking into account the need to strengthen capacity-building for developing countries in
preparing their submissions;
VIII
Maritime safety and security and flag State implementation
83. Encourages States to ratify or accede to international agreements addressing the safety and security of
navigation, as well as maritime labour, and to adopt the necessary measures consistent with the Convention and
other relevant international instruments aimed at implementing and enforcing the rules contained in those
agreements, and emphasizes the need for capacity-building for and assistance to developing States;
84. Recognizes that the legal regimes governing maritime safety and maritime security may have common
and mutually reinforcing objectives that may be interrelated and could benefit from synergies, and encourages States
to take this into account in their implementation;
85. Emphasizes the need for further efforts to promote a culture of safety and security in the shipping
industry and to address the shortage of adequately trained personnel, and urges the establishment of more centres to
provide the required education and training;
86. Also emphasizes that safety and security measures should be implemented with minimal negative effects
on seafarers and fishers, especially in relation to their working conditions, and welcomes the ongoing cooperation
between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Labour Organization on
child labour in fisheries and aquaculture, particularly the publication in June 2013 of the Guidance on addressing
child labour in fisheries and aquaculture, as well as the work that has been conducted on the issue of trafficking in
persons and forced labour on fishing vessels by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Labour Organization;
87. Welcomes the consideration by the committees of the International Maritime Organization of the fair
treatment of seafarers;
_______________
105

From 10 to 14 February and from 10 to 14 March 2014, and from 4 to 8 August and from 2 to 5 September 2014.

65

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

88. Also welcomes the entry into force on 1 January 2012, with a five-year transitional period until 1 January
2017, of the amendments adopted in Manila on 25 June 2010, known as the Manila amendments, to the
International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978,106 as well
as the entry into force on 29 September 2012 of the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification
and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995, and invites States that have not yet done so to ratify or
accede to these Conventions;
89. Further welcomes the entry into force on 20 August 2013 of the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006, of
the International Labour Organization, invites States that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to that Convention,
and also invites States that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the Work in Fishing Convention, 2007
(No. 188) and the Seafarers’ Identity Documents Convention (Revised), 2003 (No. 185),107 of the International
Labour Organization and to effectively implement all of those Conventions, and emphasizes the need to provide to
States, at their request, technical cooperation and assistance in that regard;
90. Notes the adoption on 11 October 2012 of the Cape Town Agreement of 2012 on the Implementation of
the Provisions of the Torremolinos Protocol of 1993 relating to the Torremolinos International Convention for the
Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977, and invites States that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the Agreement;
91. Welcomes ongoing cooperation between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the International Maritime Organization and the International Labour Organization relating to the safety of fishers
and fishing vessels, underlines the urgent need for continued work in that area, and notes the approval by the three
organizations of the Guidelines to Assist Competent Authorities in the Implementation of Part B of the Code of
Safety for Fishermen and Fishing Vessels, the Voluntary Guidelines for the Design, Construction and Equipment of
Small Fishing Vessels, and the Safety Recommendations for Decked Fishing Vessels of Less than 12 Metres in
Length and Undecked Fishing Vessels;
92. Recalls that all actions taken to combat threats to maritime security must be in accordance with
international law, including the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention;
93. Recognizes the crucial role of international cooperation at the global, regional, subregional and bilateral
levels in combating, in accordance with international law, threats to maritime security, including piracy, armed
robbery at sea, and terrorist acts against shipping, offshore installations and other maritime interests, through
bilateral and multilateral instruments and mechanisms aimed at monitoring, preventing and responding to such
threats, the enhanced sharing of information among States relevant to the detection, prevention and suppression of
such threats, and the prosecution of offenders with due regard to national legislation, and the need for sustained
capacity-building to support such objectives;
94. Acknowledges the work of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in promoting
international cooperation and strengthening capacity to combat the problem of transnational organized crime
committed at sea;
95. Notes that piracy and armed robbery at sea affect a wide range of vessels engaged in maritime activities;
96. Emphasizes the importance of promptly reporting incidents to enable accurate information on the scope
of the problem of piracy and armed robbery against ships and, in the case of armed robbery against ships, by
affected vessels to the coastal State, underlines the importance of effective information-sharing with States
potentially affected by incidents of piracy and armed robbery against ships, and notes with appreciation the
important role of the International Maritime Organization and the important contribution of the Information Sharing
Centre of the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia;
97. Urges all States, in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization, to actively combat piracy
and armed robbery at sea by adopting measures, including those relating to assistance with capacity-building
through training of seafarers, port staff and enforcement personnel in the prevention, reporting and investigation of
incidents, by bringing the alleged perpetrators to justice, in accordance with international law, and by adopting
national legislation, as well as by providing enforcement vessels and equipment and guarding against fraudulent
ship registration;
_______________
106
107

66

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1361, No. 23001.
Ibid., vol. 2304, No. 41069.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

98. Encourages States to ensure effective implementation of international law applicable to combating
piracy, as reflected in the Convention, calls upon States to take appropriate steps under their national law to
facilitate, in accordance with international law, the apprehension and prosecution of those who are alleged to have
committed acts of piracy, including the financing or facilitation of such acts, also taking into account other relevant
instruments that are consistent with the Convention, and encourages States to cooperate, as appropriate, with a view
to developing their national legislation in this regard;
99. Expresses grave concern at the threats posed by piracy and armed robbery at sea to the safety and
welfare of seafarers and other persons;
100. Invites all States, the International Maritime Organization, the International Labour Organization and
other relevant international organizations and agencies to adopt or recommend, as appropriate, measures to protect
the interest and welfare of seafarers and fishers who are victims of pirates, after their release from captivity,
including their post-incident care and reintegration into society;
101. Notes the ongoing cooperation between the International Maritime Organization, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Division with respect to the compilation of national legislation on piracy, also
notes that copies of national legislation received by the Secretariat have been placed on the website of the Division,
and encourages the aforementioned bodies to further cooperate with the view to assisting Member States, upon
request, in developing their national laws on piracy;
102. Recognizes continued national, bilateral and trilateral initiatives as well as regional cooperative
mechanisms, in accordance with international law, to address piracy, including the financing or facilitation of acts of
piracy, and armed robbery at sea in the Asian region, and calls upon other States to give immediate attention to
adopting, concluding and implementing cooperation agreements at the regional level on combating piracy and
armed robbery against ships;
103. Expresses serious concern at the inhuman conditions hostages taken at sea face in captivity and also the
adverse impact on their families, calls for the immediate release of all hostages taken at sea, and stresses the
importance of cooperation among Member States on the issue of hostage-taking at sea;
104. Welcomes, in this regard, the establishment of the Hostage Support Programme by the Board of the Trust
Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia;108
105. Reiterates its serious concern regarding continued incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia, expresses alarm in particular at the hijacking of vessels, supports the recent efforts to address this
problem at the global and regional levels, notes the adoption by the Security Council of resolutions 1816 (2008) of
2 June 2008, 1838 (2008) of 7 October 2008, 1846 (2008) of 2 December 2008, 1851 (2008) of 16 December 2008,
1897 (2009) of 30 November 2009, 1918 (2010) of 27 April 2010, 1950 (2010) of 23 November 2010, 1976 (2011)
of 11 April 2011, 2015 (2011) of 24 October 2011, 2020 (2011) of 22 November 2011 and 2036 (2012) of
22 February 2012, as well as the statements by the President of the Security Council of 25 August 2010109 and of
19 November 2012,110 also notes that the authorization in resolution 1816 (2008) and the provisions in resolutions
1838 (2008), 1846 (2008), 1851 (2008), 1897 (2009), 1950 (2010), 2020 (2011), 2077 (2012) of 21 November 2012
and 2125 (2013) of 18 November 2013 apply only to the situation in Somalia and do not affect the rights,
obligations or responsibilities of Member States under international law, including any rights or obligations under
the Convention, with respect to any other situation, and underscores, in particular, the fact that they are not to be
considered as establishing customary international law;
106. Welcomes the significant decrease in reported incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia, which are at
the lowest level since 2006, continues to be gravely concerned by the ongoing threat that piracy and armed robbery
at sea continue to pose to the region, and acknowledges Security Council resolution 2125 (2013);
107. Recognizes the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) for operationalizing a global
piracy database designed to consolidate information about piracy off the coast of Somalia and facilitate the
_______________
108

See S/2013/623, paras. 11–13.
S/PRST/2010/16; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2010–31 July 2011.
110
S/PRST/2012/24; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2012–31 July 2013.
109

67

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

development of actionable analysis for law enforcement, and urges all States to share such information with
INTERPOL for use in the database, through appropriate channels;111
108. Notes the continued efforts within the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, following the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1851 (2008), including the establishment under the Contact Group of
Working Group 5 on the financial aspects of Somali piracy to focus on and coordinate efforts to disrupt the pirate
enterprise ashore, and commends the contributions of all States in the efforts to fight piracy off the coast of Somalia;
109. Recognizes the primary role of the Federal Government of Somalia in combating piracy and armed
robbery against ships off the coast of Somalia, acknowledges the importance of a comprehensive and sustainable
settlement of the situation in Somalia, and emphasizes the need to address the underlying causes of piracy and to
assist Somalia and States in the region in strengthening institutional capacity to fight piracy, including the financing
or facilitation of acts of piracy, and armed robbery against ships off the coast of Somalia and to bring to justice those
involved in such acts;
110. Notes the approval by the International Maritime Organization of the guidelines to assist in the
investigation of the crimes of piracy and armed robbery against ships, revised interim guidance to shipowners, ship
operators and shipmasters on the use of privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships in the high risk
area, revised interim recommendations for flag States regarding the use of privately contracted armed security
personnel on board ships in the high risk area, revised interim recommendations for port and coastal States
regarding the use of privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships in the high risk area, interim
guidance to private maritime security companies providing privately contracted armed security personnel on board
ships in the high risk area, and interim guidance for flag States on measures to prevent and mitigate Somalia-based
piracy;
111. Encourages States to ensure that ships flying their flag apply ship security measures approved in
accordance with national and international law;
112. Notes the efforts made by the shipping industry to cooperate with the efforts by States regarding piracy
off the coast of Somalia, in particular in assisting ships that navigate in that area, and recalls the adoption on
30 November 2011 by the Assembly of the International Maritime Organization of resolution A.1044(27) on piracy
and armed robbery against ships in waters off the coast of Somalia;
113. Recalls the adoption on 29 January 2009 of the Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy
and Armed Robbery against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden (Djibouti Code of Conduct)
under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization, the establishment of the International Maritime
Organization Djibouti Code Trust Fund, a multi-donor trust fund initiated by Japan, and the ongoing activities for
the implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct;
114. Expresses its deep concern at the high number of incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea, recalls the primary role of States in the region to counter the threat and address the underlying
causes of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, welcomes the adoption in Yaoundé on 25 June
2013 of the Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illegal
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa, and calls upon States in the region to sign and implement the Code of
Conduct as soon as possible and consistent with international law, in particular the Convention;
115. Urges States to ensure the full implementation of resolution A.1044(27) of the Assembly of the
International Maritime Organization on piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters off the coast of Somalia;
116. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation112 and the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf,112 notes the entry into force on 28 July 2010
of the 2005 Protocol to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation113 and of the 2005 Protocol to the 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety
_______________
111

See S/2012/783, para. 46.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1678, No. 29004.
113
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.15/21.
112

68

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf, 114 invites States that have not yet done so to consider
becoming parties to those Protocols, and urges States parties to take appropriate measures to ensure the effective
implementation of those instruments through the adoption of legislation, where appropriate;
117. Calls upon States to effectively implement the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code and the
amendments to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea,115 and to work with the International
Maritime Organization to promote safe and secure shipping while ensuring freedom of navigation;
118. Urges all States, in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization, to improve the protection
of offshore installations by adopting measures related to the prevention, reporting and investigation of acts of
violence against installations, in accordance with international law, and by implementing such measures through
national legislation to ensure proper and adequate enforcement;
119. Emphasizes the progress in regional cooperation, including the efforts of littoral States, on the
enhancement of safety, security and environmental protection in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, and the
effective functioning of the Cooperative Mechanism on Safety of Navigation and Environment Protection in the
Straits of Malacca and Singapore (the Cooperative Mechanism) to promote dialogue and facilitate close cooperation
between the littoral States, user States, shipping industries and other stakeholders in line with article 43 of the
Convention, notes with appreciation the convening of the sixth Cooperation Forum, in Kuta, Indonesia, on 7 and
8 October 2013, the sixth Project Coordination Committee Meeting, in Kuta on 11 October 2013, and the tenth and
eleventh Aids to Navigation Fund Committee Meetings, in Singapore on 4 and 5 April 2013 and 3 and 4 October
2013, respectively, the events being key pillars of the Cooperative Mechanism, also notes with appreciation the
important role of the Information Sharing Centre of the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, based in Singapore, and calls upon States to give immediate attention to
adopting, concluding and implementing cooperation agreements at the regional level;
120. Recognizes that some transnational organized criminal activities threaten legitimate uses of the oceans
and endanger the lives of people at sea;
121. Notes that transnational organized criminal activities are diverse and may be interrelated in some cases
and that criminal organizations are adaptive and take advantage of the vulnerabilities of States, in particular coastal
and small island developing States in transit areas, and calls upon States and relevant intergovernmental
organizations to increase cooperation and coordination at all levels to detect and suppress the smuggling of
migrants, trafficking in persons and illicit trafficking in firearms, in accordance with international law;
122. Recognizes the importance of enhancing international cooperation at all levels to fight transnational
organized criminal activities, including illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, within the scope
of the United Nations instruments against illicit drug trafficking, as well as the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in
persons and illicit trafficking in firearms and criminal activities at sea falling within the scope of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;116
123. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime,117 the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime,118 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,119 and to take appropriate
measures to ensure their effective implementation;
_______________
114

International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.15/22.
International Maritime Organization, documents SOLAS/CONF.5/32 and 34, and document MSC 81/25/Add.1, annex 2, resolution
MSC.202(81) introducing the long-range identification and tracking of ships system.
116
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
117
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
118
Ibid., vol. 2326, No. 39574.
119
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
115

69

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

124. Calls upon States to ensure freedom of navigation, the safety of navigation and the rights of transit
passage, archipelagic sea lanes passage and innocent passage in accordance with international law, in particular the
Convention;
125. Welcomes the work of the International Maritime Organization relating to the protection of shipping
lanes of strategic importance and significance, and in particular in enhancing safety, security and environmental
protection in straits used for international navigation, and calls upon the International Maritime Organization, States
bordering straits and user States to continue their cooperation to keep such straits safe, secure and environmentally
protected and open to international navigation at all times, consistent with international law, in particular the
Convention;
126. Calls upon user States and States bordering straits used for international navigation to continue to
cooperate by agreement on matters relating to navigational safety, including safety aids for navigation, and the
prevention, reduction and control of pollution from ships, and welcomes developments in this regard;
127. Calls upon States that have accepted the amendments to regulation XI-1/6 of the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, 120 to implement the Code of International Standards and
Recommended Practices for a Safety Investigation into a Marine Casualty or Marine Incident,121 which took effect
on 1 January 2010;
128. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming members of the International
Hydrographic Organization, encourages all members of that Organization to actively consider, in accordance with
applicable rules and procedures, applications of States that wish to become members of that Organization, and urges
all States to work with that Organization to increase the coverage of hydrographic information on a global basis to
enhance capacity-building and technical assistance and to promote safe navigation, particularly through the
production and use of accurate electronic navigational charts, especially in areas used for international navigation, in
ports and where there are vulnerable or protected marine areas;
129. Encourages States to continue their efforts in the implementation of all areas of the Action Plan for the
Safety of Transport of Radioactive Material, approved by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in March 2004;
130. Notes that cessation of the transport of radioactive materials through the regions of small island
developing States is an ultimate desired goal of small island developing States and some other countries, and
recognizes the right of freedom of navigation in accordance with international law; that States should maintain
dialogue and consultation, in particular under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
International Maritime Organization, with the aim of improved mutual understanding, confidence-building and
enhanced communication in relation to the safe maritime transport of radioactive materials; that States involved in
the transport of such materials are urged to continue to engage in dialogue with small island developing States and
other States to address their concerns; and that these concerns include the further development and strengthening,
within the appropriate forums, of international regulatory regimes to enhance safety, disclosure, liability, security
and compensation in relation to such transport;
131. Acknowledges, in the context of paragraph 130 above, the potential environmental and economic
impacts of maritime incidents and accidents on coastal States, in particular those related to the transport of
radioactive materials, and emphasizes the importance of effective liability regimes in that regard;
132. Encourages States to draw up plans and to establish procedures to implement the Guidelines on Places of
Refuge for Ships in Need of Assistance adopted by the International Maritime Organization on 5 December 2003;122
133. Invites States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Nairobi International
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007;123
_______________
120

International Maritime Organization, document MSC 84/24/Add.1, annex 3, resolution MSC.257(84).
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 84/24/Add.1, annex 1, resolution MSC.255(84).
122
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.949(23).
123
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.16/19.
121

70

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

134. Requests States to take appropriate measures with regard to ships flying their flag or of their registry to
address hazards that may be caused by wrecks and drifting or sunken cargo to navigation or the marine environment;
135. Calls upon States to ensure that masters on ships flying their flag take the steps required by relevant
instruments124 to provide assistance to persons in distress at sea, and urges States to cooperate and to take all
measures necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the amendments to the International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue125 and to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea126 relating to the
delivery of persons rescued at sea to a place of safety, as well as of the associated Guidelines on the Treatment of
Persons Rescued at Sea;127
136. Notes the adoption by the International Maritime Organization of International Convention for the
Safety of Life at Sea regulation III/17-1,128 as well as the related Guidelines for the development of plans and
procedures for recovery of persons from the water;
137. Recognizes that all States must fulfil their search and rescue responsibilities in accordance with
international law, including the Convention, and the ongoing need for the International Maritime Organization and
other relevant organizations to assist, in particular, developing States both to increase their search and rescue
capabilities, including through the establishment of additional rescue coordination centres and regional sub-centres,
and to take effective action to address, to the extent feasible, the issue of unseaworthy ships and small craft within
their national jurisdiction, and emphasizes in this regard the importance of cooperation for these purposes, including
within the framework of the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979;129
138. Welcomes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization in relation to disembarkation of
persons rescued at sea, and notes in this regard the need to implement all relevant international instruments and the
importance of cooperation among States as provided for in those instruments;
139. Invites States to implement the Revised Guidelines on the Prevention of Access by Stowaways and the
Allocation of Responsibilities to Seek the Successful Resolution of Stowaway Cases adopted by the International
Maritime Organization on 2 December 2010;130
140. Calls upon States to continue to cooperate in developing comprehensive approaches to international
migration and development, including through dialogue on all their aspects;
141. Also calls upon States to take measures to protect fibre-optic submarine cables and to fully address
issues relating to these cables, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
142. Encourages greater dialogue and cooperation among States and the relevant regional and global
organizations through workshops and seminars on the protection and maintenance of fibre-optic submarine cables to
promote the security of such critical communications infrastructure;
143. Also encourages the adoption by States of laws and regulations addressing the breaking or injury of
submarine cables or pipelines beneath the high seas done wilfully or through culpable negligence by a ship flying its
flag or by a person subject to its jurisdiction, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
144. Affirms the importance of maintenance, including the repair, of submarine cables, undertaken in
conformity with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
145. Reaffirms that flag, port and coastal States all bear responsibility for ensuring the effective
implementation and enforcement of international instruments relating to maritime security and safety, in accordance
with international law, in particular the Convention, and that flag States have primary responsibility that requires
further strengthening, including through increased transparency of ownership of vessels;
_______________
124

The International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979,
as amended, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982, and the International Convention on Salvage, 1989.
125
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.1, annex 5, resolution MSC.155(78).
126
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.1, annex 3, resolution MSC.153(78).
127
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.2, annex 34, resolution MSC.167(78).
128
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 91/22/Add.1, annex 2, resolution MSC.338(91).
129
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1405, No. 23489.
130
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 88/26/Add.1, annex 6, resolution MSC.312(88).

71

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

146. Urges flag States without an effective maritime administration and appropriate legal frameworks to
establish or enhance the necessary infrastructure, legislative and enforcement capabilities to ensure effective
compliance with and implementation and enforcement of their responsibilities under international law, in particular
the Convention, and, until such action is taken, to consider declining the granting of the right to fly their flag to new
vessels, suspending their registry or not opening a registry, and calls upon flag and port States to take all measures
consistent with international law necessary to prevent the operation of substandard vessels;
147. Recognizes that international shipping rules and standards adopted by the International Maritime
Organization in respect of maritime safety, efficiency of navigation and the prevention and control of marine
pollution, complemented by best practices of the shipping industry, have led to a significant reduction in maritime
accidents and pollution incidents, encourages all States to participate in the Voluntary International Maritime
Organization Member State Audit Scheme,131 and notes the decision of the International Maritime Organization on
a phased-in introduction of the Audit Scheme as an institutionalized process;132
148. Welcomes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization to develop a mandatory code for
ships operating in polar waters (the Polar Code), and encourages States and competent international organizations
and bodies to support continued efforts to finalize the Polar Code within the agreed framework, with an entry into
force as soon as possible;
149. Recognizes that maritime safety can also be improved through effective port State control, the
strengthening of regional arrangements and increased coordination and cooperation among them, and increased
information-sharing, including among safety and security sectors;
150. Encourages flag States to take appropriate measures sufficient to achieve or maintain recognition by
intergovernmental arrangements that recognize satisfactory flag State performance, including, as appropriate,
satisfactory port State control examination results on a sustained basis, with a view to improving quality shipping
and furthering flag State implementation of relevant instruments under the International Maritime Organization as
well as relevant goals and objectives of the present resolution;
IX
Marine environment and marine resources
151. Emphasizes once again the importance of the implementation of Part XII of the Convention in order to
protect and preserve the marine environment and its living marine resources against pollution and physical
degradation, and calls upon all States to cooperate and take measures consistent with the Convention, directly or
through competent international organizations, for the protection and preservation of the marine environment;
152. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States noted with concern that the health of oceans and marine
biodiversity are negatively affected by marine pollution, including marine debris, especially plastic, persistent
organic pollutants, heavy metals and nitrogen-based compounds, from a number of marine and land-based sources,
including shipping and land run-off, and that States committed to take action to reduce the incidence and impacts of
such pollution on marine ecosystems, including through the effective implementation of relevant conventions
adopted in the framework of the International Maritime Organization, and the follow-up of relevant initiatives such
as the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities,133 as
well as the adoption of coordinated strategies to this end, and that they further committed to take action, by 2025,
based on collected scientific data, to achieve significant reductions in marine debris to prevent harm to the coastal
and marine environment;
153. Notes the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, including its recent findings on the
acidification of oceans, and in this regard encourages States and competent international organizations and other
relevant institutions, individually and in cooperation, to urgently pursue further research on ocean acidification,
especially programmes of observation and measurement, noting in particular the continued work under the
_______________
131

International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.946(23).
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.1018(26).
133
A/51/116, annex II.
132

72

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Convention on Biological Diversity134 and paragraph 23 of decision XI/18 adopted at the eleventh meeting of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, held in Hyderabad, India, from 8 to 19 October
2012,135 and to increase national, regional and global efforts to address levels of ocean acidity and the negative
impact of such acidity on vulnerable marine ecosystems, particularly coral reefs;
154. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States called for support for initiatives that address ocean
acidification and the impacts of climate change on marine and coastal ecosystems and resources and, in this regard,
reiterated the need to work collectively to prevent further ocean acidification, as well as to enhance the resilience of
marine ecosystems and of the communities whose livelihoods depend on them, and to support marine scientific
research, monitoring and observation of ocean acidification and particularly vulnerable ecosystems, including
through enhanced international cooperation in this regard;
155. Notes with concern the approximately 30 per cent increase in the acidity of ocean surface waters since
the beginning of the industrial era136 and the wide range of impacts associated with the continuing and alarming
acidification of the world’s oceans, and urges States to make significant efforts to tackle the causes of ocean
acidification and to further study and minimize its impacts, to enhance local, national, regional and global
cooperation in this regard, including the sharing of relevant information, and to take steps to make marine
ecosystems more resilient to the impacts of ocean acidification;
156. Recognizes the recent attention paid to ocean acidification at the fourteenth meeting of the Informal
Consultative Process, and commits itself to continue to pay attention to this important issue, including by taking into
account the first global integrated marine assessment and the ongoing work of the recently established Ocean
Acidification International Coordination Centre of the International Atomic Energy Agency;
157. Encourages States, individually or in collaboration with relevant international organizations and bodies,
to enhance their scientific activity to better understand the effects of climate change on the marine environment and
marine biodiversity and develop ways and means of adaptation, taking into account, as appropriate, the
precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches;
158. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to international agreements addressing
the protection and preservation of the marine environment and its living marine resources against the introduction of
harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens and marine pollution from all sources, including the dumping of wastes
and other matter, and other forms of physical degradation, as well as agreements that provide for preparedness for,
response to and cooperation on pollution incidents and that include provisions on liability and compensation for
damage resulting from marine pollution, and to adopt the necessary measures consistent with international law,
including the Convention, aimed at implementing and enforcing the rules contained in those agreements;
159. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States noted the significant threat that alien invasive species pose
to marine ecosystems and resources and committed to implement measures to prevent the introduction and manage
the adverse environmental impacts of alien invasive species, including, as appropriate, those adopted in the
framework of the International Maritime Organization;
160. Encourages States, directly or through competent international organizations, to consider the further
development and application, as appropriate and consistent with international law, including the Convention, of
environmental impact assessment processes covering planned activities under their jurisdiction or control that may
cause substantial pollution of or significant and harmful changes to the marine environment, and also encourages
the communication of the reports of the results of such assessments to the competent international organizations in
accordance with the Convention;
161. Encourages States that have not done so to become parties to regional seas conventions addressing the
protection and preservation of the marine environment;
_______________
134

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/11/35, annex I.
136
As stated in the 2013 report of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on the physical science basis of
climate change.
135

73

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

162. Encourages States, in accordance with international law, including the Convention and other relevant
instruments, either bilaterally or regionally, to jointly develop and promote contingency plans for responding to
pollution incidents, as well as other incidents that are likely to have significant adverse effects on the marine
environment and biodiversity;
163. Recognizes the importance of improving understanding of the impact of climate change on oceans and
seas, and recalls that in “The future we want”, States noted that sea-level rise and coastal erosion are serious threats
for many coastal regions and islands, particularly in developing countries and, in this regard, called upon the
international community to enhance its efforts to address these challenges;
164. Notes with concern that the health of the oceans and marine biodiversity are negatively affected by
marine debris, especially plastic, from land-based and marine sources, and thus recognizes the need for better
understanding of the sources, amounts, pathways, distribution trends, nature and impacts of marine debris;
165. Welcomes the activities of relevant United Nations bodies and organizations, including the United
Nations Environment Programme, to address the sources and impacts of marine debris, as well as actions relating to
marine debris taken under the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals, 137 in
particular the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to that Convention at its tenth meeting, held in Bergen,
Norway, from 20 to 25 November 2011, of resolution 10.4 on marine debris;
166. Encourages States to further develop partnerships with industry and civil society to raise awareness of
the extent of the impact of marine debris on the health and productivity of the marine environment and consequent
economic loss;
167. Urges States to integrate the issue of marine debris into national and, as appropriate, regional strategies
dealing with waste management, especially in the coastal zone, ports and maritime industries, including recycling,
reuse, reduction and disposal, to consider developing an integrated waste management infrastructure and to
encourage the development of appropriate economic incentives with the aim of reducing marine debris to address
this issue, including the development of cost-recovery systems that provide an incentive to use port reception
facilities and discourage ships from discharging marine debris at sea, and support for measures to prevent, reduce
and control pollution from any source, including land-based sources, such as community-based coastal and
waterway clean-up and monitoring activities, and encourages States to cooperate regionally and subregionally to
identify potential sources and coastal and oceanic locations where marine debris aggregates and to develop and
implement joint prevention and recovery programmes for marine debris as well as to raise awareness of the issue of
marine debris;
168. Notes the work of the International Maritime Organization to prevent pollution by garbage from ships,
and welcomes the entry into force on 1 January 2013 of the revised annex V to the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, on the prevention of
pollution by garbage from ships;138
169. Also notes the work of the International Maritime Organization to prevent pollution by sewage from
ships, welcomes the entry into force on 1 January 2013 of the amendments to annex IV to the International
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto,
on the possible establishment of special areas for the prevention of such pollution, and in this regard notes the
designation of the Baltic Sea as the first Special Area under annex IV;139
170. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Protocol of 1997
(annex VI – Regulations for the Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships) to the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, and notes the entry
into force on 1 January 2013 of the amendments to annex VI on regulations on energy efficiency for ships;140
_______________
137

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1651, No. 28395.
International Maritime Organization, document MEPC 62/24 and Corr.1 and 2, annex 13, resolution MEPC.201(62) and document
MEPC 63/23/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex 24, resolution MEPC.219(63).
139
International Maritime Organization, document MEPC 62/24 and Corr.1 and 2, annex 12, resolution MEPC.200(62).
140
International Maritime Organization, document MEPC 62/24/Add.1, annex 19, resolution MEPC.203(62).
138

74

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

171. Also encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to the 1996 Protocol to the
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (the London
Protocol), and furthermore to ratify or accede to the International Convention for the Control and Management of
Ships’ Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004,141 thereby facilitating its early entry into force;
172. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization and the resolution on International
Maritime Organization policies and practices related to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from ships;142
173. Urges States to cooperate in correcting the shortfall in port waste reception facilities in accordance with
the action plan to address the inadequacy of port waste reception facilities developed by the International Maritime
Organization;
174. Recognizes that most of the pollution load of the oceans emanates from land-based activities and affects
the most productive areas of the marine environment, and calls upon States, as a matter of priority, to implement the
Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities and to take
all appropriate measures to fulfil the commitments of the international community embodied in the Manila
Declaration on Furthering the Implementation of the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine
Environment from Land-based Activities;143
175. Expresses its concern regarding the spreading of hypoxic dead zones in oceans as a result of
eutrophication fuelled by riverine run-off of fertilizers, sewage outfall and reactive nitrogen resulting from the
burning of fossil fuels and resulting in serious consequences for ecosystem functioning, and calls upon States to
enhance their efforts to reduce eutrophication and, to this effect, to continue to cooperate within the framework of
relevant international organizations, in particular the Global Programme of Action;
176. Calls upon all States to ensure that urban and coastal development projects and related land-reclamation
activities are carried out in a responsible manner that protects the marine habitat and environment and mitigates the
negative consequences of such activities;
177. Notes the adoption of the Minamata Convention on Mercury144 on 10 October 2013;
178. Welcomes the continued work of States, the United Nations Environment Programme and regional
organizations in the implementation of the Global Programme of Action, and encourages increased emphasis on the
link between fresh water, the coastal zone and marine resources in the implementation of international development
goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,77 and of the time-bound targets in
the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),85 in particular the target on sanitation, and the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development;145
179. Recalls the resolution of the thirtieth Consultative Meeting of Contracting Parties to the Convention on
the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (the London Convention) and
the third Meeting of Contracting Parties to the London Protocol, held from 27 to 31 October 2008, on the regulation
of ocean fertilization,146 in which the Contracting Parties agreed, inter alia, that the scope of the London Convention
and Protocol includes ocean fertilization activities and that, given the present state of knowledge, ocean fertilization
activities other than for legitimate scientific research should not be allowed, and that scientific research proposals
should be assessed on a case-by-case basis using an assessment framework to be developed by the scientific groups
under the London Convention and Protocol, and also agreed that, to this end, such other activities should be
considered as contrary to the aims of the London Convention and Protocol and should not currently qualify for any
exemption from the definition of dumping in article III, paragraph 1 (b), of the London Convention and article 1,
paragraph 4.2, of the London Protocol;
_______________
141

International Maritime Organization, document BWM/CONF/36, annex.
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.963(23).
143
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP(DEPI)/GPA/IGR.3/6, annex.
144
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP(DTIE)/Hg/CONF/4, annex II.
145
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
146
International Maritime Organization, document LC 30/16, annex 6, resolution LC-LP.1 (2008).
142

75

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

180. Also recalls the resolution of the thirty-second Consultative Meeting of Contracting Parties to the
London Convention and the fifth Meeting of Contracting Parties to the London Protocol, held from 11 to
15 October 2010, on the Assessment Framework for Scientific Research Involving Ocean Fertilization;147
181. Notes the continued work of the Contracting Parties to the London Convention and Protocol towards a
global, transparent and effective control and regulatory mechanism for ocean fertilization activities and other
activities that fall within the scope of the London Convention and Protocol and have the potential to cause harm to
the marine environment;
182. Recalls decision IX/16 C, adopted at the ninth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, held in Bonn, Germany, from 19 to 30 May 2008,148 in which the Conference
of the Parties, inter alia, bearing in mind the ongoing scientific and legal analysis occurring under the auspices of the
London Convention and Protocol, requested parties and urged other Governments, in accordance with the
precautionary approach, to ensure that ocean fertilization activities were not carried out until there was an adequate
scientific basis on which to justify such activities, including an assessment of associated risks, and that a global,
transparent and effective control and regulatory mechanism was in place for those activities, with the exception of
small-scale scientific research studies within coastal waters, and stated that such studies should be authorized only if
justified by the need to gather specific scientific data, should be subject to a thorough prior assessment of the
potential impacts of the research studies on the marine environment, should be strictly controlled and should not be
used for generating and selling carbon offsets or for any other commercial purposes, and takes note of decision
X/29, adopted at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, held
in Nagoya, Japan, from 18 to 29 October 2010,149 in which the Conference of the Parties requested parties to
implement decision IX/16 C;
183. Also recalls that, in “The future we want”, States stressed their concern about the potential
environmental impacts of ocean fertilization, recalled in this regard the decisions related to ocean fertilization
adopted by the relevant intergovernmental bodies, and resolved to continue addressing ocean fertilization with
utmost caution, consistent with the precautionary approach;
184. Reaffirms paragraph 119 of resolution 61/222 of 20 December 2006 regarding ecosystem approaches
and oceans, including the proposed elements of an ecosystem approach, means to achieve implementation of an
ecosystem approach and requirements for improved application of an ecosystem approach, and in this regard:
(a) Notes that continued environmental degradation in many parts of the world and increasing competing
demands require an urgent response and the setting of priorities for management actions aimed at conserving
ecosystem integrity;
(b) Also notes that ecosystem approaches to ocean management should be focused on managing human
activities in order to maintain and, where needed, restore ecosystem health to sustain goods and environmental
services, provide social and economic benefits for food security, sustain livelihoods in support of international
development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and conserve marine biodiversity;
(c) Recalls that States should be guided in the application of ecosystem approaches by a number of existing
instruments, in particular the Convention, which sets out the legal framework for all activities in the oceans and seas,
and its implementing Agreements, as well as other commitments, such as those contained in the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the World Summit on Sustainable Development call for the application of an ecosystem
approach by 2010, and in this context encourages States to enhance their efforts towards applying such an approach;
(d) Encourages States to cooperate and coordinate their efforts and take, individually or jointly, as
appropriate, all measures, in conformity with international law, including the Convention and other applicable
instruments, to address impacts on marine ecosystems within and beyond areas of national jurisdiction, taking into
account the integrity of the ecosystems concerned;
_______________
147

International Maritime Organization, document LC 32/15 and Corr.1, annex 5, resolution LC-LP.2 (2010).
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I.
149
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
148

76

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

185. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States committed themselves to protect and restore the health,
productivity and resilience of oceans and marine ecosystems, to maintain their biodiversity, enabling their
conservation and sustainable use for present and future generations, and to effectively apply an ecosystem approach
and the precautionary approach in the management, in accordance with international law, of activities having an
impact on the marine environment, to deliver on all three dimensions of sustainable development;
186. Encourages competent organizations and bodies that have not yet done so to incorporate an ecosystem
approach into their mandates, as appropriate, in order to address impacts on marine ecosystems;
187. Invites States, in particular those States with advanced technology and marine capabilities, to explore
prospects for improving cooperation with and assistance to developing States, in particular least developed countries
and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, with a view to better integrating into national
policies and programmes sustainable and effective development in the marine sector;
188. Notes the information compiled by the Secretariat 150 in relation to the assistance available to and
measures that may be taken by developing States, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, as well as coastal African States, to realize the benefits of sustainable and effective development
of marine resources and uses of the oceans, as provided by States and competent international organizations and
global and regional funding agencies, and urges them to provide information for the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral and for incorporation on the website of the Division;
189. Encourages States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Hong Kong
International Convention for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships, 2009,151 to facilitate its early
entry into force;
190. Encourages continued cooperation between the parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal 152 and the International Maritime
Organization on regulations on the prevention of pollution from ships;
191. Notes the role of the Basel Convention in protecting the marine environment against the adverse effects
which may result from such wastes;
192. Notes with concern the potential for serious environmental consequences resulting from oil spill
incidents, urges States, consistent with international law, to cooperate, directly or through competent international
organizations, and share best practices, in the fields of protection of the marine environment, human health and
safety, prevention, emergency response and mitigation, and in this regard encourages the undertaking of and
collaboration on scientific research, including marine scientific research, to better understand the consequences of
marine oil spills;
193. Encourages States to consider becoming parties to the 2010 Protocol to the 1996 International
Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious
Substances by Sea;153
X
Marine biodiversity
194. Reaffirms its central role relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
beyond areas of national jurisdiction, notes the work of States and relevant intergovernmental organizations and
bodies on those issues, and invites them to contribute, within the areas of their respective competence, to the
consideration of these issues within the process initiated by the General Assembly in resolution 66/231;154
_______________
150

A/63/342.
International Maritime Organization, document SR/CONF/45.
152
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1673, No. 28911.
153
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.17/10.
154
Resolution 66/231, para. 167.
151

77

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

195. Welcomes the holding of the intersessional workshops on 2 and 3 May and on 6 and 7 May 2013,
pursuant to paragraph 182 of resolution 67/78, which provided valuable scientific and technical expert information
as an input to the work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group;155
196. Also welcomes the holding of the second meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group,
convened in New York from 19 to 23 August 2013 in accordance with paragraphs 183 and 184 of resolution 67/78,
within the process initiated by the General Assembly in resolution 66/231, with a view to ensuring that the legal
framework for the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction
effectively addresses those issues by identifying gaps and ways forward, including through the implementation of
existing instruments and the possible development of a multilateral agreement under the Convention, takes note of
the exchange of views at that meeting, and endorses its recommendations;156
197. Reaffirms the commitment made by States in “The future we want” to address, on an urgent basis,
building on the work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group and before the end of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, the issue of the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, including by taking a decision on the development of an international instrument
under the Convention, and decides to establish a process within the Working Group to prepare for such action;
198. Requests, in this regard, the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group, within its mandate
established by resolution 66/231 and in the light of resolution 67/78, and in order to prepare for the decision to be
taken at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, to make recommendations to the Assembly on the scope,
parameters and feasibility of an international instrument under the Convention;
199. Decides, to this end, that the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group shall meet for three
meetings of four days each, with the possibility of the General Assembly deciding that additional meetings will be
held, if needed, within existing resources;
200. Requests the Secretary-General to convene three meetings of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group, to take place from 1 to 4 April and 16 to 19 June 2014 and from 20 to 23 January 2015, and requests the
Secretary-General to make every effort to provide full conference services within existing resources;
201. Requests the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group, in order to inform the
deliberations of the Working Group, to invite Member States to submit their views on the scope, parameters and
feasibility of an international instrument under the Convention, for circulation by the Division to Member States as
an informal working document compiling the views of States no later than three weeks before the first meeting of
the Working Group, and decides that this informal working document will be updated and circulated prior to
subsequent meetings;
202. Recognizes the abundance and diversity of marine genetic resources and their value in terms of the
benefits, goods and services they can provide;
203. Also recognizes the importance of research on marine genetic resources for the purpose of enhancing the
scientific understanding, potential use and application, and enhanced management of marine ecosystems;
204. Encourages States and international organizations, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes and partnerships, to continue in a sustainable and comprehensive way to support, promote
and strengthen capacity-building activities, in particular in developing countries, in the field of marine scientific
research, taking into account, in particular, the need to create greater taxonomic capabilities;
205. Notes the work under the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal Biological Diversity157 and the
Convention on Biological Diversity elaborated programme of work on marine and coastal biological diversity,158
and, while reiterating the central role of the General Assembly relating to the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, notes with appreciation the complementary
technical and scientific work done by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity;
_______________
155

See A/AC.276/6.
See A/68/399, annex.
157
See A/51/312, annex II, decision II/10.
158
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex, decision VII/5, annex I.
156

78

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

206. Reaffirms the need for States, individually or through competent international organizations, to urgently
consider ways to integrate and improve, based on the best available scientific information and the precautionary
approach and in accordance with the Convention and related agreements and instruments, the management of risks to
the marine biodiversity of seamounts, cold water corals, hydrothermal vents and certain other underwater features;
207. Calls upon States and international organizations to urgently take further action to address, in accordance
with international law, destructive practices that have adverse impacts on marine biodiversity and ecosystems,
including seamounts, hydrothermal vents and cold water corals;
208. Calls upon States to strengthen, in a manner consistent with international law, in particular the
Convention, the conservation and management of marine biodiversity and ecosystems and national policies in
relation to marine protected areas;
209. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States reaffirmed the importance of area-based conservation
measures, including marine protected areas, consistent with international law and based on best available scientific
information, as a tool for conservation of biological diversity and sustainable use of its components, and noted
decision X/2 of the tenth Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, that by
2020, 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of particular importance for biodiversity and
ecosystem services, are to be conserved through effectively and equitably managed, ecologically representative and
well-connected systems of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures;149
210. Encourages States, in this regard, to further progress towards the establishment of marine protected
areas, including representative networks, and calls upon States to further consider options to identify and protect
ecologically or biologically significant areas, consistent with international law and on the basis of the best available
scientific information;
211. Reaffirms the need for States to continue and intensify their efforts, directly and through competent
international organizations, to develop and facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools for conserving and
managing vulnerable marine ecosystems, including the possible establishment of marine protected areas, consistent
with international law, as reflected in the Convention, and based on the best scientific information available;
212. Notes the work of States, relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies, including the Convention
on Biological Diversity, in the assessment of scientific information on and compilation of ecological criteria for the
identification of marine areas that may require protection, in the light of the objective of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development to develop and facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools, such as ecosystem
approaches and the establishment of marine protected areas consistent with international law, as reflected in the
Convention, and based on scientific information, including representative networks;85
213. Recalls that the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, at its ninth meeting,
adopted scientific criteria for identifying ecologically or biologically significant marine areas in need of protection in
open-ocean waters and deep-sea habitats and scientific guidance for selecting areas to establish a representative
network of marine protected areas, including in open-ocean waters and deep-sea habitats,159 notes the ongoing work
under the Convention on Biological Diversity in this regard, and also recalls that the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations has developed guidance for the identification of vulnerable marine ecosystems
through the International Guidelines for the Management of Deep-sea Fisheries in the High Seas;
214. Acknowledges the Micronesia Challenge, the Eastern Tropical Pacific Seascape project, the Caribbean
Challenge and the Coral Triangle Initiative, which in particular seek to create and link domestic marine protected
areas to better facilitate ecosystem approaches, and reaffirms the need for further international cooperation,
coordination and collaboration in support of such initiatives;
215. Notes the efforts of the Sargasso Sea Alliance, led by the Government of Bermuda, to raise awareness of
the ecological significance of the Sargasso Sea;
216. Reiterates its support for the International Coral Reef Initiative, notes the International Coral Reef
Initiative General Meeting held in Belize City from 14 to 17 October 2013, and supports the elaborated programme
of work of the Convention on Biological Diversity on marine and coastal biological diversity related to coral reefs
under the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal Biological Diversity;
_______________
159

United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I, decision IX/20, annexes I and II.

79

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

217. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States recognized the significant economic, social and
environmental contributions of coral reefs, in particular to islands and other coastal States, as well as the significant
vulnerability of coral reefs and mangroves to impacts, including from climate change, ocean acidification,
overfishing, destructive fishing practices and pollution, and supported international cooperation with a view to
conserving coral reef and mangrove ecosystems and realizing their social, economic and environmental benefits, as
well as facilitating technical collaboration and voluntary information-sharing;
218. Encourages States and relevant international institutions to improve efforts to address coral bleaching
by, inter alia, improving monitoring to predict and identify bleaching events, supporting and strengthening action
taken during such events and improving strategies to manage reefs to support their natural resilience and enhance
their ability to withstand other pressures, including ocean acidification;
219. Encourages States to cooperate, directly or through competent international bodies, in exchanging
information in the event of accidents involving vessels on coral reefs and in promoting the development of
economic assessment techniques for both restoration and non-use values of coral reef systems;
220. Emphasizes the need to mainstream sustainable coral reef management and integrated watershed
management into national development strategies, as well as into the activities of relevant United Nations agencies
and programmes, international financial institutions and the donor community;
221. Notes that ocean noise is a potential threat to living marine resources, affirms the importance of sound
scientific studies in addressing this matter, encourages further research, studies and consideration of the impacts of
ocean noise on living marine resources, and requests the Division to continue to compile the peer-reviewed
scientific studies it receives from Member States and intergovernmental organizations pursuant to paragraph 107 of
resolution 61/222 and, as appropriate, to make them, or references and links to them, available on its website;
XI
Marine science
222. Calls upon States, individually or in collaboration with each other or with competent international
organizations and bodies, to continue to strive to improve understanding and knowledge of the oceans and the deep
sea, including, in particular, the extent and vulnerability of deep sea biodiversity and ecosystems, by increasing their
marine scientific research activities in accordance with the Convention;
223. Encourages, in that regard, relevant international organizations and other donors to consider supporting
the Endowment Fund of the International Seabed Authority in order to promote the conduct of collaborative marine
scientific research in the international seabed area by supporting the participation of qualified scientists and technical
personnel from developing countries in relevant programmes, initiatives and activities;
224. Invites all relevant organizations, funds, programmes and bodies within the United Nations system, in
consultation with interested States, to coordinate relevant activities with regional and national marine scientific and
technological centres in small island developing States, as appropriate, to ensure the more effective achievement of
their objectives in accordance with relevant United Nations small island developing States development
programmes and strategies;
225. Notes with appreciation the work of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, with the advice
of the Advisory Body of Experts on the Law of the Sea, on the development of procedures for the implementation
of Parts XIII and XIV of the Convention;
226. Also notes with appreciation the work of the Advisory Body of Experts, including its work in
cooperation with the Division, on the practice of member States related to marine scientific research and transfer of
marine technology within the framework of the Convention, and welcomes the decision by the Executive Council
of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, at its forty-fifth session, held in Paris from 26 to 28 June
2012, that the Advisory Body will continue its work focused on priorities as tasked by Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission governing bodies in line with the terms of reference, mobilizing extrabudgetary
resources when necessary;160
_______________
160

80

Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, decision EC-XLV/Dec.4.3.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

227. Recalls the issuance of the revised publication entitled Marine Scientific Research: A guide to the
implementation of the relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in December
2010, and requests the Secretariat to continue to make efforts to publish the guide in all official languages of the
United Nations;
228. Notes the contribution of the Census of Marine Life to marine biodiversity research, including through
its report entitled “First Census of Marine Life 2010: Highlights of a Decade of Discovery”;
229. Welcomes the increasing attention being focused on oceans as a potential source of renewable energy,
and notes in this regard the summary of discussions of the Informal Consultative Process at its thirteenth meeting;161
230. Stresses the importance of increasing the scientific understanding of the oceans-atmosphere interface,
including through participation in ocean observing programmes and geographic information systems, such as the
Global Ocean Observing System, sponsored by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the World Meteorological Organization and the International Council for
Science, particularly considering their role in monitoring and forecasting climate change and variability and in the
establishment and operation of tsunami warning systems;
231. Notes with appreciation the progress made by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and
Member States towards the establishment of regional and national tsunami warning and mitigation systems,
welcomes the continued collaboration of the United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations in this
effort, and encourages Member States to establish and sustain their national warning and mitigation systems, within
a global, ocean-related multi-hazard approach, as necessary, to reduce loss of life and damage to national economies
and strengthen the resilience of coastal communities to natural disasters;
232. Stresses the need for continued efforts in developing mitigation and preparedness measures for natural
disasters, particularly following tsunami events caused by earthquakes, such as the 11 March 2011 event in Japan;
233. Urges States to take necessary action and to cooperate in relevant organizations, including the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the World
Meteorological Organization, to address damage to ocean data buoys deployed and operated in accordance with
international law, including through education and outreach about the importance and purpose of these buoys, and
by strengthening these buoys against such damage, and increasing reporting of such damage;
XII
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State
of the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects
234. Reiterates the need to strengthen the regular scientific assessment of the state of the marine environment
in order to enhance the scientific basis for policymaking;
235. Welcomes the holding of the fourth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the Regular
Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects, convened in New York from 22 to 25 April 2013 in accordance with paragraph 231 of resolution 67/78;
236. Endorses the recommendations adopted by the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole at its fourth
meeting;75
237. Reaffirms the principles guiding the Regular Process and the objective and scope of its first cycle
(2010–2014) as agreed upon at the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole in 2009;162
238. Notes that the members of the Group of Experts of the Regular Process continued serving on the Group
of Experts during the second phase of the first assessment cycle pursuant to paragraph 209 of resolution 65/37 A,
and encourages regional groups that have not yet done so to appoint experts to the Group of Experts in accordance
with paragraph 180 of resolution 64/71;
_______________
161
162

A/67/120.
See A/64/347, annex.

81

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

239. Recognizes the work of the Group of Experts during the first phase of the first assessment cycle;
240. Welcomes the development and operation of the website of the Regular Process, under the auspices of
the United Nations, recognizes the contributions made to the establishment of the website, and invites consultations
between the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole, with the participation of the Joint Coordinators of
the Group of Experts, as appropriate, and the secretariat of the Regular Process regarding the content of the website;
241. Takes note of the guidance for contributors that was adopted by the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole163 and the revised draft timetable for the first global integrated marine assessment,164 welcomes
the holding of the workshops in Miami, United States of America, from 13 to 15 November 2012, in Maputo on 6
and 7 December 2012, in Brisbane, Australia, from 25 to 27 February 2013 and in Grand Bassam, Côte d’Ivoire,
from 28 to 30 October 2013, and takes note of the summaries thereof165 as well as of the updated report on the
preliminary inventory of capacity-building for assessments;
242. Recognizes the work done by the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole during the
intersessional period;
243. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the fifth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole on 31 March 2014, with a view to assessing the ongoing work of the first cycle of the first global integrated
marine assessment and to providing any recommendations to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session,
including on the source of funding for issuance of the summary of the first global integrated marine assessment as
an official document of the Assembly;
244. Recalls that the Regular Process, as established under the United Nations, is accountable to the General
Assembly and is an intergovernmental process guided by international law, including the Convention and other
applicable international instruments, and takes into account relevant Assembly resolutions;
245. Emphasizes that the second phase of the first cycle of the Regular Process has begun and that the
deadline for the first global integrated marine assessment is 2014;
246. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States expressed their support for the Regular Process, looked
forward to the completion of its first global integrated assessment of the state of the marine environment by 2014
and its subsequent consideration by the General Assembly, and encouraged consideration by States of the
assessment findings at appropriate levels;
247. Requests the secretariat of the Regular Process to send the first draft of the first global integrated marine
assessment to Member States for comments from June to August 2014, and decides that the Group of Experts shall
revise the assessment in the light of the comments received and that, once revised, the draft shall be presented to the
Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole, together with the comments received, and that, with the
approval of the Bureau, the draft assessment shall be transmitted for consideration by the Working Group, that the
assessment should be available on the website of the Regular Process in the working language of the Group of
Experts, that the Secretary-General should endeavour to translate the assessment into all other official languages,
subject to the availability of resources in the voluntary trust fund for the purposes of supporting the operations of the
first five-year cycle of the Regular Process, and that the summary of the first global integrated marine assessment
should be submitted by the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole to be issued as an official
document of the General Assembly for its final approval by the Assembly at its seventieth session;
248. Notes with appreciation the nominations received to date to the pool of experts of the Regular Process,
urges States to continue to appoint individuals to the pool of experts through the regional groups, in accordance with
the criteria for the appointment of experts, and to provide support for the work of the Group of Experts in the
preparation of the first global integrated marine assessment, and requests the members of the Bureau to engage
States in their regional groups and urge them to nominate individuals to the pool of experts as soon as possible;
_______________
163

A/68/82 and Corr.1, annex II.
Ibid., annex III.
165
See A/67/687, A/67/885 and A/67/896.
164

82

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

249. Invites the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the International Maritime Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and other competent United Nations specialized agencies, as appropriate, to continue to provide technical and
scientific support to the Regular Process;
250. Requests the secretariat of the Regular Process to convene meetings of the Group of Experts in
accordance with the revised draft timetable for the first global integrated marine assessment, subject to the
availability of resources;
251. Notes with appreciation the support provided by the Division as the secretariat of the Regular Process
and the technical and logistical support of the United Nations Environment Programme and the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission;
252. Recognizes that United Nations specialized agencies can play an important role in promoting the
Regular Process, and invites those agencies to continue to promote the Regular Process in consultation and
coordination with the secretariat of the Regular Process;
253. Encourages additional opportunities for the Group of Experts to have access to information relevant to
the first global integrated marine assessment and capacity-building;
254. Notes the recommendation made by the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole,75 and decides to continue
its consideration of any need to strengthen the capacity of the Division, as the secretariat of the Regular Process;
255. Notes with appreciation the contribution made to the voluntary trust fund for the purpose of supporting
the operations of the first five-year cycle of the Regular Process, established pursuant to paragraph 183 of resolution
64/71, expresses its serious concern regarding the limited resources available in the trust fund, urges Member States,
international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations and natural and juridical persons to make financial contributions to the voluntary trust fund and to
make other contributions to the Regular Process, and, in the light of the limited resources available in the trust fund,
decides to review the need for sustainability in the activities of the Regular Process and to continue its consideration
of the need to ensure predictability and sustainability of financial resources to support the operations of the Regular
Process;
256. Requests the Secretary-General to administer the voluntary trust fund established pursuant to
paragraph 183 of resolution 64/71 beyond the first five-year cycle and for the duration of the operations of the
Regular Process;
XIII
Regional cooperation
257. Notes that there have been a number of initiatives at the regional level, in various regions, to further the
implementation of the Convention, also notes in that context the Caribbean-focused Assistance Fund, which is
intended to facilitate, mainly through technical assistance, the voluntary undertaking of maritime delimitation
negotiations between Caribbean States, notes once again the Fund for Peace: Peaceful Settlement of Territorial
Disputes, established by the General Assembly of the Organization of American States in 2000 as a primary
mechanism, given its broader regional scope, for the prevention and resolution of pending territorial, land border
and maritime boundary disputes, and calls upon States and others in a position to do so to contribute to these funds;
258. Notes with appreciation efforts at the regional level to further the implementation of the Convention and
respond, including through capacity-building, to issues related to maritime safety and security, the conservation and
sustainable use of living marine resources, the protection and preservation of the marine environment and the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity;
259. Notes the convening in 2014 of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States,
and recognizes the importance of coordinated, balanced and integrated actions to address the sustainable
development challenges facing small island developing States, including challenges relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine resources and the preservation of the marine environment;
260. Invites States and international organizations to enhance their cooperation to better protect the marine
environment, and in this respect welcomes the memorandum of understanding for enhanced cooperation, concluded
83

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

between the Commission for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic, the North East
Atlantic Fisheries Commission, the International Seabed Authority and the International Maritime Organization;
261. Recognizes the results of the International Polar Year, 2007–2008, with particular emphasis on new
knowledge about the linkages between environmental change in the polar regions and global climate systems, and
encourages States and scientific communities to strengthen their cooperation in this respect;
262. Welcomes regional cooperation, and in this regard notes the Pacific Oceanscape Framework as an
initiative to enhance cooperation among coastal States in the Pacific island region to foster marine conservation and
sustainable development;
263. Notes with appreciation the various cooperative efforts displayed by States at the regional and
subregional levels, and in this regard welcomes initiatives such as the Integrated Assessment and Management of
the Gulf of Mexico Large Marine Ecosystem;
264. Acknowledges relevant cooperation among the members of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the
South Atlantic;
XIV
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
265. Welcomes the report of the Co-Chairs on the work of the Informal Consultative Process at its fourteenth
meeting, which focused on the impacts of ocean acidification on the marine environment;73
266. Recognizes the role of the Informal Consultative Process as a unique forum for comprehensive
discussions on issues related to oceans and the law of the sea, consistent with the framework provided by the
Convention and chapter 17 of Agenda 21,76 and that the perspective of the three pillars of sustainable development
should be further enhanced in the examination of the selected topics;
267. Welcomes the work of the Informal Consultative Process and its contribution to improving coordination
and cooperation between States and strengthening the annual debate of the General Assembly on oceans and the law
of the sea by effectively drawing attention to key issues and current trends;
268. Also welcomes efforts to improve and focus the work of the Informal Consultative Process, and in that
respect recognizes the primary role of the Informal Consultative Process in integrating knowledge, the exchange of
opinions among multiple stakeholders and coordination among competent agencies, and enhancing awareness of
topics, including emerging issues, while promoting the three pillars of sustainable development, and recommends
that the Informal Consultative Process devise a transparent, objective and inclusive process for the selection of
topics and panellists so as to facilitate the work of the General Assembly during informal consultations concerning
the annual resolution on oceans and the law of the sea;
269. Recalls the need to strengthen and improve the efficiency of the Informal Consultative Process, and
encourages States, intergovernmental organizations and programmes to provide guidance to the Co-Chairs to this
effect, particularly before and during the preparatory meeting for the Informal Consultative Process;
270. Also recalls that a further review of the effectiveness and utility of the Informal Consultative Process
will be undertaken by the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
271. Requests the Secretary-General to convene, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 54/33,
the fifteenth meeting of the Informal Consultative Process, in New York from 27 to 30 May 2014, to provide it with
the facilities necessary for the performance of its work and to arrange for support to be provided by the Division, in
cooperation with other relevant parts of the Secretariat, as appropriate;
272. Expresses its continued serious concern regarding the lack of resources available in the voluntary trust
fund established pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose of assisting developing countries, in particular least
developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked developing States, in attending the meetings of
the Informal Consultative Process, and urges States to make additional contributions to the trust fund;
273. Decides that those representatives from developing countries who are invited by the Co-Chairs, in
consultation with Governments, to make presentations during the meetings of the Informal Consultative Process
shall receive priority consideration in the disbursement of funds from the voluntary trust fund established pursuant
84

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

to resolution 55/7 in order to cover the costs of their travel, and shall also be eligible to receive daily subsistence
allowance subject to the availability of funds after the travel costs of all other eligible representatives from those
countries mentioned in paragraph 272 above have been covered;
274. Also decides that, in its deliberations on the report of the Secretary-General on oceans and the law of the
sea, the Informal Consultative Process shall focus its discussions at its fifteenth meeting on the role of seafood in
global food security;
XV
Coordination and cooperation
275. Encourages States to work closely with and through international organizations, funds and programmes,
as well as the specialized agencies of the United Nations system and relevant international conventions, to identify
emerging areas of focus for improved coordination and cooperation and how best to address these issues;
276. Encourages bodies established by the Convention to strengthen coordination and cooperation, as
appropriate, in fulfilling their respective mandates;
277. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of heads of
intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations engaged in
activities relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea, as well as funding institutions, and underlines the
importance of their constructive and timely input for the report of the Secretary-General on oceans and the law of
the sea and of their participation in relevant meetings and processes;
278. Welcomes the work done by the secretariats of relevant United Nations specialized agencies,
programmes, funds and bodies and the secretariats of related organizations and conventions to enhance inter-agency
coordination and cooperation on ocean issues, including, where appropriate, through UN-Oceans, the inter-agency
coordination mechanism on ocean and coastal issues within the United Nations system;
279. Recognizes the work undertaken so far by UN-Oceans, approves the revised terms of reference for the
work of UN-Oceans, with a revised mandate, as annexed to the present resolution, and decides to review these
terms of reference at its seventy-second session in the light of the work of UN-Oceans;
XVI
Activities of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
280. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the annual report on oceans and the law of the
sea, prepared by the Division, as well as for the other activities of the Division, which reflect the high standard of
assistance provided to Member States by the Division;
281. Notes with satisfaction the fifth observance by the United Nations of World Oceans Day on 8 June 2013,
recognizes with appreciation the efforts deployed by the Division in organizing its celebration, and invites the
Division to continue to promote and facilitate international cooperation on the law of the sea and ocean affairs in the
context of the future observance of World Oceans Day, as well as through its participation in other events;
282. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to carry out the responsibilities and functions entrusted to
him in the Convention and in the related resolutions of the General Assembly, including resolutions 49/28 and
52/26, and to ensure the allocation of appropriate resources to the Division for the performance of its activities under
the approved budget for the Organization;
283. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication activities of the Division, in particular
through the publication of The Law of the Sea: A Select Bibliography and the Law of the Sea Bulletin;
XVII
Sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly
284. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report for consideration by the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session on developments and issues relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea, including the
85

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

implementation of the present resolution, in accordance with resolutions 49/28, 52/26 and 54/33, and to make the
section of the report related to the topic that is the focus of the fifteenth meeting of the Informal Consultative
Process available at least six weeks in advance of the meeting of the Informal Consultative Process;
285. Emphasizes the critical role of the annual report of the Secretary-General, which integrates information
on developments relating to the implementation of the Convention and the work of the Organization, its specialized
agencies and other institutions in the field of ocean affairs and the law of the sea at the global and regional levels,
and as a result constitutes the basis for the annual consideration and review of developments relating to ocean affairs
and the law of the sea by the General Assembly as the global institution having the competence to undertake such a
review;
286. Notes that the report referred to in paragraph 284 above will also be submitted to States Parties
pursuant to article 319 of the Convention regarding issues of a general nature that have arisen with respect to the
Convention;
287. Also notes the desire to further improve the efficiency of and effective participation of delegations in the
informal consultations concerning the annual General Assembly resolution on oceans and the law of the sea, decides
that the period of the informal consultations on that resolution should not exceed a maximum of two weeks in total
and that the consultations should be scheduled in such a way that the Division has sufficient time to produce the
report referred to in paragraph 284 above, and invites States to submit text proposals for inclusion in the resolution
to the Coordinator of the informal consultations at the earliest possible date;
288. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Oceans and the
law of the sea”.
Annex
Terms of reference for UN-Oceans
A.

Scope and objectives

1. UN-Oceans is an inter-agency mechanism that seeks to enhance the coordination, coherence and effectiveness
of competent organizations of the United Nations system and the International Seabed Authority, within existing
resources, in conformity with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the respective competences of
each of its participating organizations and the mandates and priorities approved by their respective governing
bodies.
B.

Mandate

2.

UN-Oceans will:

(a) Strengthen and promote coordination and coherence of United Nations system activities related to ocean
and coastal areas;
(b) Regularly share ongoing and planned activities of participating organizations within the framework of
relevant United Nations and other mandates with a view to identifying possible areas for collaboration and synergy;
(c) Facilitate, as appropriate, inputs by its participating organizations to the annual reports of the SecretaryGeneral on oceans and the law of the sea and on sustainable fisheries to be submitted to the Secretariat;
(d) Facilitate inter-agency information exchange, including sharing of experiences, best practices, tools and
methodologies and lessons learned in ocean-related matters.
C.

Modalities of work

Participation
3. In order to fulfil its mandate on ensuring United Nations system coherence on issues related to ocean affairs
and the law of the sea, participation in UN-Oceans is open to United Nations system organizations with competence
in activities related to ocean and coastal areas and the International Seabed Authority.
86

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Focal point
4. The United Nations Legal Counsel/Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea will be the focal point
of UN-Oceans, and in that capacity will:
(a) Convene the meetings of UN-Oceans and organize those meetings, including by preparing and
disseminating meeting minutes, reports and background documents;
(b)

Facilitate communication among UN-Oceans participants;

(c) Maintain and update information about UN-Oceans activities, make this information available to
UN-Oceans participants and States Members of the United Nations and make it publicly available through the
UN-Oceans website (www.unoceans.org);
(d) Represent UN-Oceans at relevant meetings, including those under the General Assembly and those of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and its High-level Committee on Programmes.
Meetings
5. UN-Oceans will hold at least one face-to-face meeting per year, supplemented as needed by virtual
(teleconference, videoconference) meetings.
6. As far as practicable, UN-Oceans will hold its face-to-face meetings at United Nations Headquarters,
preferably in conjunction with the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the
Law of the Sea.
7. Each meeting will be conducted by a Chair, elected for that meeting among UN-Oceans participants present at
the meeting. The Chair of a given UN-Oceans meeting cannot be elected to chair the immediately subsequent
meeting.
8. UN-Oceans will endeavour to make maximum use of electronic communication and information management
and will conduct intersessional work by electronic means such as teleconferences and videoconferences.
9.

UN-Oceans will work on the basis of consensus.

10. UN-Water and UN-Energy may participate in UN-Oceans meetings as invited observers, as appropriate and
necessary.
Work programme
11. UN-Oceans will regularly prepare a work programme allowing it to effectively coordinate the response of its
participating organizations to the mandates approved by their governing bodies.
12. In support of its mandate and work, UN-Oceans may set up time-bound ad hoc assignments to facilitate
coordination on specific issues, open to all participating organizations of UN-Oceans.
Reporting
13. To ensure transparency and accountability:
(a) The Secretary-General will report annually on the activities and work programmes of UN-Oceans through
his report to the General Assembly on developments and issues relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea;
(b) UN-Oceans, upon request from the General Assembly, will also report to Member States in the context
of the meetings of the Informal Consultative Process;
(c) Upon request from the General Assembly, feedback and consultation sessions with UN-Oceans may be
held in the context of the meetings of the Informal Consultative Process or at any other time deemed necessary by
Member States;
(d) UN-Oceans will also annually brief the High-Level Committee on Programmes on its activities and
work programmes;
(e) UN-Oceans will systematically post all of its meeting reports, assignment reports, annual reports to the
Informal Consultative Process and other relevant documents on the UN-Oceans website (www.unoceans.org).
87

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/71
A/RES/687/1

Adopted at the 63rd plenary meeting, on 9 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.19 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Barbados, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Greece, Iceland,
Jamaica, Lithuania, Maldives, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Portugal, Samoa, Slovenia, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United States of America

68/71.

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks,
and related instruments

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its annual resolutions on sustainable fisheries, including resolution 67/79 of 11 December 2012,
and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (the
Convention),166 and bearing in mind the relationship between the Convention and the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (the
Agreement),167
Welcoming the ratifications of and accessions to the Agreement and the fact that a growing number of States,
entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement, and subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, have taken measures, as appropriate, towards the
implementation of the provisions of the Agreement, in order to improve their management regimes,
Welcoming also the work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and its Committee
on Fisheries, and recognizing in particular the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (the Code) and other related instruments, including the international
plans of action, which set out principles and global standards of behaviour for responsible practices for conservation
of fisheries resources and the management and development of fisheries, as well as the 2005 Rome Declaration on
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing,
Noting with concern that effective management of marine capture fisheries has been made difficult in some
areas by unreliable information and data caused by, inter alia, unreported and misreported fish catch and fishing
effort and that this lack of accurate data contributes to overfishing in some areas,
Recognizing the significant contribution of sustainable fisheries to food security, income, wealth and poverty
alleviation for present and future generations,
Welcoming in this regard the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”, as endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012,
Welcoming the Reviewed Strategic Framework of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, approved by the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its thirtyeighth session,
Recalling that in “The future we want”,168 States were encouraged to give due consideration to implementing
the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of
National Food Security, of the Committee on World Food Security of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations,
_______________
166

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
Ibid., vol. 2167, No. 37924.
168
Resolution 66/288, annex.
167

88

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on the development
of international guidelines for securing sustainable small-scale fisheries, including the resumption of the Technical
Consultation on International Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-scale Fisheries, to be held from 3 to
7 February 2014,
Recognizing the urgent need for action at all levels to ensure the long-term sustainable use and management of
fisheries resources through the wide application of the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches,
Expressing concern over the current and projected adverse effects of climate change on food security and the
sustainability of fisheries, and noting in that regard the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the United Nations Environment Programme,
Reaffirming its commitment to ensuring that conservation and management measures adopted by regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements are based on the best available scientific information,
Deploring the fact that fish stocks, including straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, in many
parts of the world are overfished or subject to sparsely regulated and heavy fishing efforts, as a result of, inter alia,
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, inadequate flag State control and enforcement, including monitoring,
control and surveillance measures, inadequate regulatory measures, harmful fisheries subsidies and overcapacity, as
well as inadequate port State control, as highlighted in the report of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations entitled The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2012,
Expressing its support for accelerating work to complete the ongoing negotiations in the World Trade
Organization to strengthen disciplines on subsidies in the fisheries sector, including through the prohibition of
certain forms of fisheries subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing,
Concerned that only a limited number of States have taken measures to implement, individually and through
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, the International Plan of Action for the
Management of Fishing Capacity adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Recalling the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated
Fishing adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Particularly concerned that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing constitutes a serious threat to fish
stocks and marine habitats and ecosystems, to the detriment of sustainable fisheries as well as the food security and
the economies of many States, particularly developing States,
Concerned that some operators increasingly take advantage of the globalization of fishery markets to trade
fishery products stemming from illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and make economic profits from those
operations, which constitutes an incentive for them to pursue their activities,
Recognizing that effective deterrence and combating of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing has
significant financial and other resource implications,
Recognizing also the duty provided in the Convention, the Agreement to Promote Compliance with
International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas (the Compliance
Agreement),169 the Agreement and the Code for flag States to exercise effective control over fishing vessels flying
their flag, and vessels flying their flag which provide support to fishing vessels, to ensure that the activities of such
fishing and support vessels do not undermine the effectiveness of conservation and management measures taken in
accordance with international law and adopted at the national, subregional, regional or global levels,
Recognizing further the importance of adequately regulating, monitoring and controlling trans-shipment at sea
to contribute to combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities,
Noting that the Voluntary Guidelines for Flag State Performance were agreed at the second resumed session of
the Technical Consultation on Flag State Performance, convened by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations in Rome from 4 to 8 February 2013, for consideration by the Committee on Fisheries at its thirtyfirst session, in 2014,
_______________
169

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2221, No. 39486.

89

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting also the obligation of all States, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the relevant
provisions of the Convention, to cooperate in the conservation and management of living marine resources, and
recognizing the importance of coordination and cooperation at the global, regional, subregional and national levels
in the areas, inter alia, of marine scientific research, data collection, information-sharing, capacity-building and
training for the conservation, management and sustainable development of living marine resources,
Acknowledging the importance of ocean data buoy systems moored in areas beyond national jurisdiction to
sustainable development, promoting safety at sea and limiting human vulnerability to natural disasters, due to their
use in weather and marine forecasts, fisheries management, tsunami forecasts and climate prediction, and
expressing concern that most damage to ocean data buoys, such as moored buoys and tsunameters, frequently
results from actions taken by some fishing operations which render the buoys inoperable,
Welcoming in this regard the adoption of measures by States, individually or through regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, to protect ocean data buoy systems from the impacts of fishing
activities,
Recognizing the need for States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to continue to develop and implement, consistent with international law, effective port State measures
to combat overfishing and illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, the critical need for cooperation with
developing States to build their capacity, and the importance of cooperation between the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the International Maritime Organization in this regard,
Noting with satisfaction the ratifications, acceptance and approval of and accessions to the Agreement on Port
State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,170
Noting the regional capacity development workshops convened by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, in collaboration with other international entities, programmes and projects, in preparation for the
entry into force of the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and
Unregulated Fishing,
Welcoming the convening of the fourth Global Fisheries Enforcement Training Workshop, to be held in
San José from 17 to 21 February 2014,
Recognizing the efforts of States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to implement its resolution 46/215 of 20 December 1991, in which the General Assembly called for a
global moratorium on all large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing, including collaborative fisheries enforcement
activities, and in particular the 20-year effort by States members of the North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission
that has successfully contributed to the decrease in the use of large-scale pelagic drift-nets in the high seas of the
North Pacific Ocean,
Concerned that marine pollution from all sources constitutes a serious threat to human health and safety,
endangers fish stocks, marine biodiversity and marine and coastal habitats and has significant costs to local and
national economies,
Recognizing that marine debris is a global transboundary pollution problem and that, owing to the many
different types and sources of marine debris, different approaches to their prevention and removal are necessary,
including identification of such sources,
Noting that the contribution of sustainable aquaculture to global fish supplies continues to respond to
opportunities in developing countries to enhance local food security and poverty alleviation and, together with the
efforts of other aquaculture-producing countries, will make a significant contribution to meeting future demands in
fish consumption, bearing in mind article 9 of the Code,
Reaffirming the importance of sustainable aquaculture to food security, and concerned about the potential
effects of genetically engineered aquatic fish species on the health and sustainability of wild fish stocks,
_______________
170

90

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2009/REP and Corr.1–3, appendix E.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Calling attention to the particular vulnerabilities of small island developing States, other developing coastal
States and subsistence fishing communities whose livelihoods, economic development and food security are heavily
dependent on sustainable fisheries and will suffer disproportionately if sustainable fisheries are negatively affected,
Welcoming in this regard the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, to be held in
Apia from 1 to 4 September 2014, which will focus on small island developing States as a special case for
sustainable development, in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities,
Calling attention to the circumstances affecting fisheries in many developing States, in particular African
States and small island developing States, and recognizing the urgent need for capacity-building, including the
transfer of marine technology and in particular fisheries-related technology, to enhance the ability of such States to
exercise their rights in order to realize the benefits from fisheries resources and fulfil their obligations under
international instruments,
Recognizing the need to adopt, implement and enforce appropriate measures to minimize by-catch, waste,
discards, including high-grading, loss of fishing gear and other factors that adversely affect the sustainability of fish
stocks and ecosystems and, consequently, can also have harmful effects on the economies and food security of small
island developing States, other developing coastal States and subsistence fishing communities,
Recognizing also the need to further integrate ecosystem approaches into fisheries conservation and
management and, more generally, the importance of applying ecosystem approaches to the management of human
activities in the ocean, and noting in this regard the Reykjavik Declaration on Responsible Fisheries in the Marine
Ecosystem,171 the work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations related to guidelines for the
implementation of the ecosystem approach to fisheries management and the importance of this approach to relevant
provisions of the Agreement and the Code, as well as decision VII/11 172 and other relevant decisions of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity,
Recognizing further the economic and cultural importance of sharks in many countries, the biological
importance of sharks in the marine ecosystem as key predatory species, the vulnerability of certain shark species to
overexploitation, the fact that some are threatened with extinction, the need for measures to promote the long-term
conservation, management and sustainable use of shark populations and fisheries, and the relevance of the
International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, adopted by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in 1999, in providing guidance on the development of such measures,
Welcoming in this regard the review by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations of the
implementation of the International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, and its ongoing
work in this regard,
Noting with concern that basic data on shark stocks and harvests continue to be lacking and that not all
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements have adopted conservation and management
measures for directed shark fisheries and for the regulation of by-catch of sharks from other fisheries,
Welcoming science-based measures taken by States to conserve and sustainably manage sharks, and noting in
this respect management measures taken by coastal States, including limits on catch or fishing effort, technical
measures, including by-catch reduction measures, sanctuaries, closed seasons and areas and monitoring, control and
surveillance,
Noting the addition of five shark species and two species of manta ray to appendix II to the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora173 by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora at its sixteenth meeting, held in
Bangkok from 3 to 14 March 2013,
Recognizing the importance of marine species occupying low trophic levels in the ecosystem and for food
security, and the need to ensure their long-term sustainability,
_______________
171

E/CN.17/2002/PC.2/3, annex.
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex.
173
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
172

91

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Expressing concern over continued incidental mortality, in fishing operations, of seabirds, particularly
albatrosses and petrels, as well as other marine species, including sharks, fin-fish species, marine mammals and
marine turtles, while recognizing considerable efforts by States and through various regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to reduce incidental mortality as a result of by-catch,
I
Achieving sustainable fisheries
1. Reaffirms the importance it attaches to the long-term conservation, management and sustainable use of
the living marine resources of the world’s oceans and seas and the obligations of States to cooperate to this end, in
accordance with international law, as reflected in the relevant provisions of the Convention,166 in particular the
provisions on cooperation set out in Part V and Part VII, section 2, of the Convention, and where applicable, the
Agreement;167
2. Calls upon all States that have not done so, in order to achieve the goal of universal participation, to
become parties to the Convention, which sets out the legal framework within which all activities in the oceans and
seas must be carried out, taking into account the relationship between the Convention and the Agreement;
3. Notes with satisfaction that in “The future we want”,168 States addressed the sustainable development of
fisheries, recognized the significant contribution of fisheries to the three dimensions of sustainable development and
stressed the crucial role of healthy marine ecosystems, sustainable fisheries and sustainable aquaculture for food
security and nutrition and in providing for the livelihoods of millions of people, and encourages States to implement
the commitments made in “The future we want”;
4. Encourages States to give due priority to the implementation of the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)174 in relation to achieving sustainable
fisheries, especially restoring depleted stocks to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield on an urgent
basis and, where possible, not later than 2015, and recalls that in “The future we want”, States committed
themselves to intensify their efforts to meet that target and to urgently take the measures necessary to maintain or
restore all stocks at least to levels that can produce the maximum sustainable yield, with the aim of achieving those
goals in the shortest time feasible, as determined by their biological characteristics, and in order to achieve this, to
urgently develop and implement science-based management plans, including by reducing or suspending fishing
catch and fishing effort commensurate with the status of the stock, consistent with international law, the applicable
international instruments and relevant General Assembly resolutions and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations;
5. Urges States, either directly or through appropriate subregional, regional or global organizations or
arrangements, to intensify efforts to assess and address, as appropriate, the impacts of global climate change and
ocean acidification on the sustainability of fish stocks and the habitats that support them, in particular the most
affected ones;
6. Emphasizes the obligations of flag States to discharge their responsibilities, in accordance with the
Convention and the Agreement, to ensure compliance by vessels flying their flag with the conservation and
management measures adopted and in force with respect to fisheries resources on the high seas;
7. Calls upon all States, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to apply widely, in accordance with international law and the Code, the precautionary approach and ecosystem
approaches to the conservation, management and exploitation of fish stocks, and also calls upon States parties to the
Agreement to implement fully the provisions of article 6 of the Agreement as a matter of priority;
8. Urges States to increase their reliance on scientific advice in developing, adopting and implementing
conservation and management measures, and to increase their efforts, including through international cooperation,
to promote science for conservation and management measures that apply, in accordance with international law, the
precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches to fisheries management, enhancing understanding of ecosystem
_______________
174
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.

92

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

approaches, in order to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources, and in this
regard encourages the implementation of the Strategy for Improving Information on Status and Trends of Capture
Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as a framework for the improvement and
understanding of fishery status and trends;
9. Calls upon all States, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to apply stock-specific precautionary reference points, as described in annex II to the Agreement and in the Code, to
ensure that populations of harvested stocks and, where necessary, associated or dependent species are maintained at
or restored to sustainable levels, and to use these reference points for triggering conservation and management
action;
10. Encourages States to apply the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches in adopting and
implementing conservation and management measures addressing, inter alia, by-catch, pollution and overfishing,
and protecting habitats of specific concern, taking into account existing guidelines developed by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
11. Also encourages States to enhance or develop observer programmes, individually or through regional
fisheries management organizations or arrangements, in order to improve data collection on, inter alia, target and
by-catch species, which could also assist monitoring, control and surveillance tools, and to take into account
standards, forms of cooperation and other existing structures for such programmes as described in article 25 of the
Agreement and article 5 of the Code;
12. Calls upon States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to collect and,
where appropriate, report to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations required catch and effort
data, and fishery-related information, in a complete, accurate and timely way, including for straddling fish stocks
and highly migratory fish stocks within and beyond areas under national jurisdiction, discrete high seas fish stocks,
and by-catch and discards; and, where they do not exist, to establish processes to strengthen data collection and
reporting by members of regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, including through regular
reviews of member compliance with such obligations, and, when such obligations are not met, require the member
concerned to rectify the problem, including through the preparation of plans of action with timelines;
13. Invites States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to cooperate with the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in the implementation and further development of the
Fisheries Resources Monitoring System initiative;
14. Reaffirms paragraph 10 of its resolution 61/105 of 8 December 2006, and calls upon States, including
through regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, to urgently adopt and implement measures to
fully implement the International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks for directed and
non-directed shark fisheries, based on the best available scientific information, through, inter alia, limits on catch or
fishing effort, by requiring that vessels flying their flag collect and regularly report data on shark catches, including
species-specific data, discards and landings, undertaking, including through international cooperation,
comprehensive stock assessments of sharks, reducing shark by-catch and by-catch mortality and, where scientific
information is uncertain or inadequate, not increasing fishing effort in directed shark fisheries and urgently
establishing science-based management measures to ensure the long-term conservation, management and
sustainable use of shark stocks and to prevent further declines of vulnerable or threatened shark stocks;
15. Calls upon States to take immediate and concerted action to improve the implementation of and
compliance with existing regional fisheries management organization or arrangement and national measures that
regulate shark fisheries and incidental catch of sharks, in particular those measures which prohibit or restrict
fisheries conducted solely for the purpose of harvesting shark fins and, where necessary, to consider taking other
measures, as appropriate, such as requiring that all sharks be landed with each fin naturally attached;
16. Calls upon regional fisheries management organizations with the competence to regulate highly
migratory species to strengthen or establish precautionary, science-based conservation and management measures,
as appropriate, for sharks taken in fisheries within their convention areas consistent with the International Plan of
Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks;
17. Encourages range States and regional economic integration organizations that have not yet done so to
become signatories to the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks under the
93

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals,175 and also invites non-range States,
intergovernmental organizations and international and national non-governmental organizations or other relevant
bodies and entities to consider becoming cooperating partners;
18. Encourages States, as appropriate, to cooperate in establishing non-detriment findings for shared stocks
of marine species listed in appendices I and II to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora,173 consistent with the concepts and non-binding guiding principles contained in resolution
Conf. 16.7 on non-detriment findings adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora at its sixteenth meeting, held in Bangkok from 3 to
14 March 2013;
19. Urges States to eliminate barriers to trade in fish and fisheries products which are not consistent with
their rights and obligations under the World Trade Organization agreements, taking into account the importance of
the trade in fish and fisheries products, particularly for developing countries;
20. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States committed themselves to observing the need to ensure
access to fisheries and the importance of access to markets by subsistence, small-scale and artisanal fisherfolk and
women fish workers, as well as indigenous peoples and their communities, particularly in developing countries,
especially small island developing States;
21. Urges States and relevant international and national organizations to provide for the participation of
small-scale fishery stakeholders in related policy development and fisheries management strategies in order to
achieve long-term sustainability for such fisheries, consistent with the duty to ensure the proper conservation and
management of fisheries resources;
22. Encourages States, either directly or through competent and appropriate subregional, regional or global
organizations and arrangements, to analyse, as appropriate, the impact of fishing for marine species corresponding
to low trophic levels;
23. Welcomes, in this regard, the initiation of further studies by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations of the impact of industrial fishing activities on species corresponding to low trophic levels;
24. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to consider the potential effects of
genetically engineered fish species on the health and sustainability of wild fish stocks and to provide guidance,
consistent with the Code, on minimizing harmful impacts in this regard;
II
Implementation of the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks
25. Calls upon all States, and entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the
Agreement, that have not done so to ratify or accede to the Agreement and in the interim to consider applying it
provisionally;
26. Calls upon States parties to the Agreement to effectively implement, as a matter of priority, the
provisions of the Agreement through their national legislation and through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements in which they participate;
27. Emphasizes the importance of those provisions of the Agreement relating to bilateral, subregional and
regional cooperation in enforcement, and urges continued efforts in this regard;
28. Urges States parties to the Agreement, in accordance with article 21, paragraph 4, thereof, to inform,
either directly or through the relevant subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement, all
_______________
175

94

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1651, No. 28395.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

States whose vessels fish on the high seas in the same subregion or region of the form of identification issued by
those States parties to officials duly authorized to carry out boarding and inspection functions in accordance with
articles 21 and 22 of the Agreement;
29. Also urges States parties to the Agreement, in accordance with article 21, paragraph 4, thereof, to
designate an appropriate authority to receive notifications pursuant to article 21 and to give due publicity to such
designation through the relevant subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement;
30. Invites regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements which have not yet done so to
adopt procedures for high seas boarding and inspection that are consistent with articles 21 and 22 of the Agreement;
31. Calls upon States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements with competence over discrete high seas fish stocks, to adopt the
measures necessary to ensure the long-term conservation, management and sustainable use of such stocks in
accordance with the Convention and consistent with the Code and the general principles set forth in the Agreement;
32. Invites States to assist developing States in enhancing their participation in regional fisheries
management organizations or arrangements, including by facilitating access to fisheries for straddling fish stocks
and highly migratory fish stocks, in accordance with article 25, paragraph 1 (b), of the Agreement, taking into
account the need to ensure that such access benefits the developing States concerned and their nationals;
33. Invites States and international financial institutions and organizations of the United Nations system to
provide assistance according to Part VII of the Agreement, including, if appropriate, the development of special
financial mechanisms or instruments to assist developing States, in particular the least developed among them and
small island developing States, to enable them to develop their national capacity to exploit fishery resources, including
developing their domestically flagged fishing fleet, value-added processing and the expansion of their economic base in
the fishing industry, consistent with the duty to ensure the proper conservation and management of fisheries resources;
34. Encourages States, intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions, national
institutions and non-governmental organizations, as well as natural and juridical persons, to make voluntary
financial contributions to the Assistance Fund established under Part VII of the Agreement;
35. Encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat (the Division) to continue their efforts
to publicize the availability of assistance through the Assistance Fund;
36. Encourages accelerated progress by States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, regarding the recommendations of the Review
Conference on the Agreement, held in New York from 22 to 26 May 2006,176 and the identification of emerging
priorities;
37. Encourages States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, to consider implementing, as appropriate, the recommendations of
the resumed Review Conference, held in New York from 24 to 28 May 2010;177
38. Recalls paragraph 6 of its resolution 56/13 of 28 November 2001, and requests the Secretary-General to
convene, in April 2014, in accordance with past practice, a tenth round of informal consultations of States Parties to
the Agreement for a duration of two days to consider, inter alia, regional, subregional and global implementation of
the Agreement and initial preparatory work for the resumption of the Review Conference;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to invite States, and entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1,
paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement, that are not party to the Agreement, as well as the United Nations Development
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other specialized agencies, the World
Bank, the Global Environment Facility and other relevant international financial institutions, subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, other fisheries bodies, other relevant intergovernmental
bodies and relevant non-governmental organizations, in accordance with past practice, to attend the tenth round of
informal consultations of States Parties to the Agreement as observers;
_______________
176
177

See A/CONF.210/2006/15, annex.
See A/CONF.210/2010/7, annex.

95

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

40. Reaffirms its request that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations initiate
arrangements with States for the collection and dissemination of data on fishing in the high seas by vessels flying
their flag at the subregional and regional levels where no such arrangements exist;
41. Also reaffirms its request that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations revise its
global fisheries statistics database to provide information on straddling fish stocks, highly migratory fish stocks and
discrete high seas fish stocks on the basis of where the catch is taken;
III
Related fisheries instruments
42. Emphasizes the importance of the effective implementation of the provisions of the Compliance
Agreement,169 and urges continued efforts in this regard;
43. Calls upon all States and other entities referred to in article X, paragraph 1, of the Compliance
Agreement that have not yet become parties to that Agreement to do so as a matter of priority and, in the interim, to
consider applying it provisionally;
44. Urges States and subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
implement and promote the application of the Code within their areas of competence;
45. Urges States to develop and implement, as a matter of priority, national and, as appropriate, regional
plans of action to put into effect the international plans of action of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations;
46. Welcomes in this regard the work undertaken by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations to improve the response rate for monitoring implementation of the Code and the international plans of
action and strategies by developing a web-based questionnaire, and highlights the importance of responding to the
questionnaire;
47. Encourages the development of best-practice guidelines for safety at sea in connection with marine
fisheries by the competent international organizations;
48. Encourages States to consider signing, ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the Cape Town
Agreement of 2012 on the Implementation of the Provisions of the Torremolinos Protocol of 1993 relating to the
Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977;
IV
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
49. Emphasizes once again its serious concern that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing remains one
of the greatest threats to fish stocks and marine ecosystems and continues to have serious and major implications for
the conservation and management of ocean resources, as well as the food security and the economies of many
States, particularly developing States, and renews its call upon States to comply fully with all existing obligations
and to combat such fishing and urgently to take all steps necessary to implement the International Plan of Action to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing;
50. Recalls in this regard that in “The future we want”, States acknowledged that illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing deprive many countries of a crucial natural resource and remain a persistent threat to their
sustainable development and recommitted to eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing as advanced in
the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, and to prevent and combat those practices, including by developing and
implementing national and regional action plans in accordance with the International Plan of Action to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, implementing, in accordance with international
law, effective and coordinated measures by coastal States, flag States, port States, chartering nations and the States
of nationality of the beneficial owners and others who support or engage in illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing by identifying vessels engaged in such fishing and by depriving offenders of the benefits accruing from it, as
well as by cooperating with developing countries to systematically identify needs and build capacity, including
support for monitoring, control, surveillance, compliance and enforcement systems;
96

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

51. Urges States to exercise effective control over their nationals, including beneficial owners, and vessels
flying their flag, in order to prevent and deter them from engaging in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
activities or supporting vessels engaging in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, including those
vessels listed by regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements as engaged in those activities, and to
facilitate mutual assistance to ensure that such actions can be investigated and proper sanctions imposed;
52. Also urges States to take effective measures, at the national, subregional, regional and global levels, to
deter the activities, including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, of any vessel which undermines
conservation and management measures that have been adopted by subregional and regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements in accordance with international law;
53. Calls upon States not to permit vessels flying their flag to engage in fishing on the high seas or in areas
under the national jurisdiction of other States, unless duly authorized by the authorities of the States concerned and
in accordance with the conditions set out in the authorization, and to take specific measures, including deterring the
reflagging of vessels by their nationals, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention, the Agreement
and the Compliance Agreement, to control fishing operations by vessels flying their flag;
54. Urges States, individually and collectively through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to develop appropriate processes to assess the performance of States with respect to implementing the
obligations regarding fishing vessels flying their flag set out in relevant international instruments;
55. Reaffirms the need to strengthen, where necessary, the international legal framework for intergovernmental
cooperation, in particular at the subregional and regional levels, in the management of fish stocks and in combating
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, in a manner consistent with international law, and for States and entities
referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement to collaborate in efforts to address
these types of fishing activities;
56. Urges regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to further coordinate measures for
combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, such as through the development of a common list
of vessels identified as engaged in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing or the mutual recognition of the
illegal, unreported and unregulated vessel lists established by each organization or arrangement;
57. Reaffirms its call upon States to take all necessary measures consistent with international law, without
prejudice to a State’s sovereignty over ports in its territory and to reasons of force majeure or distress, including the
prohibition of vessels from accessing their ports followed by a report to the flag State concerned, when there is clear
evidence that they are or have been engaged in or have supported illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, or
when they refuse to give information either on the origin of the catch or on the authorization under which the catch
has been made;
58. Reaffirms paragraph 53 of its resolution 64/72 of 4 December 2009 with regard to eliminating illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing by vessels flying “flags of convenience” and requiring that a “genuine link” be
established between States and fishing vessels flying their flags, and urges States operating open registry to
effectively control all fishing vessels flying their flag, as required by international law, or otherwise stop open
registry for fishing vessels;
59. Encourages States, either directly or through competent and appropriate subregional, regional or global
organizations and arrangements, to consider adopting rules, consistent with international law, to ensure that
chartering arrangements and practices related to fishing vessels enable compliance with and enforcement of relevant
conservation and management measures, so as not to undermine efforts to combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing;
60. Recognizes the need for enhanced port State measures to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, and urges States to cooperate, in particular at the regional level and through subregional and regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to adopt all necessary port measures, consistent with
international law taking into account article 23 of the Agreement, and to further promote the development and
application of standards at the regional level;
61. Encourages, in this regard, States and regional economic integration organizations that have not yet
done so to consider ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing170 with a view to its early entry into force;
97

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

62. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States that have signed the Agreement on Port State Measures to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing were called upon to expedite procedures
for its ratification with a view to its early entry into force;
63. Encourages strengthened collaboration between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the International Maritime Organization, taking into account the respective competencies, mandates
and experience of the two organizations, to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, particularly in
improving the implementation of flag State responsibilities and port State measures;
64. Encourages States, with respect to vessels flying their flag, and port States, to make every effort to share
data on landings and catch quotas, and in this regard encourages regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements to consider developing open databases containing such data for the purpose of enhancing the
effectiveness of fisheries management;
65. Calls upon States to take all measures necessary to ensure that vessels flying their flag do not engage in
trans-shipment of fish caught by fishing vessels engaged in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, through
adequate regulation, monitoring and control of trans-shipment of fish at sea, including through additional national
measures applicable to vessels flying their flag to prevent such trans-shipment;
66. Urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to adopt and implement internationally agreed market-related measures in accordance with international law,
including principles, rights and obligations established in World Trade Organization agreements, as called for in the
International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing;
67. Welcomes the ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on the
development of best-practice guidelines for catch documentation schemes and traceability, in accordance with its
agreed terms of reference and framework principles;
68. Calls upon States to initiate, as soon as possible, work within the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations on the elaboration, in accordance with international law, including the agreements established
under the World Trade Organization, of guidelines and other relevant criteria relating to catch documentation
schemes, including possible formats;
69. Encourages information-sharing regarding emerging market- and trade-related measures by States and
other relevant actors with appropriate international forums, given the potential implications of these measures for all
States, consistent with the established plan of work of the Committee on Fisheries, and taking into account the
Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fish Trade of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
70. Acknowledges the development of participatory surveillance activities at sea involving fishing
communities in West Africa as a cost-effective way of detecting illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
71. Notes the concern expressed by the Committee on Fisheries at the proliferation of private standards and
ecolabelling schemes potentially leading to the creation of trade barriers and restrictions, and also notes the work by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to develop an evaluation framework to assess the
conformity of public and private ecolabelling schemes through the Guidelines for the Ecolabelling of Fish and
Fishery Products from Marine Capture Fisheries;
72. Also notes the concerns about possible connections between transnational organized crime and illegal
fishing in certain regions of the world, and encourages States, including through the appropriate international forums
and organizations, to study the causes and methods of and contributing factors to illegal fishing to increase
knowledge and understanding of those possible connections, and to make the findings publicly available, and in this
regard takes note of the study issued by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on transnational organized
crime in the fishing industry, bearing in mind the distinct legal regimes and remedies under international law
applicable to illegal fishing and transnational organized crime;
V
Monitoring, control and surveillance and compliance and enforcement
73. Calls upon States, in accordance with international law, to strengthen implementation of or, where they
do not exist, adopt comprehensive monitoring, control and surveillance measures and compliance and enforcement
schemes individually and within those regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements in which they
98

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

participate, in order to provide an appropriate framework for promoting compliance with agreed conservation and
management measures, and further urges enhanced coordination among all relevant States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in these efforts;
74. Encourages further work by competent international organizations, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to develop guidelines on flag State control of fishing vessels;
75. Urges States, individually and through relevant regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to establish mandatory vessel monitoring, control and surveillance systems, in particular to require
that vessel monitoring systems be carried by all vessels fishing on the high seas as soon as practicable, recalling that
paragraph 62 of resolution 63/112 of 5 December 2008 urged that large-scale fishing vessels be required to carry
vessel monitoring systems no later than December 2008, and to share information on fisheries enforcement matters;
76. Calls upon States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations or
arrangements, to strengthen or establish, consistent with national and international law, positive or negative lists of
vessels fishing within the areas covered by relevant regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements
in order to promote compliance with conservation and management measures and to identify products from illegal,
unreported and unregulated catches, and encourages improved coordination among all States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in sharing and using this information, taking into account the forms of
cooperation with developing States as set out in article 25 of the Agreement;
77. Encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in cooperation with States,
regional economic integration organizations, the International Maritime Organization and, as appropriate, regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to expedite efforts to develop and manage a comprehensive
global record of fishing vessels, refrigerated transport vessels and supply vessels, including with a unique vessel
identifier system, using the International Maritime Organization numbering system for fishing vessels above 100
gross register tonnage as a first step;
78. Notes the recommendation of the Maritime Safety Committee of the International Maritime
Organization that the Organization’s resolution A.600(15) be amended to allow voluntary application of the
International Maritime Organization Ship Identification Number Scheme to fishing vessels of 100 gross tonnage
and above, and recognizes that such an amendment will aid the prevention of illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing activities;
79. Requests States and relevant international bodies to develop, in accordance with international law, more
effective measures to trace fish and fishery products to enable importing States to identify fish or fishery products
caught in a manner that undermines international conservation and management measures agreed in accordance
with international law, taking into account the special requirements of developing States and the forms of
cooperation with developing States as set out in article 25 of the Agreement, and at the same time to recognize the
importance of market access, in accordance with provisions 11.2.4, 11.2.5 and 11.2.6 of the Code, for fish and
fishery products caught in a manner that is in conformity with such international measures;
80. Requests States to take the necessary measures, consistent with international law, to help to prevent fish
and fishery products caught in a manner that undermines applicable conservation and management measures
adopted in accordance with international law from entering international trade;
81. Encourages States to establish and undertake cooperative surveillance and enforcement activities in
accordance with international law to strengthen and enhance efforts to ensure compliance with conservation and
management measures, and prevent and deter illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
82. Urges States, directly and through regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, to
develop and adopt effective monitoring, control and surveillance measures for trans-shipment, as appropriate, in
particular at-sea trans-shipment, in order to, inter alia, monitor compliance, to collect and verify fisheries data, and to
prevent and suppress illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, in accordance with international law and,
in parallel, to encourage and support the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in studying the
current practices of trans-shipment and produce a set of guidelines for this purpose;
83. Expresses its appreciation for financial contributions from States to improve the capacity of the existing
voluntary International Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Network for Fisheries-related Activities, and
99

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

encourages States to join and actively participate in the Network and to consider supporting, when appropriate, its
transformation in accordance with international law into an international unit with dedicated resources to further
assist Network members, taking into account the forms of cooperation with developing States as set out in article 25
of the Agreement;
84. Encourages participation in the fourth Global Fisheries Enforcement Training Workshop, to be held in
San José from 17 to 21 February 2014, hosted by the International Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Network
for Fisheries-related Activities, in order to share information, experiences and technologies, foster coordination and
improve skills among enforcement officials;
85. Encourages States, individually and through relevant international bodies, to improve the understanding
of the causes and impacts of forced labour and human trafficking in the fishing and aquaculture industries, including
processing and related industries, and to further consider actions to combat these practices, including raising
awareness of the issue;
VI
Fishing overcapacity
86. Calls upon States to commit themselves to urgently reducing the capacity of the world’s fishing fleets to
levels commensurate with the sustainability of fish stocks, through the establishment of target levels and plans or
other appropriate mechanisms for ongoing capacity assessment, while avoiding the transfer of fishing capacity to
other fisheries or areas in a manner that undermines the sustainable management of fish stocks, including those
areas where fish stocks are overexploited or in a depleted condition, and recognizing in this context the legitimate
rights of developing States to develop their fisheries for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks
consistent with article 25 of the Agreement, article 5 of the Code and paragraph 10 of the International Plan of
Action for the Management of Fishing Capacity of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
87. Reiterates its call upon States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, to ensure that the urgent actions required in the International Plan of Action for the Management
of Fishing Capacity are undertaken expeditiously and that its implementation is facilitated without delay;
88. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to report on the state of progress in
the implementation of the International Plan of Action for the Management of Fishing Capacity, as provided for in
paragraph 48 of the Plan of Action;
89. Calls upon States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements with competence to regulate highly migratory species, urgently to
address global fishing capacity for tunas, inter alia, in a way that recognizes the legitimate rights of developing
States, in particular small island developing States, to participate in and benefit from such fisheries, taking into
account the recommendations of the 2010 Joint Tuna Regional Fisheries Management Organizations International
Workshop on RFMO Management of Tuna Fisheries, held in Brisbane, Australia, and the recommendations of the
2011 third joint meeting of tuna regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
90. Encourages those States which are cooperating to establish subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, taking into account the best scientific information available as well as
the precautionary approach, to exercise voluntary restraint of fishing effort levels in those areas that will come under
the regulation of the future organizations and arrangements until adequate regional conservation and management
measures are adopted and implemented, taking into account the need to ensure the long-term conservation,
management and sustainable use of the relevant fish stocks and to prevent significant adverse impacts on vulnerable
marine ecosystems;
91. Urges States to eliminate subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity and to illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, including by accelerating work to complete World Trade Organization
negotiations on fisheries subsidies in accordance with the 2001 Doha Ministerial Declaration178 to clarify and
improve and the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to strengthen disciplines on fisheries subsidies, taking
into account the importance of the fisheries sector to developing countries;
_______________
178

100

A/C.2/56/7, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

92. Recalls, in this regard, that in “The future we want”, States reaffirmed their commitment in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation to eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing and overcapacity, taking into account the importance of that sector to developing countries, reiterated their
commitment to conclude multilateral disciplines on fisheries subsidies that would give effect to the mandates of the
World Trade Organization Doha Development Agenda178 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to strengthen
disciplines on subsidies in the fisheries sector, including through the prohibition of certain forms of fisheries
subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and
differential treatment for developing and least developed countries should be an integral part of World Trade
Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation, taking into account the importance of the sector to development
priorities, poverty reduction and livelihood and food security concerns, and encouraged one another to further
improve the transparency and reporting of existing fisheries subsidies programmes through the World Trade
Organization and, given the state of fisheries resources, and without prejudicing the Doha and Hong Kong
ministerial mandates on fisheries subsidies or the need to conclude those negotiations, to eliminate subsidies that
contribute to overcapacity and overfishing and to refrain from introducing new such subsidies or from extending or
enhancing existing ones;
VII
Large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing
93. Expresses concern that, despite the adoption of General Assembly resolution 46/215, the practice of
large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing still exists and remains a threat to living marine resources;
94. Urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to adopt effective measures, or strengthen existing measures, to implement and enforce the provisions of resolution
46/215 and subsequent resolutions on large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing in order to eliminate the use of large-scale
pelagic drift nets in all seas and oceans, which means that efforts to implement resolution 46/215 should not result in
the transfer to other parts of the world of drift nets that contravene the resolution;
95. Also urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to adopt effective measures, or strengthen existing measures, to implement and enforce the present
global moratorium on the use of large-scale pelagic drift nets on the high seas, and calls upon States to ensure that
vessels flying their flag that are duly authorized to use large-scale drift nets in waters under their national jurisdiction
do not use such gear for fishing while on the high seas;
VIII
Fisheries by-catch and discards
96. Urges States, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and other
relevant international organizations that have not done so to take action, including with consideration of the interests
of developing coastal States and, as appropriate, subsistence fishing communities, to reduce or eliminate by-catch,
catch by lost or abandoned gear, fish discards and post-harvest losses, including juvenile fish, consistent with
international law and relevant international instruments, including the Code, and in particular to consider measures
including, as appropriate, technical measures related to fish size, mesh size or gear, discards, closed seasons and
areas and zones reserved for selected fisheries, particularly artisanal fisheries, the establishment of mechanisms for
communicating information on areas of high concentration of juvenile fish, taking into account the importance of
ensuring the confidentiality of such information, and support for studies and research that will reduce or eliminate
by-catch of juvenile fish, and to ensure that these measures are implemented so as to optimize their effectiveness;
97. Welcomes the commitment of States in “The future we want” to enhance action to manage by-catch,
discards and other adverse ecosystem impacts from fisheries, including by eliminating destructive fishing practices,
consistent with international law, the applicable international instruments and relevant General Assembly resolutions
and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
98. Calls upon States, either individually, collectively or through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, to further study, develop and adopt effective management measures, taking into
account the best available scientific information on fishing methods, including fish aggregating devices, to minimize
by-catch;
101

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

99. Also calls upon States, either individually, collectively or through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, to collect the necessary data in order to evaluate and closely monitor the use of
large-scale fish aggregating devices and other devices, as appropriate, and their effects on tuna resources and tuna
behaviour and associated and dependent species, to improve management procedures to monitor the number, type
and use of such devices and to mitigate possible negative effects on the ecosystem, including on juveniles and the
incidental by-catch of non-target species, particularly sharks and turtles, and notes in this regard the measures
adopted by different regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
100. Urgently calls upon States, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements and, where appropriate, other relevant international organizations to develop and implement effective
management measures to reduce the incidence of catch of non-target species, including the utilization of selective
fishing gear, where appropriate;
101. Calls upon States and subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
adopt or improve measures to assess the impact of their fisheries on species caught as by-catch and to improve the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of information and reporting on incidental catch of species caught as by-catch,
including through adequate observer coverage and the use of modern technologies, and to provide assistance to
developing States to meet data-collection and reporting obligations;
102. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, as appropriate, to
strengthen or establish data-collection programmes to obtain reliable species-specific estimates of shark, marine
turtle, fin-fish, marine mammal and seabird by-catch, and to promote further research on selective fishing gear and
practices and on the use of appropriate by-catch mitigation measures;
103. Encourages States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to coordinate in
the development and implementation of clear and standardized by-catch data-collection and reporting protocols for
non-target species, in particular endangered, threatened and protected species, taking into account best-practice
advice from appropriate international organizations and arrangements, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels;179
104. Encourages States and entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the
Agreement to give due consideration to participation, as appropriate, in subregional and regional instruments and
organizations with mandates to conserve non-target species taken incidentally in fishing operations;
105. Encourages States to strengthen, if necessary, the capacity of those subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in which they participate to ensure the adequate conservation of nontarget species taken incidentally in fishing operations, taking into consideration best practices for non-target species
management, and to expedite their ongoing efforts in this regard;
106. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements urgently to
implement, as appropriate, the measures recommended in the 2004 Guidelines to Reduce Sea Turtle Mortality in
Fishing Operations and the International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline
Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in order to prevent the decline of sea
turtles and seabird populations by minimizing by-catch and increasing post-release survival in their fisheries,
including through research and development of gear and bait alternatives, promoting the use of available by-catch
mitigation technology, and establishing and strengthening data-collection programmes to obtain standardized
information to develop reliable estimates of the by-catch of these species;
107. Urges States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
implement the International Guidelines on Bycatch Management and Reduction of Discards of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
108. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to continue to take
urgent action to reduce the by-catch of seabirds, including albatrosses and petrels, in fisheries by adopting and
implementing conservation measures consistent with the 2009 best practices technical guidelines of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to support implementation of the International Plan of Action for
_______________
179

102

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2258, No. 40228.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries and taking into account the work of the Agreement on
the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels and of organizations such as the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources;
IX
Subregional and regional cooperation
109. Urges coastal States and States fishing on the high seas, in accordance with the Convention, the
Agreement and other relevant instruments, to pursue cooperation in relation to straddling fish stocks and highly
migratory fish stocks, either directly or through appropriate subregional or regional fisheries management
organizations or arrangements, to ensure the effective conservation and management of such stocks;
110. Urges States fishing for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks on the high seas, and
relevant coastal States, where a subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement has the
competence to establish conservation and management measures for such stocks, to give effect to their duty to
cooperate by becoming members of such an organization or participants in such an arrangement, or by agreeing to
apply the conservation and management measures established by such an organization or arrangement, or to
otherwise ensure that no vessel flying their flag is authorized to access the fisheries resources to which regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements or conservation and management measures established by
such organizations or arrangements apply;
111. Invites, in this regard, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
ensure that all States having a real interest in the fisheries concerned may become members of such organizations or
participants in such arrangements, in accordance with the Convention, the Agreement and the Code;
112. Encourages relevant coastal States and States fishing on the high seas for a straddling fish stock or a
highly migratory fish stock, where there is no subregional or regional fisheries management organization or
arrangement to establish conservation and management measures for such stocks, to cooperate to establish such an
organization or enter into another appropriate arrangement to ensure the conservation and management of such
stocks, and to participate in the work of the organization or arrangement;
113. Urges signatory States and other States whose vessels fish within the area of the Convention on the
Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources in the South-East Atlantic Ocean180 for fishery resources
covered by that Convention to become parties to that Convention as a matter of priority and, in the interim, to ensure
that vessels flying their flags fully comply with the measures adopted;
114. Recalls the entry into force of the Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement, and encourages further
ratifications, accessions, acceptances and approvals of that Agreement;
115. Also recalls the entry into force of the Convention on the Conservation and Management of High Seas
Fishery Resources in the South Pacific Ocean, and encourages further ratifications, accessions, acceptances and
approvals of that Convention;
116. Encourages States, regional economic integration organizations and the entities referred to in article 1,
paragraph 2 (b), of the Convention on the Conservation and Management of High Seas Fishery Resources in the
South Pacific Ocean that participated in the negotiation of that Convention to fully implement the voluntary interim
measures that have been adopted to give effect to paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of General Assembly resolution
61/105 until conservation and management measures have been adopted;
117. Welcomes the recent signatures and ratification of the Convention on the Conservation and Management
of High Seas Fisheries Resources in the North Pacific Ocean, and encourages further ratifications, accessions,
acceptances and approvals of that Convention;
118. Encourages States that participated in the negotiation of the Convention on the Conservation and
Management of High Seas Fisheries Resources in the North Pacific Ocean to fully implement interim voluntary
measures adopted in accordance with paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of resolution 61/105 and paragraphs 117, 119,
120, 122 and 123 of resolution 64/72;
_______________
180

Ibid., vol. 2221, No. 39489.

103

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

119. Notes the ongoing efforts of the members of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission to strengthen the
functioning of the Commission so that it can more effectively discharge its mandate, and invites the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to provide members of the Commission with the necessary
assistance to this end;
120. Encourages signatory States and States having a real interest to become parties to the Convention for the
Strengthening of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission Established by the 1949 Convention between the
United States of America and the Republic of Costa Rica;
121. Urges the Contracting Parties to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest
Atlantic Fisheries181 that have not yet done so to approve the 2007 Amendment to that Convention with a view to its
early entry into effect;
122. Urges further efforts by regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, as a matter of
priority, in accordance with international law, to strengthen and modernize their mandates and the measures adopted
by such organizations or arrangements, and to implement modern approaches to fisheries management, as reflected
in the Agreement and other relevant international instruments, relying on the best scientific information available
and application of the precautionary approach and incorporating an ecosystem approach to fisheries management
and biodiversity considerations, including the conservation and management of ecologically related and dependent
species and protection of their habitats, where these aspects are lacking, to ensure that they effectively contribute to
long-term conservation and management and sustainable use of living marine resources, and welcomes those
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements that have taken steps in this direction;
123. Calls upon regional fisheries management organizations with the competence to conserve and manage
highly migratory fish stocks that have not yet adopted effective conservation and management measures in line with
the best scientific information available to conserve and manage stocks falling under their mandate to do so
urgently;
124. Urges States to strengthen and enhance cooperation among existing and developing regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in which they participate, including increased communication and
further coordination of measures, such as through the holding of joint consultations, and to strengthen integration,
coordination and cooperation by such regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with other
relevant fisheries organizations, regional seas arrangements and other relevant international organizations;
125. Urges the five regional fisheries management organizations with competence to manage highly
migratory species to continue to take measures to implement the Course of Actions adopted at the second joint
meeting of tuna regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and to consider the
recommendations of the third joint meeting of tuna regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
126. Invites States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with competence to
manage straddling fish stocks to share experiences and good practices, for example by considering organizing joint
meetings, where appropriate;
127. Urges regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to improve transparency and to
ensure that their decision-making processes are fair and transparent, rely on the best scientific information available,
incorporate the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches, address participatory rights, including through,
inter alia, the development of transparent criteria for allocating fishing opportunities which reflects, where
appropriate, the relevant provisions of the Agreement, taking due account, inter alia, of the status of the relevant
stocks and the respective interests in the fishery;
128. Welcomes the fact that a number of regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements have
completed performance reviews, and encourages the implementation, as appropriate, of the recommendations of
their respective reviews as a matter of priority;
129. Urges States, through their participation in regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements that have not done so, to undertake, on an urgent basis, performance reviews of those regional
_______________
181

104

Ibid., vol. 1135, No. 17799.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

fisheries management organizations and arrangements, initiated either by the organization or arrangement itself or
with external partners, including in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
using transparent criteria based on the provisions of the Agreement and other relevant instruments, and taking into
account the best practices of regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements and, as appropriate, any
set of criteria developed by States or other regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, and
encourages that such performance reviews include some element of independent evaluation and propose means for
improving the functioning of the regional fisheries management organization or arrangement, as appropriate;
130. Calls upon States, through their participation in regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to undertake performance reviews of those regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements on a regular basis, and to make the results publicly available, to implement the recommendations of
such reviews and to strengthen the comprehensiveness of those reviews over time, as necessary;
131. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States recognized the need for transparency and accountability in
fisheries management by regional fisheries management organizations and the efforts already made by those
regional fisheries management organizations that had undertaken independent performance reviews, called upon all
regional fisheries management organizations to regularly undertake such reviews and make the results publicly
available, encouraged implementation of the recommendations of such reviews and recommended that the
comprehensiveness of those reviews be strengthened over time, as necessary;
132. Urges States to cooperate, taking into account those performance reviews, to develop best-practice
guidelines for regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and to apply, to the extent possible,
those guidelines to organizations and arrangements in which they participate;
133. Encourages the development of regional guidelines for States to use in establishing sanctions for noncompliance by vessels flying their flag and by their nationals, to be applied in accordance with national law, that are
adequate in severity for effectively securing compliance, deterring further violations and depriving offenders of the
benefits deriving from their illegal activities, as well as in evaluating their systems of sanctions to ensure that they
are effective in securing compliance and deterring violations;
134. Recognizes the importance of ensuring transparency of reporting of fishing activities within regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements in order to facilitate efforts to combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, as well as the importance of respecting the reporting obligations within those organizations and
arrangements, notes in this regard the measures adopted by the International Commission for the Conservation of
Atlantic Tunas182 and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission,183 and encourages other regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to consider establishing similar measures;
X
Responsible fisheries in the marine ecosystem
135. Urges States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
enhance their efforts to apply an ecosystem approach to fisheries, taking into account paragraph 30 (d) of the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
136. Encourages States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements and other relevant international organizations, to work to ensure that fisheries and other ecosystem
data collection is performed in a coordinated and integrated manner, facilitating incorporation into global
observation initiatives, where appropriate;
137. Calls upon States and regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, working in
cooperation with other relevant organizations, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the World Meteorological Organization, to adopt,
as appropriate, measures to protect ocean data buoy systems moored in areas beyond national jurisdiction from
actions that impair their operation;
_______________
182
183

International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, recommendation 11-16.
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, resolutions 12/07 and 13/07.

105

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

138. Encourages States to increase scientific research on the marine ecosystem in accordance with
international law;
139. Calls upon States, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other specialized
agencies, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, where appropriate, and
other appropriate intergovernmental bodies to cooperate in achieving sustainable aquaculture, including through
information exchange, developing equivalent standards on such issues as aquatic animal health and human health
and safety concerns, assessing the potential positive and negative impacts of aquaculture, including socioeconomics,
on the marine and coastal environment, including biodiversity, and adopting relevant methods and techniques to
minimize and mitigate adverse effects, and in this regard encourages the implementation of the 2007 Strategy and
Outline Plan for Improving Information on Status and Trends of Aquaculture of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, as a framework for the improvement and understanding of aquaculture status
and trends;
140. Calls upon States to take action immediately, individually and through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, and consistent with the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches, to
continue to implement the 2008 International Guidelines for the Management of Deep-Sea Fisheries in the High
Seas of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (the Guidelines) in order to sustainably
manage fish stocks and protect vulnerable marine ecosystems, including seamounts, hydrothermal vents and cold
water corals, from destructive fishing practices, recognizing the immense importance and value of deep-sea
ecosystems and the biodiversity they contain;
141. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States committed to enhance actions to protect vulnerable marine
ecosystems from significant adverse impacts, including through the effective use of impact assessments, consistent
with international law, the applicable international instruments and relevant General Assembly resolutions and
guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
142. Reaffirms the importance of paragraphs 80 to 90 of resolution 61/105, paragraphs 113 to 127 of
resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121 to 136 of resolution 66/68 of 6 December 2011 addressing the impacts of
bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems and the long-term sustainability of deep-sea fish stocks and the
actions called for in those resolutions, and emphasizes the need for full implementation by all States and relevant
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements of their commitments under those paragraphs on an
urgent basis;
143. Recalls that nothing in the paragraphs of resolutions 61/105, 64/72 and 66/68 addressing the impacts of
bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems prejudices the sovereign rights of coastal States over their
continental shelf or the exercise of the jurisdiction of coastal States with respect to their continental shelf under
international law as reflected in the Convention, in particular article 77 thereof;
144. Notes in this regard the adoption by coastal States of conservation measures regarding their continental
shelf to address the impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems, as well as their efforts to ensure
compliance with those measures;
145. Welcomes the important progress made by States, regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements and those States participating in negotiations in establishing a regional fisheries management
organization or arrangement competent to regulate bottom fisheries to implement paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of
resolution 61/105, paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and
132 to 134 of resolution 66/68 and address the impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems;
146. Also welcomes the substantial ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations related to the management of deep-sea fisheries in the high seas and the protection of vulnerable marine
ecosystems, and urges States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to ensure that their
actions in sustainably managing deep-sea fisheries and implementing paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of resolution
61/105, paragraphs 113 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of
resolution 66/68 are consistent with the Guidelines;
147. Affirms the importance of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations continuing to
undertake work pursuant to paragraphs 135 and 136 of resolution 66/68 as part of its ongoing programme for deepsea fisheries;
106

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

148. Notes the convening of a regional workshop on vulnerable marine ecosystems in the South-East
Atlantic, in Swakopmund, Namibia, from 8 to 12 April 2013, by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations;
149. Encourages accelerated progress to establish criteria on the objectives and management of marine
protected areas for fisheries purposes, and in this regard welcomes the development by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations of technical guidelines on marine protected areas and fisheries, and urges
coordination and cooperation among all relevant international organizations and bodies;
150. Urges all States to implement the 1995 Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine
Environment from Land-based Activities184 and to accelerate activity to safeguard the marine ecosystem, including
fish stocks, against pollution and physical degradation, taking into account the increase in oceanic dead zones;
151. Acknowledges the serious environmental impacts on the marine environment caused by abandoned, lost
or otherwise discarded fishing gear, and encourages States to take action to reduce such gear, noting the
recommendations of the 2009 report by the United Nations Environment Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations;
152. Reaffirms the importance it attaches to paragraphs 77 to 81 of resolution 60/31 of 29 November 2005
concerning the issue of lost, abandoned or discarded fishing gear and related marine debris and the adverse impacts
such debris and derelict fishing gear have on, inter alia, fish stocks, habitats and other marine species, and urges
accelerated progress by States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in implementing
those paragraphs of the resolution;
153. Encourages further studies, including by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
on the impacts of underwater noise on fish stocks and fishing catch rates, as well as associated socioeconomic
effects;
154. Calls upon States, including through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
play an active role in global efforts to conserve and sustainably use living marine resources, so as to contribute to
marine biological diversity;
155. Encourages States, either individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, as appropriate, to identify any spawning and nursery areas for fish stocks under their jurisdiction or
competence and, where required, to adopt science-based measures to conserve such stocks during these critical life
stages;
156. Recognizes the wide range of impacts of ocean acidification on marine ecosystems, and calls upon States
to tackle the causes of ocean acidification and to further study its impacts;
157. Emphasizes the importance of developing adaptive marine resource management strategies and
enhancing capacity-building to implement such strategies in order to enhance the resilience of marine ecosystems to
minimize the wide range of impacts on marine organisms and threats to food security caused by ocean acidification,
in particular the impacts on the ability of calciferous plankton, coral reefs, shellfish and crustaceans to build shells
and skeletal structures and the threats this could pose to protein supply;
XI
Capacity-building
158. Reiterates the crucial importance of cooperation by States directly or, as appropriate, through the
relevant subregional and regional organizations, and by other international organizations, including the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations through its FishCode programme, including through financial
and/or technical assistance, in accordance with the Agreement, the Compliance Agreement, the Code and its
associated international plans of action, to increase the capacity of developing States to achieve the goals and
implement the actions called for in the present resolution;
_______________
184

A/51/116, annex II.

107

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

159. Welcomes the ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in
developing guidance on the strategies and measures required for the creation of an enabling environment for
sustainable small-scale fisheries, and encourages studies for creating possible alternative livelihoods for coastal
communities;
160. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States recognized the importance of building the capacity of
developing countries to be able to benefit from the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and seas and their
resources, and in this regard emphasized the need for cooperation in marine scientific research to implement the
provisions of the Convention and the outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development, as well as for the
transfer of technology, taking into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and
Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology;
161. Also recalls that in “The future we want”, States urged the identification and mainstreaming by
2014 of strategies that further assist developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small
island developing States, in developing their national capacity to conserve, sustainably manage and realize the
benefits of sustainable fisheries, including through improved market access for fish products from developing
countries;
162. Encourages increased capacity-building and technical assistance by States, international financial
institutions and relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies for fishers, in particular small-scale fishers, in
developing countries, and in particular small island developing States, consistent with environmental sustainability,
in recognition of the fact that food security and livelihoods may depend on fisheries;
163. Encourages States to cooperate closely, directly or through the United Nations system, including the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, with a view to enhancing capacity-building of developing
States, and in particular small island developing States, in the field of fisheries through education and training;
164. Recognizes, in this regard, the work of the United Nations University Fisheries Training Programme in
Iceland, which has contributed for 15 years to capacity-building in this field in developing countries, graduated
280 fellows from 47 countries and, in addition, held 36 short courses in 12 countries;
165. Encourages the international community to enhance the opportunities for sustainable development in
developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, small island developing States and coastal African
States, by encouraging greater participation of those States in authorized fisheries activities being undertaken within
areas under their national jurisdiction, in accordance with the Convention, by distant-water fishing nations in order
to achieve better economic returns for developing countries from their fisheries resources within areas under their
national jurisdiction and an enhanced role in regional fisheries management, as well as by enhancing the ability of
developing countries to develop their own fisheries, as well as to participate in high seas fisheries, including access
to such fisheries, in conformity with international law, in particular the Convention and the Agreement, and taking
into account article 5 of the Code;
166. Requests distant-water fishing nations, when negotiating access agreements and arrangements with
developing coastal States, to do so on an equitable and sustainable basis and to take into account their legitimate
expectation to fully benefit from the sustainable use of the natural resources of their exclusive economic zones, to
ensure that vessels flying their flag comply with the laws and regulations of the developing coastal States adopted in
accordance with international law and to give greater attention to fish processing and fish-processing facilities
within the national jurisdiction of the developing coastal State to assist the realization of the benefits from the
development of fisheries resources and also to the transfer of technology and assistance for monitoring, control and
surveillance and compliance and enforcement within areas under the national jurisdiction of the developing coastal
State providing fisheries access, taking into account the forms of cooperation set out in article 25 of the Agreement
and article 5 of the Code;
167. Encourages States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to provide greater assistance and to promote coherence in such assistance for developing States in
designing, establishing and implementing relevant agreements, instruments and tools for the conservation and
sustainable management of fish stocks, including in designing and strengthening their domestic regulatory fisheries
policies and those of regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements in their regions, and the
enhancement of research and scientific capabilities through existing funds, such as the Assistance Fund under
108

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Part VII of the Agreement, bilateral assistance, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements
assistance funds, the FishCode programme, the World Bank’s global programme on fisheries and the Global
Environment Facility;
168. Encourages States to provide technical and financial support to developing countries to address their
special requirements and challenges in implementing the Guidelines;
169. Calls upon States to promote, through continuing dialogue and the assistance and cooperation provided
in accordance with articles 24 to 26 of the Agreement, further ratifications of or accessions to the Agreement by
seeking to address, inter alia, the issue of lack of capacity and resources that might stand in the way of developing
States becoming parties;
170. Notes with appreciation the compilation prepared by the Secretariat of the needs of developing States for
capacity-building and assistance in the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory
fish stocks and the sources of available assistance for developing States to address such needs;
171. Encourages States, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and other relevant
bodies to assist developing States in the implementation of the actions called for in paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of
resolution 61/105, paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and
132 to 134 of resolution 66/68;
172. Urges States and regional economic integration organizations, individually and through regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to mainstream efforts to assist developing States, in
particular the least developed and small island developing States, with other relevant international development
strategies with a view to enhancing international coordination to enable them to develop their national capacity to
exploit fishery resources, consistent with the duty to ensure the conservation and management of those resources,
and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to fully mobilize and coordinate the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system, including at the level of the regional economic commissions, within
their respective mandates;
173. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations to develop strategies to further assist
developing States, in particular the least developed and small island developing States, in fully realizing the benefits
from the catch of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks and in strengthening regional efforts to
sustainably conserve and manage such stocks, and, in this regard, to make available such information;
XII
Cooperation within the United Nations system
174. Requests the relevant parts of the United Nations system, international financial institutions and donor
agencies to support increased enforcement and compliance capabilities for regional fisheries management
organizations and their member States;
175. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to continue its cooperative
arrangements with United Nations agencies on the implementation of the international plans of action and to report
to the Secretary-General, for inclusion in his annual report on sustainable fisheries, on priorities for cooperation and
coordination in this work;
XIII
Activities of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
176. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the activities of the Division, which reflect the
high standard of assistance provided to Member States by the Division;
177. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to carry out the responsibilities and functions entrusted to
him by the Convention, the Agreement and the related resolutions of the General Assembly and to ensure the
allocation of appropriate resources to the Division for the performance of its activities under the approved budget for
the Organization;
109

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

XIV
Sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly
178. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of relevant
intergovernmental organizations, the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and relevant non-governmental organizations;
179. Notes the desire to further improve the efficiency of and the effective participation of delegations in the
informal consultations concerning the annual General Assembly resolution on sustainable fisheries, decides that the
informal consultations on this resolution will be held in a single round of consultations in November for a period of
six days, and invites States to submit proposals for inclusion in the text of the resolution to the Coordinator of the
informal consultations no later than five weeks before the start of the consultations;
180. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”, the sub-item entitled “Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and
related instruments”, and to consider the possibility of including this sub-item in future provisional agendas on a
biennial basis.
RESOLUTION 68/98
A/RES/689/8

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.26 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam

68/98.

Global health and foreign policy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 63/33 of 26 November 2008, 64/108 of 10 December 2009, 65/95 of 9 December
2010, 66/115 of 12 December 2011 and 67/81 of 12 December 2012,
Welcoming the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits which have contributed to the
advancement of the global health agenda, including the 2013 outcome document of the special event to follow up
efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,185 the 2013 outcome document of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development Goals and other
internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities: the way forward, a disability-inclusive
development agenda towards 2015 and beyond,186 the 2012 outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,187 the Rio Political Declaration on Social Determinants
of Health adopted at the 2011 World Conference on Social Determinants of Health, the 2011 Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS,188 the 2011 political declaration of the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,189 World
Health Assembly resolution 66.11 of 27 May 2013 on health in the post-2015 development agenda, the Helsinki
Statement on Health in All Policies, adopted at the Eighth Global Conference on Health Promotion, and
_______________
185

Resolution 68/6.
Resolution 68/3.
187
Resolution 66/288, annex.
188
Resolution 65/277, annex.
189
Resolution 66/2, annex.
186

110

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recommendation No. 202 concerning national floors of social protection, adopted by the International Labour
Conference at its 101st session, and reaffirming the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development, adopted in Cairo in September 1994,190 the key actions for the further implementation
of the Programme of Action191 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,192
Welcoming also the adoption of Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/12 of 22 July 2013 on the
United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases,
Reaffirming the right of every human being, without distinction of any kind, to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health and to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being
of oneself and one’s family, including adequate food, clothing and housing, and to the continuous improvement of
living conditions,
Noting with particular concern that, for millions of people, the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health, including access to quality medicines, remains a distant goal, that, especially
for women, the most vulnerable, children and those living in poverty, the likelihood of achieving this goal is
becoming increasingly remote, that millions of people are driven below the poverty line each year because of
catastrophic out-of-pocket payments for health care and that excessive out-of-pocket payments can discourage the
impoverished from seeking or continuing care,
Reaffirming the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), the Doha Declaration on
the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of
30 August 2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health and, when formal acceptance procedures are completed, the amendment to article 31 of the TRIPS
Agreement, as proposed by the General Council of the World Trade Organization in its decision of 6 December
2005, which provide flexibilities for the protection of public health, and in particular to promote access to medicines
for all, and to encourage the provision of assistance to developing countries in this regard, and calling for broad and
timely acceptance of the amendment to article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement,
Recognizing that the protection of intellectual property can be important in the development of new medicines,
Recognizing also that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of all three dimensions of
sustainable development and that, despite progress made, challenges in global health, including major inequities and
vulnerabilities within and among countries, regions and populations, still remain and demand persistent attention,
Reaffirming the commitment to the achievement of all the Millennium Development Goals, and stressing the
need to further support initiatives aimed at accelerating progress for their achievement by 2015,
Welcoming progress made in the areas of the Millennium Development Goals on health, which are key to
achieving all the Goals, and noting that the Goals are interconnected and that progress in the achievement of any of
the Goals bolsters progress in others, noting with concern in this regard the remaining gap between the commitment
and delivery on Goal 8, and stressing that more needs to be done to achieve the Goals by 2015,
Noting the important role that partnerships with a broad range of actors, including national Governments, local
authorities, international institutions, business, civil society organizations, foundations, philanthropists and social
impact investors, scientists and academics, and individuals, play in development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “A life of dignity for all: accelerating progress
towards the Millennium Development Goals and advancing the United Nations development agenda beyond
2015”,193
_______________
190

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
191
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
192
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
193
A/68/202 and Corr.1.

111

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Acknowledging the efforts made by Member States to finance and strengthen their health systems, supported
by international cooperation, to achieve health goals, to make progress towards universal access to health services
and to address health challenges, including communicable and non-communicable diseases, as well as their
underlying determinants, which are associated with social, economic and environmental conditions,
Acknowledging also that the promotion of health equity is essential to sustainable development and to a better
quality of life and well-being for all, which, in turn, can contribute to peace and security, and that health equity is a
shared goal and responsibility and requires the engagement of all sectors of government, all segments of society and
all members of the international community,
Recognizing the link between moving towards universal health coverage and many other foreign policy issues,
such as the social dimension of globalization, cohesion and stability, inclusive and equitable growth and sustainable
development and sustainability of national financing mechanisms in this regard,
Underscoring the need for partnerships for global health to ensure the promotion of effective implementation
of universal health coverage on the basis of solidarity, at the national and international levels,
Underscoring also the need for far-reaching partnerships for global health to support the promotion of, inter
alia, gender equality and women’s empowerment, sexual and reproductive health and women’s and girls’ full
enjoyment of all their human rights, so as to contribute to the eradication of poverty and to economic and social
development, including improved health outcomes,
Noting the role of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative in promoting synergy between foreign
policy and global health, as well as the contribution of the Oslo Ministerial Declaration of 20 March 2007, entitled
“Global health: a pressing foreign policy issue of our time”,194 which was reaffirmed, with renewed actions and
commitments, by the ministerial communiqué of 23 September 2013,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Director
General of the World Health Organization on global health and foreign policy;195
2. Reiterates the call for more attention to health as an important cross-cutting policy issue on the
international agenda, as it is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of all three dimensions of sustainable
development, and for recognition that global health challenges require concerted and sustained efforts;
3.

Urges Member States to continue to consider health issues in the formulation of foreign policy;

4. Calls for enhanced partnerships by Member States and other relevant stakeholders, from the public and
private sectors, including civil society and academia, to improve health for all, in particular by supporting the
development of sustainable and comprehensive health systems, ensuring universal access to quality health services,
fostering innovation to develop to meet current and future health needs and promoting health throughout the life
course;
5. Emphasizes that partnerships for global health should be guided by the principles of national ownership,
focus on results and effectiveness, transparency, shared responsibility, mutual accountability, inclusiveness and
sustainability;
6. Calls upon Member States to promote and strengthen, as appropriate, their dialogue with the private
sector, as well as with civil society actors and academia, in order to maximize their engagement and contribution to
solving global health challenges, while at the same time safeguarding public health interests from undue influence
by any form of real, perceived or potential conflict of interest, through the management of risk, the strengthening of
due diligence and accountability and the increasing of the transparency of engagement;
7. Reaffirms the role of the World Health Organization as the directing and coordinating authority on
international health work, in accordance with its constitution, and notes the ongoing discussion on partnerships and
engagement with non-State actors in the context of the World Health Organization reform;
_______________
194
195

112

A/63/591, annex.
A/68/394.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Encourages Member States and partnerships for global health to consider health in a holistic manner, to
adopt a multisectoral approach, to act on economic, social and environmental determinants in the final push towards
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and to pave the way towards the post-2015 development
agenda;
9. Urges Member States to honour their commitments towards agreed health targets and goals and to
sustain and accelerate efforts towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, particularly the
health-related Goals, noting in particular the relevance of, inter alia, the 2011 Political Declaration on HIV and
AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS,188 the 2011 political declaration of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,189 the Programme
of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, adopted in Cairo in September 1994,190
the key actions for the further implementation of the Programme of Action191 and the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action;192
10. Also urges Member States to honour the commitments made in the initiative of the Secretary-General on
saving 4.6 million children and mothers in 1,000 days;
11. Encourages Member States and all stakeholders to give appropriate consideration to the importance of
health issues in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda and due consideration, in particular, to
universal health coverage, the health-related Millennium Development Goals and non-communicable diseases;
12. Calls upon partnerships for global health to support Member States in carrying out their responsibilities
to accelerate the transition towards universal health coverage, which implies that all people have access, without
discrimination, to nationally determined sets of the promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative
basic health services needed and essential, safe, affordable, effective and quality medicines, especially through the
promotion of primary health care, while ensuring that the use of these services does not expose the users to financial
hardship, with a specific emphasis on the poor, vulnerable and marginalized segments of the population;
13. Encourages Member States to strengthen and improve the quality of health systems, which requires the
enhancement of, inter alia, health financing, health workforces, access to medicines and vaccines, including
procurement, distribution and availability, infrastructure, information systems, service delivery and political will in
leadership and governance, and to promote equity, and also encourages partnerships for global health to enhance
their support for Member States in this regard;
14. Encourages Member States and relevant stakeholders to consider voluntary innovative financing
mechanisms as a positive contribution to assist developing countries in mobilizing additional resources for health
development on a sustainable, predictable and voluntary basis, and emphasizes that such financing should
supplement and not be a substitute for traditional sources of financing;
15. Encourages Member States to strengthen, as appropriate, mutually beneficial partnerships in research
and development on health and to facilitate the development of pharmaceuticals, diagnostics and vaccines, medical
services and medical devices, as well as other health-related technology and innovation;
16. Also encourages Member States to promote partnerships for capacity-building in the national regulation
of pharmaceuticals and commodities, quality control and supply chain management and, where relevant, to enhance
the capacity for national and regional production, especially for essential medicines and equipment;
17. Recognizes the importance of fostering North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation in
showcasing initiatives, exchanging experiences and best practices and building capacity on health, in particular to
facilitate the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms for integrated action on health inequities, in line with
national priorities;
18. Calls for the strengthening of the global partnership for development, with an inclusive and peoplecentred development agenda, to reinforce the commitments of the international community to poverty eradication
and sustainable development, while taking into account the fact that challenges in global health still remain and
demand persistent attention;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the Director General of the World Health
Organization and with relevant institutions, to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, under the
item entitled “Global health and foreign policy”, a report on partnerships for global health that assesses and
113

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

addresses global health governance and the interlinkages between health and all determinants, including social,
economic and environmental determinants, and presents recommendations for action to be taken by relevant
stakeholders to achieve improved global health governance, taking into account, in particular, human rights, good
governance, mutual respect, equity, sustainability, solidarity, shared responsibilities of international community and
a people-centred approach.
RESOLUTION 68/99
A/RES/689/9

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.21 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Chile,
China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

68/99.

Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 45/190 of 21 December 1990, 46/150 of 18 December 1991, 47/165 of
18 December 1992, 48/206 of 21 December 1993, 50/134 of 20 December 1995, 52/172 of 16 December 1997,
54/97 of 8 December 1999, 56/109 of 14 December 2001, 58/119 of 17 December 2003, 60/14 of 14 November
2005, 62/9 of 20 November 2007 and 65/131 of 15 December 2010, as well as its resolution 55/171 of
14 December 2000 on closure of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, and taking note of the decisions adopted by the
organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system in the implementation of those resolutions,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1990/50 of 13 July 1990, 1991/51 of 26 July 1991 and
1992/38 of 30 July 1992 and Council decision 1993/232 of 22 July 1993,
Conscious of the long-term nature of the consequences of the disaster at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant,
which was a major technological catastrophe in terms of its scope and complexity and created humanitarian,
environmental, social, economic and health consequences and problems of common concern, requiring for their
solution wide and active international cooperation and coordination of efforts in this field at the international and
national levels,
Expressing profound concern at the ongoing effects of the consequences of the accident on the lives and health
of people, in particular children, in the affected areas of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine, as well as in
other affected countries,
Noting the consensus reached among members of the Chernobyl Forum on the environmental, health and
socioeconomic effects of the Chernobyl disaster, in particular in providing a message of reassurance and practical
advice to communities living in territories affected by the Chernobyl disaster,
Acknowledging the importance of the national efforts being undertaken by the Governments of Belarus, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine to mitigate and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster,
Recognizing the contribution of civil society organizations, including the national Red Cross Societies of
Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, in response to the Chernobyl disaster and in support of the efforts of the affected countries,
Welcoming with appreciation the developmental approach to tackling the problems caused by the Chernobyl
disaster aimed at normalizing the situation of the individuals and communities concerned in the medium and long term,
Stressing the exceptional Chernobyl-related needs, in particular in the areas of health, environment and
research, in the context of the transition from the emergency to the recovery phase of mitigation of the consequences
of the Chernobyl disaster,
Noting the coordinating role for Chernobyl issues of the United Nations Development Programme,
114

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming with appreciation the progress of engineering projects in transforming the damaged reactor site
into a stable and environmentally safe condition, noting in particular that the design and construction of a new, safe
confinement for the reactor will require significant funds to complete,
Stressing the need for further coordination by the United Nations Development Programme and improved
resource mobilization by the United Nations system to support the activities aimed at the recovery of Chernobylaffected territories, inter alia, community-based development projects, support to investment promotion and the
creation of new jobs and small businesses, advocacy work and the provision of relevant policy advice as requested,
and the widest possible dissemination of the findings of the Chernobyl Forum through the International Chernobyl
Research and Information Network,
Emphasizing the significance of the upcoming thirtieth anniversary of the accident for developing approaches
to the organization of further international cooperation on Chernobyl after 2016,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of resolution 65/131,196 as
well as relevant parts of the reports of the agencies and organizations of the United Nations system,
1. Welcomes the contribution made by States and by organizations of the United Nations system to the
development of cooperation to mitigate and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, the activities of
regional and other organizations and those of non-governmental organizations, as well as bilateral activities;
2. Notes with appreciation the efforts undertaken by the agencies of the United Nations system and other
international organizations that are members of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Chernobyl to continue
implementing a developmental approach to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster, in particular through the development of specific projects, and stresses the need for the Inter-Agency Task
Force to continue its activities to that end, including through coordinating efforts in the field of resource
mobilization;
3. Acknowledges the difficulties faced by the most affected countries in minimizing the consequences of
the Chernobyl disaster, and invites States, in particular donor States, and all relevant agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as non-governmental
organizations, to continue to provide support to the ongoing efforts of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine
to mitigate the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, including through the allocation of adequate funds to
support medical, social, economic and environmental programmes related to the disaster;
4. Reaffirms that the United Nations should continue to play an important catalytic and coordinating role in
the strengthening of international cooperation to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations Coordinator of International Cooperation on
Chernobyl, in her capacity as Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and as Chair of the
United Nations Development Group, to continue to take appropriate practical measures to strengthen coordination
of the international efforts in that area;
6. Welcomes the efforts of the Government of Ukraine and inputs and contributions made by the States,
international organizations and financial institutions that participated in the Chernobyl pledging conference to
complete the construction of the shelter facility and related nuclear safety projects at Chernobyl, in accordance with
international standards, so as to transform the site into a stable and environmentally safe condition, and urges all
parties to ensure that a strong, long-standing, high-level commitment remains in place to ensure the successful
completion of this vital work;
7. Also welcomes the activities of the United Nations Development Programme Goodwill Ambassador, star
tennis player Ms. Maria Sharapova, who serves as an advocate for post-Chernobyl recovery efforts, and praises her
personal commitment in supporting a number of recovery projects that aid local communities in Belarus, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine;
_______________
196

A/68/498.

115

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Notes with satisfaction the completion of the Cooperation for Rehabilitation Programme in Belarus and
the Chernobyl Recovery and Development Programme in Ukraine, aimed at promoting better living conditions in
and the sustainable development of the affected territories;
9. Welcomes the results of a three-year project implemented by the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Population Fund aimed at enhancing
human well-being and safety in the Chernobyl-affected areas and the area-based development project in the
Chernobyl-affected areas in Belarus, as well as the nationwide extension of the area-based development approach
that was piloted in the Chernobyl-affected region of Ukraine;
10. Notes with satisfaction assistance rendered by the International Atomic Energy Agency to Belarus, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine on remediation of agricultural and urban environments, cost-effective agricultural
countermeasures and the monitoring of human exposure in areas affected by the Chernobyl disaster;
11. Also notes with satisfaction the progress made by the Governments of the affected countries in
implementing national strategies to mitigate the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, calls upon United Nations
agencies and multilateral and bilateral donors to continue to align their assistance with the priorities of the national
strategies of the affected States, and stresses the importance of working together on their implementation in a
common effort in the spirit of cooperation;
12. Welcomes the achievements of the International Chernobyl Research and Information Network, aimed at
providing scientific information on the consequences of the accident, with practical advice for local communities in
the affected territories of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine through dissemination of the findings of the
Chernobyl Forum, including by providing accurate information on the impact of radiation in accessible, nontechnical language in the form of practical messages on healthy and productive lifestyles to the populations affected
by the accident in order to empower them to maximize social and economic recovery and sustainable development
in all its aspects;
13. Stresses the importance of the full implementation of the third decade after the Chernobyl disaster,
2006–2016, the Decade of Recovery and Sustainable Development of the Affected Regions, proclaimed in its
resolution 62/9, which is focused on achieving the goal of a return to normal life for the affected communities as far
as is possible within this time frame;
14. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to coordinate, within existing resources, the
efforts of the United Nations system and with other relevant actors on the implementation of the Decade and to keep
post-Chernobyl recovery issues high on the inter-agency and international agendas;
15. Welcomes with appreciation the participation and input of the international community at the
international conference entitled “25 Years after the Chernobyl Disaster: Safety for the Future”, held from 20 to
22 April 2011 in Kyiv, initiated by Ukraine and co-sponsored by Belarus and the Russian Federation;
16. Notes the international high-level representation at the Kyiv Summit on the Safe and Innovative Use of
Nuclear Energy, held on 19 April 2011 and initiated by the Government of Ukraine;
17. Welcomes the initiatives of the Governments of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine to host
international events to mark the thirtieth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident, and invites organizations of the
United Nations system, donor countries and other development agencies to contribute to their effective realization;
18. Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system to actively engage in and fund, within existing resources, the preparations for these events;
19. Encourages Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, major groups, the
private sector and other donors to contribute to the relevant preparatory processes;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, as appropriate, the full involvement of resident coordinators
and country teams in Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine in preparations for the above-mentioned events;
21. Requests the President of the General Assembly to convene, on 26 April 2016, a special commemorative
meeting of the Assembly in observance of the thirtieth anniversary of the Chernobyl catastrophe;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions and, through existing coordination mechanisms, in particular the United Nations Coordinator
116

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of International Cooperation on Chernobyl, to continue to maintain close cooperation and to lead the dialogue with
the agencies of the United Nations system and Member States on the future of inter-agency cooperation on the
Chernobyl disaster, as well as with regional and other relevant organizations, while implementing specific
Chernobyl-related programmes and projects;
23. Requests the United Nations Coordinator of International Cooperation on Chernobyl to organize, within
existing resources, in collaboration with the Governments of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine,
organizations of the United Nations system, donor countries and other development agencies, a review of progress
made during the Decade, as well as to consider further approaches to international cooperation on Chernobyl, and
welcomes in this context the generous proposal of Belarus to host the relevant event in 2014;
24. Also requests the United Nations Coordinator of International Cooperation on Chernobyl to continue to
collect, document and disseminate all experiences and lessons learned from tackling the human consequences of the
Chernobyl nuclear accident for application and replication in other nuclear disaster situations and to fully utilize
those experiences in the areas of disaster risk reduction, preparedness, response and recovery worldwide;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, under a
separate sub-item, a report containing a comprehensive assessment of the implementation of all aspects of the
present resolution and, in particular, of the action plan on Chernobyl to 2016.
RESOLUTION 68/100
A/RES/681/00

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.22 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine

68/100. Assistance to the Palestinian people
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/86 of 13 December 2012, as well as its previous resolutions on the question,
Recalling also the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements in
Washington, D.C., on 13 September 1993, by the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, 197 and the subsequent implementation agreements
concluded by the two sides,
Recalling further all relevant international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, and, in
particular, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,198 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,198 the Convention on the Rights of the Child199 and the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,200
Gravely concerned at the difficult living conditions and humanitarian situation affecting the Palestinian
people, in particular women and children, throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
Conscious of the urgent need for improvement in the economic and social infrastructure of the occupied
territory,
Welcoming, in this context, the development of projects, notably on infrastructure, to revive the Palestinian
economy and improve the living conditions of the Palestinian people, stressing the need to create the appropriate
conditions to facilitate the implementation of these projects, and noting the contribution of partners in the region and
of the international community,
_______________
197

A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
199
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
200
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
198

117

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Aware that development is difficult under occupation and is best promoted in circumstances of peace and
stability,
Noting the great economic and social challenges facing the Palestinian people and their leadership,
Emphasizing the importance of the safety and well-being of all people, in particular women and children, in
the whole Middle East region, the promotion of which is facilitated, inter alia, in a stable and secure environment,
Deeply concerned about the negative impact, including the health and psychological consequences, of
violence on the present and future well-being of children in the region,
Conscious of the urgent necessity for international assistance to the Palestinian people, taking into account the
Palestinian priorities,
Expressing grave concern about the humanitarian situation in Gaza, and underlining the importance of
emergency and humanitarian assistance,
Welcoming the results of the Conference to Support Middle East Peace, convened in Washington, D.C., on
1 October 1993, the establishment of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians and the work being done by the World Bank as its secretariat and the establishment of the
Consultative Group, as well as all follow-up meetings and international mechanisms established to provide
assistance to the Palestinian people,
Underlining the importance of the International Conference in Support of the Palestinian Economy for the
Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009, in addressing the immediate
humanitarian situation in Gaza and in mobilizing donors to provide financial and political support for the Palestinian
Authority in order to alleviate the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation being faced by the Palestinian people,
Recalling the International Donors’ Conference for the Palestinian State, held in Paris on 17 December 2007,
the Berlin Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil Security and the Rule of Law, held on 24 June 2008, and the
Palestine Investment Conferences, held in Bethlehem from 21 to 23 May 2008 and on 2 and 3 June 2010,
Welcoming the latest meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, held in Brussels on 19 March 2013 and in New York on 25 September 2013,
Welcoming also the activities of the Joint Liaison Committee, which provides a forum in which economic
policy and practical matters related to donor assistance are discussed with the Palestinian Authority,
Welcoming further the implementation of the Palestinian National Development Plan 2011–2013 on
governance, economy, social development and infrastructure, and stressing the need for continued international
support for the Palestinian State-building process, as outlined in the summary by the Chair of the meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee held on 25 September 2013,
Stressing the need for the full engagement of the United Nations in the process of building Palestinian
institutions and in providing broad assistance to the Palestinian people,
Welcoming recent steps to ease the restrictions on movement and access in the West Bank, while stressing the
need for further steps to be taken in this regard, and recognizing that such steps would improve living conditions and
the situation on the ground and could promote further Palestinian economic development,
Acknowledging the measures announced by Israel regarding access to the Gaza Strip, while calling for full
implementation and complementary measures that address the need for a fundamental change in policy that allows
for the sustained and regular opening of the border crossings for the movement of persons and goods, including for
the reconstruction and economic recovery of Gaza,
Welcoming the action of the Special Representative of the Quartet, Mr. Tony Blair, charged with developing,
with the Government of the Palestinian Authority, a multi-year agenda to strengthen institutions, promote economic
development and mobilize international funds,
Stressing the urgency of reaching a durable solution to the crisis in Gaza through the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
118

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Stressing also the importance of the regular opening of the crossings for the movement of persons and goods,
for both humanitarian and commercial flows,
Noting the active participation of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority in the activities of the Special Envoys of the Quartet,
Welcoming the endorsement by the Security Council, in resolution 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003, of the
performance-based road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,201 and stressing
the need for its implementation and compliance with its provisions,
Commending the efforts within the Quartet made by the United States of America, the European Union, the
United Nations and the Russian Federation in pursuing vigorously a two-State solution, noting the commitment of
the Quartet to remain actively involved and the need for strong international support to promote the peace process,
and calling for the resumption and acceleration of negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian sides towards a
comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions and the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, in order to ensure a political solution, with two States – Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable Palestinian State – living side by side in peace and security,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,202
Expressing grave concern about continuing violence against civilians,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;202

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his rapid response and efforts regarding
assistance to the Palestinian people;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Member States, United Nations bodies and intergovernmental,
regional and non-governmental organizations that have provided and continue to provide assistance to the
Palestinian people;
4. Stresses the importance of the work of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Palestinian Authority and of the steps taken under the auspices of the Secretary-General to ensure the
achievement of a coordinated mechanism for United Nations activities throughout the occupied territories;
5. Urges Member States, international financial institutions of the United Nations system,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and regional and interregional organizations to extend, as
rapidly and as generously as possible, economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people, in close cooperation
with the Palestine Liberation Organization and through official Palestinian institutions;
6. Welcomes, in this regard, the meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians of 19 March and 25 September 2013, and recalls the outcome of the
International Conference in Support of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009, at which donors pledged approximately 4.5 billion United States dollars to
support the needs of the Palestinian people;
7. Recalls the International Donors’ Conference for the Palestinian State, held in Paris on 17 December
2007, the Berlin Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil Security and the Rule of Law, held on 24 June 2008,
and the Palestine Investment Conferences, held in Bethlehem from 21 to 23 May 2008 and on 2 and 3 June 2010;
8. Stresses the importance of following up on the results of the International Conference in Support of the
Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza;
9. Calls upon donors that have not yet converted their budget support pledges into disbursements to
transfer funds as soon as possible, encourages all donors to increase their direct assistance to the Palestinian
_______________
201
202

S/2003/529, annex.
A/68/76-E/2013/65.

119

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Authority in accordance with its government programme in order to enable it to build a viable and prosperous
Palestinian State, underlines the need for equitable burden-sharing by donors in this effort, and encourages donors to
consider aligning funding cycles with the Palestinian Authority’s national budget cycle;
10. Calls upon relevant organizations and agencies of the United Nations system to intensify their assistance in
response to the urgent needs of the Palestinian people in accordance with priorities set forth by the Palestinian side;
11. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, and recognizes the vital role of the Agency in providing humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip;
12. Calls upon the international community to provide urgently needed assistance and services in an effort
to alleviate the difficult humanitarian situation being faced by Palestinian women, children and their families and to
help in the reconstruction and development of relevant Palestinian institutions;
13. Stresses the role that all funding instruments, including the European Commission’s PalestinianEuropean Mechanism for the Management of Socioeconomic Aid and the World Bank trust fund, have been
playing in directly assisting the Palestinian people;
14. Urges Member States to open their markets to exports of Palestinian products on the most favourable
terms, consistent with appropriate trading rules, and to implement fully existing trade and cooperation agreements;
15. Calls upon the international donor community to expedite the delivery of pledged assistance to the
Palestinian people to meet their urgent needs;
16. Stresses, in this context, the importance of ensuring free humanitarian access to the Palestinian people
and the free movement of persons and goods;
17. Also stresses the need for the full implementation by both parties of the Agreement on Movement and
Access and of the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, of 15 November 2005, to allow for the freedom of
movement of the Palestinian civilian population, as well as for imports and exports, within and into and out of the
Gaza Strip;
18. Further stresses the need to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel, premises,
facilities, equipment, vehicles and supplies, as well as the need to ensure safe and unhindered access by
humanitarian personnel and the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow such personnel to efficiently
perform their task of assisting affected civilian populations;
19. Urges the international donor community, United Nations agencies and organizations and nongovernmental organizations to extend to the Palestinian people, as rapidly as possible, emergency economic
assistance and humanitarian assistance, particularly in the Gaza Strip, to counter the impact of the current crisis;
20. Stresses the need for the continued implementation of the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations of
29 April 1994, fifth annex to the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, signed
in Washington, D.C., on 28 September 1995,203 including with regard to the full, prompt and regular transfer of
Palestinian indirect tax revenues;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the present resolution, containing:
(a)

An assessment of the assistance actually received by the Palestinian people;

(b)

An assessment of the needs still unmet and specific proposals for responding effectively to them;

22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including
special economic assistance”, the sub-item entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
_______________
203

120

A/51/889-S/1997/357, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/101
A/RES/681/01

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.24 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay

68/101. Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 on the strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian emergency assistance of the United Nations,
Recalling all relevant resolutions on safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel, including its resolution 67/85 of 13 December 2012, as well as Security Council resolution
1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003 and relevant statements by the President of the Council,
Recalling also all Security Council resolutions and presidential statements and reports of the SecretaryGeneral to the Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
Reaffirming the principles, rules and relevant provisions of international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as all relevant treaties,204 and the need to further promote and
ensure respect thereof,
Deeply concerned by the continuous erosion, in many cases, of respect for the principles and rules of
international law, in particular international humanitarian law,
Reaffirming the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of
humanitarian assistance,
Recalling that primary responsibility under international law for the security and protection of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel lies with the Government hosting a United Nations
operation conducted under the Charter of the United Nations or its agreements with relevant organizations,
Expressing its appreciation to those Governments which respect the internationally agreed principles on the
protection of humanitarian and United Nations personnel, while expressing concern over the lack of respect for
these principles in some areas,
Urging all parties involved in armed conflicts, in compliance with international humanitarian law, in particular
their obligations under the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949205 and the obligations applicable to them under
the Additional Protocols thereto of 8 June 1977, 206 to ensure the security and protection of all humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
Welcoming the fact that the number of States parties to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel,207 which entered into force on 15 January 1999, has continued to rise, the number now
having reached 91, mindful of the need to promote the universality of the Convention, and welcoming the entry into
_______________
204

These include, notably, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations of 13 February 1946, the Convention
on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies of 21 November 1947, the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 9 December 1994, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel of 8 December 2005, the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949
and the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of 8 June 1977, and Amended Protocol II of 3 May 1996 to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects of 10 October 1980, as applicable.
205
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
206
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
207
Ibid., vol. 2051, No. 35457.

121

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

force on 19 August 2010 of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel,208 which expands the scope of legal protection under the Convention,
Deeply concerned by the dangers and safety and security risks faced by humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel at the field level, as they operate in increasingly complex contexts,
Stressing the need to uphold the respect and protection which the flag of the United Nations and the nature of
humanitarian work should command and ensure, and stressing the importance of fully respecting the obligations
relating to the use of vehicles and premises of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel
as defined by relevant international instruments, as well as the obligations relating to distinctive emblems
recognized in the Geneva Conventions,
Commending the courage and commitment of those who take part in humanitarian operations, often at great
personal risk, especially locally recruited staff,
Noting that in 2012, 1,793 persons, representing 1.2 per cent of the United Nations system personnel, were
affected by significant security incidents,209 and gravely concerned by the continued increase in the number of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel affected by safety and security incidents,
including the continued sharp increase in abductions in 2012 and the first six months of 2013,210
Expressing profound regret at the deaths of and violent acts against international and national United Nations
and associated personnel involved in the provision of humanitarian assistance and against personnel of humanitarian
organizations and medical personnel performing humanitarian tasks, and strongly deploring the deliberate targeting
of, and casualties among, such personnel in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed conflicts and
in post-conflict situations,
Expressing deep concern at the deep and long-lasting impacts of attacks and threats against humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
Strongly condemning acts of murder and other forms of violence, rape and sexual assault and all forms of
violence committed in particular against women and children, and intimidation, armed robbery, abduction, hostagetaking, kidnapping, harassment and illegal arrest and detention to which those participating in humanitarian
operations are exposed, as well as attacks on humanitarian convoys and acts of destruction and looting of property,
Expressing deep concern that the occurrence of attacks and threats against humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel is a factor that increasingly restricts the provision of assistance and protection to
populations in need, and commending the commitment of the United Nations and other humanitarian personnel to
stay and deliver the most critical programmes, even in dangerous environments,
Affirming the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of attacks committed on their territory against
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and against their premises or assets do not
operate with impunity, and that the perpetrators of such acts are brought to justice, as provided for by national laws
and obligations under international law,
Recalling the inclusion of attacks intentionally directed against personnel involved in a humanitarian
assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter, as long as they are entitled to the protection
given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict, as a war crime in the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court,211 and noting the role that the Court can play in appropriate cases in
bringing to justice those responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law,
Reaffirming the need to ensure adequate levels of safety and security for United Nations personnel and
associated humanitarian personnel, including locally recruited staff, which constitutes an underlying duty of the
Organization, and mindful of the need to promote and enhance security consciousness within the organizational
culture of the United Nations and a culture of accountability at all levels, as well as to continue to promote
awareness of and sensitivity to national and local cultures and laws,
_______________
208

Resolution 60/42, annex.
A/68/489, para. 10.
210
Ibid., paras. 15 and 16.
211
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
209

122

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Gravely concerned at the high number of accidents and resulting casualties among United Nations and
associated personnel, and conscious of the importance of road safety and aviation safety in ensuring the continuity
of United Nations humanitarian operations and preventing casualties among civilians and United Nations and
associated personnel, and in this regard regretting the loss of civilian life as a result of such incidents,
Stressing that acceptance of United Nations and associated personnel by the host Governments, local
authorities and populations contributes to their safety and security,
Noting the importance of reinforcing close collaboration between the United Nations and the host country on
contingency planning, information exchange and risk assessment in the context of good mutual cooperation on
issues relating to the security of United Nations and associated personnel,
Noting also that the effective functioning of the United Nations security management system requires, among
other elements, adequate and predictable resources and the timely deployment of security personnel with
appropriate skills and field experience and the equipment necessary for the performance of their duties, including
vehicles and telecommunications equipment, which have an essential role in facilitating the safety of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;212

2. Urges all States to make every effort to ensure the full and effective implementation of the relevant
principles and rules of international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights law and refugee
law as applicable, related to the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel;
3. Strongly urges all States to take the measures necessary to ensure the safety and security of national and
international humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and to respect and ensure respect
for the inviolability of United Nations premises, which are essential to the continuation and successful
implementation of United Nations operations;
4. Calls upon all Governments and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed
conflicts and in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel and the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow those personnel to perform efficiently their
task of assisting the affected civilian population, including refugees and internally displaced persons;
5. Calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to and to respect fully their obligations under the
relevant international instruments;
6.
Court;211

Also calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal

7. Further calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,208 and urges States parties to put in place appropriate
national legislation, as necessary, to enable its effective implementation;
8. Calls upon all States, all parties involved in armed conflict and all humanitarian actors to respect the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of humanitarian assistance;
9. Expresses deep concern over the continued increase in threats to and deliberate targeting of and the
disturbing trend of politically or criminally motivated attacks against the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel;
10. Welcomes the contribution of female United Nations and associated personnel in United Nations
humanitarian operations, expresses concern that in some cases these personnel are relatively more exposed to
certain forms of crime and acts of intimidation and harassment, and strongly urges the United Nations system and
Member States to take appropriate and gender-sensitive action for their safety and security;
_______________
212

A/68/489.

123

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Strongly condemns all threats and acts of violence against humanitarian personnel and United Nations
and associated personnel, reaffirms the need to hold accountable those responsible for such acts, strongly urges all
States to take stronger action to ensure that any such acts committed on their territory are investigated fully and to
ensure that the perpetrators of such acts are brought to justice in accordance with national laws and obligations
under international law, and urges States to end impunity for such acts;
12. Stresses the importance of continued close coordination and consultation with host Governments on the
functioning of the security level system and related tools, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to
continue to consult with the host Governments;
13. Calls upon all States to comply fully with their obligations under international humanitarian law,
including as provided by the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949,213 in order to respect and protect civilians, including humanitarian personnel, in territories subject
to their jurisdiction;
14. Stresses the obligation, in accordance with international humanitarian law and national laws and regulations
as applicable, to respect and protect medical personnel, as well as humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties, their means of transport and equipment and hospitals and other medical facilities, in all circumstances;
15. Calls upon all States to provide adequate and prompt information in the event of the arrest or detention
of humanitarian personnel or United Nations and associated personnel so as to afford them the necessary medical
assistance, to allow independent medical teams to visit and examine the health of those detained and to ensure their
right to legal counsel, and urges States to take the measures necessary to ensure the speedy release of those who
have been arrested or detained in violation of the relevant conventions referred to in the present resolution and
applicable international humanitarian law;
16. Calls upon all other parties involved in armed conflict to refrain from abducting, taking hostage or
kidnapping humanitarian personnel or United Nations and associated personnel or detaining them in violation of the
relevant conventions referred to in the present resolution and applicable international humanitarian law, and speedily
to release, without harm or requirement of concession, any abductee or detainee;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary to promote full respect for the human
rights, privileges and immunities of United Nations and other personnel carrying out activities in fulfilment of the
mandate of a United Nations operation, and also requests the Secretary-General to seek the inclusion, in negotiations
of headquarters and other mission agreements concerning United Nations and associated personnel, of the
applicable conditions contained in the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations,214 the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies215 and the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel;207
18. Recommends that the Secretary-General continue to seek the inclusion of, and that host countries
include, key provisions of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel, among others,
those regarding the prevention of attacks against members of the operation, the establishment of such attacks as
crimes punishable by law and the prosecution or extradition of offenders, in future as well as, if necessary, in
existing status-of-forces, status-of-mission, host country and other related agreements negotiated between the United
Nations and those countries, mindful of the importance of the timely conclusion of such agreements, and
encourages further efforts in this regard;
19. Reaffirms the obligation of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel to
respect and, where required, observe the national laws of the country in which they are operating, in accordance
with international law and the Charter of the United Nations;
20. Stresses the importance of ensuring that humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel are aware of and sensitive to national and local customs and traditions in their countries of assignment and
communicate clearly their purpose and objectives to local populations in order to enhance their acceptance, thereby
contributing to their safety and security;
_______________
213

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
Resolution 22 A (I).
215
Resolution 179 (II).
214

124

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the measures necessary to ensure that United Nations
and other personnel carrying out activities in fulfilment of the mandate of a United Nations operation are properly
informed about and operate in conformity with the minimum operating security standards and relevant codes of
conduct and are properly informed about the conditions under which they are called upon to operate and the
standards that they are required to meet, including those contained in relevant national laws and international law,
and that adequate training in security, human rights law and international humanitarian law is provided so as to
enhance their security and effectiveness in accomplishing their functions, and reaffirms the necessity for all other
humanitarian organizations to provide their personnel with similar support;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in coordination with Member States, to take the
measures necessary to ensure that all United Nations premises and assets, including staff residences, are compliant
with the United Nations minimum operating security standards and other relevant United Nations security
standards, and to continue the ongoing assessment of the United Nations premises and physical security worldwide;
23. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure that all United Nations personnel
receive adequate safety and security training, stresses the need to continue to improve training so as to enhance
cultural awareness and knowledge of relevant law, including international humanitarian law, prior to their
deployment to the field, and reaffirms the necessity for all other humanitarian organizations to provide their
personnel with similar support;
24. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to provide counselling and support services to United
Nations personnel affected by safety and security incidents, and emphasizes the importance of making available
stress management, mental health and related services for United Nations personnel throughout the system, and
encourages all humanitarian organizations to provide their personnel with similar support;
25. Notes with appreciation the ongoing measures taken by the Secretary-General and the United Nations
system to enhance road safety, including through improved training and initiatives to promote road safety so as to
reduce incidents caused by road hazards and, in particular, to reduce casualties or injuries resulting from these
incidents among United Nations and humanitarian personnel and among the civilian population of the host country,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue the collection and analysis of data and to report on road incidents,
including civilian casualties resulting from road accidents;
26. Welcomes the progress made towards further enhancing the security management system of the United
Nations, and supports the good practice known as “stay and deliver”, while focusing on effectively managing the
risks to which personnel are exposed in order to enable the United Nations system to deliver the most critical
programmes, even in high-risk environments;
27. Urges the United Nations and other relevant humanitarian actors to include as part of their riskmanagement strategy the building of good relations and trust with national and local governments and the
promotion of acceptance by local communities and all relevant actors;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to develop enabling procedures that facilitate the
deployment of suitably qualified United Nations security personnel, with the aim of improving the safety and
security measures of the United Nations, in order to strengthen the ability of the United Nations to deliver on its
programmes, mandates and activities, including humanitarian programmes;
29. Requests the Secretary-General, inter alia through the Inter-Agency Security Management Network, to
continue the increased cooperation and collaboration among United Nations departments, organizations, funds and
programmes and affiliated international organizations, including between their headquarters and field offices, in the
planning and implementation of measures aimed at improving staff security, training and awareness, and calls upon
all relevant United Nations departments, organizations, funds and programmes and affiliated international
organizations to support those efforts;
30. Calls upon all relevant actors to make every effort to support in their public statements a favourable
environment for the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel;
31. Emphasizes the need to pay particular attention to the safety and security of locally recruited
humanitarian and United Nations personnel, who account for the large majority of casualties and who are
particularly vulnerable to attacks, including in cases of kidnapping, harassment, banditry and intimidation, requests
the Secretary-General to keep under review the relevant United Nations safety and security policy and to enhance
125

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the safety and security of locally recruited personnel, while maintaining operational effectiveness, and calls upon the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations to ensure that their personnel are adequately consulted on, informed
about and trained in the relevant security measures, plans and initiatives of their respective organizations, which
should be in line with applicable national laws and international law;
32. Notes with appreciation the progress reported in implementing the recommendations of the Independent
Panel on Safety and Security of United Nations Personnel and Premises Worldwide;
33. Requests the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat to further strengthen the analysis of
threats and to continue to improve and implement an effective, modern and flexible information management
capacity in support of analytical and operational requirements, including the ongoing system-wide analysis of best
practices and information on the range and scope of safety and security incidents involving humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and associated personnel, including attacks against them, in order to make objective and
evidence-based decisions on how to reduce the risks arising in the context of United Nations-related operations;
34. Welcomes the work of the Secretary-General in enhancing security collaboration with host
Governments, including efforts to support United Nations designated officials with regard to collaboration with host
Government authorities on staff safety and security;
35. Stresses that the effective functioning at the country level of security operations requires a unified
capacity for policy, standards, coordination, communication, compliance and threat and risk assessment, and notes
the benefits thereof to United Nations and associated personnel, including those achieved by the Department of
Safety and Security since its establishment;
36. Welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-General thus far, and encourages further efforts to enhance
coordination and cooperation, at both the headquarters and field levels, between the United Nations and other
humanitarian and non-governmental organizations on matters relating to the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, with a view to addressing mutual security concerns in the
field on the basis of the “Saving Lives Together” framework as well as other relevant national and local initiatives in
this regard, and in this respect requests the Secretary-General to encourage further collaborative initiatives to address
the security needs of implementing partners, including through enhanced information-sharing and, where
appropriate, training, invites Member States to consider increasing support to those initiatives, and requests the
Secretary-General to report on the steps taken in this regard;
37. Underlines the urgent need to allocate adequate and predictable resources to the safety and security of
United Nations personnel, through regular and extrabudgetary resources, including through the consolidated appeals
process, and encourages all States to contribute to the Trust Fund for Security of Staff Members of the United
Nations System, inter alia, with a view to reinforcing the efforts of the Department of Safety and Security to meet its
mandate and responsibilities to enable the safe delivery of programmes;
38. Also underlines the need for better coordination between the United Nations and host Governments, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, on the use and deployment of
essential equipment required to provide for the safety and security of United Nations personnel and associated
personnel working in the delivery of humanitarian assistance by United Nations organizations;
39. Calls upon States to consider acceding to or ratifying the Tampere Convention on the Provision of
Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations of 18 June 1998,216 which entered into
force on 8 January 2005, and urges them to facilitate and expedite, consistent with their national laws and
international obligations applicable to them, the use of communications equipment in those and other relief
operations, inter alia, by limiting and, whenever possible, expeditiously lifting the restrictions placed on the use of
communications equipment by United Nations and associated personnel;
40. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a
comprehensive and updated report on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel and on the implementation of the present resolution, including an assessment of the development,
implementation and outcomes of policies, strategies and initiatives of the United Nations system in the field of
safety and security.
_______________
216

126

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2296, No. 40906.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/102
A/RES/681/02

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.25 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

68/102. Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 and the guiding principles contained in the annex
thereto, other relevant General Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions and agreed conclusions of
the Council,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations217 and on the Central Emergency Response Fund,218
Reaffirming the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming also the need for all actors engaged in the provision of humanitarian
assistance in situations of complex emergencies and natural disasters to promote and fully respect these principles,
Deeply concerned about global challenges, such as the ongoing adverse impact of the world financial and
economic crisis, the negative impact of the volatile food prices on food security and nutrition and the rapid
urbanization of populations, and about their effect on the increasing vulnerability of populations and impact on the
need for and provision of humanitarian and development assistance,
Emphasizing the need to mobilize adequate, predictable, timely and flexible resources for humanitarian
assistance, based on and in proportion to assessed needs, with a view to ensuring fuller coverage of the needs in all
sectors and across humanitarian emergencies, and recognizing in this regard the achievements of the Central
Emergency Response Fund,
Reiterating the need for Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to
mainstream a gender perspective into humanitarian assistance, including by addressing the specific needs of
women, girls, boys and men in a comprehensive and consistent manner, and to take into account the needs of
affected populations, including persons with disabilities,
Expressing its deep concern about the increasing challenges faced by Member States and the United Nations
humanitarian response system and their capacities as a result of the consequences of natural disasters, including
those related to the continuing impact of climate change, and reaffirming the importance of implementing the
Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters,219
inter alia, by providing adequate resources for disaster risk reduction, including investment in disaster preparedness
and capacity-building, and by working towards building back better in all phases from relief to development,
Recognizing that developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing
States, remain acutely vulnerable to natural hazards and need adequate international cooperation, as appropriate, to
strengthen their resilience in this regard,
Recognizing also that economic growth and sustainable development are essential for the prevention of and
preparedness for natural disasters and other emergencies,
_______________
217

A/68/84-E/2013/77.
A/68/87.
219
A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2.
218

127

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing further that building national and local preparedness and response capacity is critical to a more
predictable and effective response and contributes to the achievement of humanitarian and development objectives,
including enhanced resilience and a reduced need for humanitarian response,
Emphasizing that enhancing international cooperation on emergency humanitarian assistance is essential, and
reaffirming its resolution 67/231 of 21 December 2012 on international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in
the field of natural disasters, from relief to development,
Emphasizing also the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming, in
situations in which military capacity and assets are used as a last resort to support the implementation of
humanitarian assistance, the need for their use to be undertaken with the consent of the affected State and in
conformity with international law, including international humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian principles,
Condemning the increasing number of deliberate threats and violent attacks against humanitarian personnel
and facilities, including medical personnel and facilities, noting with concern the negative implications for the
provision of humanitarian assistance to populations in need, and in this regard welcoming efforts to raise awareness
and promote preparedness to address the grave and serious humanitarian consequences arising from such violence,
Recognizing the high number of people affected by humanitarian emergencies, including the increasing
number of internally displaced persons, of whom a majority are women and children, wherein the national
authorities have the primary duty and responsibility to provide protection and humanitarian assistance to internally
displaced persons within their jurisdiction, bearing in mind their particular needs, and welcoming in this regard the
entry into force and ongoing process of ratification and implementation of the African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, which marks a significant step towards
strengthening the national and regional normative framework for the protection of and assistance to internally
displaced persons in Africa,
Recognizing also the importance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949,220 which include a vital legal framework
for the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, including the provision of humanitarian assistance,
Noting with grave concern that violence, including gender-based violence, particularly sexual violence, and
violence against children, continues to be deliberately directed against civilian populations in many emergency
situations,
Noting with appreciation the efforts that the United Nations continues to make to improve humanitarian
response, including by strengthening humanitarian response capacities, improving humanitarian coordination,
enhancing predictable and adequate funding and strengthening the accountability of all stakeholders, and
recognizing the importance of strengthening emergency administrative procedures and funding to allow for an
effective and needs-based response to emergencies,
Recognizing that, in strengthening the coordination of humanitarian assistance in the field, the organizations of
the United Nations system should continue to consult and work in close coordination with national Governments,
1. Welcomes the outcome of the sixteenth humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and Social
Council at its substantive session of 2013;221
2. Requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue her efforts to strengthen the coordination and
accountability of humanitarian assistance and leadership within the United Nations humanitarian response system,
including through the transformative agenda of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, and calls upon relevant
United Nations organizations and other relevant intergovernmental organizations, as well as other humanitarian and
development actors, to continue to work with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat to enhance the coordination, effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian assistance;
3. Also requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue to improve dialogue with all Member
States on the relevant processes, activities and deliberations of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee;
_______________
220
221

128

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/68/3/Rev.1), chap. IX.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Encourages Member States and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to
improve dialogue and collaboration on humanitarian issues, including on policy, in order to foster a more
consultative and inclusive approach to humanitarian assistance;
5. Welcomes the recent efforts by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to build
partnerships with regional organizations and the private sector, and encourages Member States and the United
Nations system to continue to strengthen partnerships at the global, regional, national and local levels in support of
national efforts in order to effectively cooperate to provide humanitarian assistance to those in need and ensure that
their collaborative efforts adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence;
6. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and humanitarian and development
organizations to continue to assess and improve, together with other relevant stakeholders, including the private
sector, how innovation can be more systematically identified and integrated into humanitarian action in a sustainable
manner and to promote the sharing of best practices and lessons learned on innovative tools, processes and
approaches, including those from large-scale natural disasters, that could improve the effectiveness and quality of
humanitarian response, and in this regard encourages all relevant stakeholders to continue to support the efforts of
Member States, in particular developing countries, to strengthen their capacities, including through facilitating
access to information and communication technologies;
7. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and, as appropriate, other relevant
humanitarian actors to continue efforts to improve the humanitarian response to natural and man-made disasters and
complex emergencies by further strengthening humanitarian response capacities at all levels, by continuing to
strengthen the provision and coordination of humanitarian assistance at the global and field levels, including through
existing cluster coordination mechanisms and in support of national authorities of the affected State, as appropriate,
and by further enhancing efficiency, transparency, performance and accountability;
8. Recognizes the benefits of engagement and coordination with relevant humanitarian actors to the
effectiveness of humanitarian response, and encourages the United Nations to continue to pursue efforts to
strengthen partnerships at the global level with the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, relevant
humanitarian non-governmental organizations and other participants in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue strengthening the support provided to United Nations
resident/humanitarian coordinators and to United Nations country teams, including by providing necessary training,
identifying resources and improving the identification of and the selection process for United Nations
resident/humanitarian coordinators, and enhancing their performance accountability;
10. Calls upon the Chair of the United Nations Development Group and the Emergency Relief Coordinator
to continue enhancing their consultations before presenting final recommendations on the selection process for
resident coordinators in countries likely to require significant humanitarian response operations;
11. Requests the United Nations to continue to identify solutions to strengthen its ability to recruit and
deploy appropriately senior, skilled and experienced humanitarian staff quickly and flexibly, giving paramount
consideration to the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, while paying due regard to gender
equality and to recruiting on as wide a geographical basis as possible, and in this regard encourages the United
Nations Development Group to strengthen the resident coordinator system, on which the humanitarian coordinator
system is based, in order to ensure the full implementation of the management and accountability system of the
Group and the resident coordinator system;
12. Recognizes that accountability is an integral part of effective humanitarian assistance, and emphasizes
the need for enhancing the accountability of humanitarian actors at all stages of humanitarian assistance;
13. Reaffirms the importance of implementing the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the
Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters,219 reiterates the importance of strengthening the effectiveness
of national and local preparedness in line with priority five of the Framework, notes the fourth session of the Global
Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Geneva from 19 to 23 May 2013, and encourages States, the United
Nations system and all stakeholders to continue to engage in the consultations on the successor to the Framework,
culminating at the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, to be held in Sendai, Japan, from 14 to
18 March 2015;
129

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to
continue to build the capacity at all levels of government and within local organizations and communities to better
prepare for hazards and respond to and recover from disasters;
15. Calls upon Member States and the international community to increase and commit adequate, timely,
flexible and predictable resources for disaster risk reduction in order to build resilience, including through
complementary humanitarian and development programming and by further strengthening national and local
capacities to prevent, prepare for and respond to humanitarian emergencies, and furthermore encourages closer
cooperation between national stakeholders and humanitarian and development actors in this regard;
16. Encourages the United Nations system, humanitarian organizations and development organizations to
continue their efforts to mainstream preparedness, early action and early recovery into their programming,
acknowledges that preparedness, early action and early recovery should receive further funding, and in this regard
encourages the provision of timely, flexible, predictable and adequate resources, including from both humanitarian
and development budgets as appropriate;
17. Urges Member States, the United Nations and other relevant organizations to take further steps to
provide a coordinated emergency response to the food and nutrition needs of affected populations, while aiming to
ensure that such steps are supportive of national strategies and programmes aimed at improving food security;
18. Expresses concern about the challenges related to, inter alia, safe access to and use of fuel, firewood,
alternative energy, water and sanitation, shelter and food and health-care services in humanitarian emergencies, and
noting with appreciation initiatives at the national and international levels that promote effective cooperation in this
regard;
19. Encourages the international community, including relevant United Nations organizations and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, to support efforts of Member States aimed at
strengthening their capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters and to support efforts, as appropriate, to
strengthen systems, especially early warning systems, for identifying and monitoring disaster risk, including
vulnerability and natural hazards;
20. Welcomes the growing number of initiatives undertaken at the regional and national levels to promote
the implementation of the Guidelines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster Relief
and Initial Recovery Assistance, encourages Member States and, where applicable, regional organizations to take
further steps to review and strengthen operational and legal frameworks for international disaster relief, taking into
account the Guidelines, as appropriate, and welcomes the recent efforts of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union to develop a model act on the subject;
21. Encourages States to create an enabling environment for the capacity-building of local authorities and of
national and local non-governmental and community-based organizations in order to ensure better preparedness in
providing timely, effective and predictable humanitarian assistance, and encourages the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations to provide support to such efforts, including, as appropriate, through the transfer of
technology and expertise to developing countries and through support to programmes aimed at enhancing the
coordination capacities of affected States;
22. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to provide emergency
assistance in ways that are supportive of recovery and long-term development, where appropriate, including through
prioritizing humanitarian tools that strengthen resilience, such as, but not limited to, cash transfers, local
procurement of food and services and social safety nets;
23. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations organizations to examine their own financing
mechanisms in order to improve, where possible, fast and flexible financing for preparedness, response and the
transition from relief to recovery;
24. Takes note of the efforts of Member States, the United Nations system and the international community
to strengthen preparedness and local, national and regional humanitarian response capacity, and calls upon the
United Nations and relevant partners to continue support in this regard;
130

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25. Encourages efforts to provide education for all, especially for girls and boys, in humanitarian
emergencies, including in order to contribute to a smooth transition from relief to development;
26. Encourages the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to work with Member
States and relevant United Nations entities to facilitate the exchange of updated, accurate and reliable information,
including through mutually comprehensible harmonized data, in order to ensure better assessment of needs and to
improve preparedness and humanitarian response;
27. Calls upon relevant United Nations organizations to support the improvement of the consolidated
appeals process, inter alia, by engaging in the preparation of common needs assessments and common humanitarian
action plans and priorities, including through a better analysis of gender-related allocations, in order to further the
development of the process, including by ensuring a more coordinated, timely and comprehensive overview of the
needs and the common humanitarian action plans in a given emergency, as an instrument for United Nations
strategic planning and prioritization, and by involving other relevant humanitarian organizations in the process,
while reiterating that consolidated appeals should be prepared in consultation with affected States;
28. Requests Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations of the United Nations system and other
relevant humanitarian actors to ensure that all aspects of humanitarian response, including disaster preparedness and
needs assessments, take into account the specific humanitarian needs of all components of the affected population,
in particular girls, boys, women, older persons and persons with disabilities, including in the design and
implementation of disaster risk reduction, humanitarian and recovery programming and, as appropriate, posthumanitarian emergency reconstruction, and in this regard encourages efforts to ensure gender mainstreaming and
emphasizes the importance of full participation of, in particular, women and persons with disabilities in decisionmaking processes related to humanitarian response;
29. Calls upon United Nations humanitarian organizations, in consultation with Member States, as
appropriate, to strengthen the evidence base for humanitarian assistance by further developing common
mechanisms to improve the quality, transparency and reliability of, and make further progress towards, common
humanitarian needs assessments, including through improved collection, analysis and reporting of sex-, age- and
disability-disaggregated data, to assess their performance in assistance and to ensure the most effective use of
humanitarian resources by those organizations;
30. Calls upon the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to enhance accountability to Member
States, including affected States, and all other stakeholders and to further strengthen humanitarian response efforts,
including by monitoring and evaluating the provision of their humanitarian assistance, incorporating lessons learned
into programming and consulting with the affected populations so that their needs are appropriately addressed;
31. Calls upon donors to provide adequate, timely, predictable and flexible resources based on and in
proportion to assessed needs, including for underfunded and forgotten emergencies, to consider providing early and
multi-year commitments to pooled humanitarian funds and to continue to support diverse humanitarian funding
channels, encourages efforts to adhere to the Principles and Good Practice of Humanitarian Donorship222 and to
improve burden-sharing among donors, and in this respect encourages the private sector, civil society and other
relevant entities to make relevant contributions, complementary to those of other sources;
32. Calls upon all Member States that are in a position to do so to increase their voluntary contributions to
humanitarian emergencies, and in this context reiterates that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
should benefit from adequate and more predictable funding;
33. Welcomes the important achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in ensuring a more
timely and predictable response to humanitarian emergencies, stresses the importance of continuing to improve the
functioning of the Fund, and in this regard encourages the United Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies to review and evaluate, where necessary, their partnership policies and practices in order to ensure the
timely disbursement of funds from the Fund to implementing partners in order to ensure that resources are used in
the most efficient, effective, accountable and transparent manner possible;
_______________
222

A/58/99-E/2003/94, annex II.

131

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

34. Calls upon all Member States, and invites the private sector and all concerned individuals and
institutions, to consider increasing their voluntary contributions to the Central Emergency Response Fund, and
emphasizes that contributions should be additional to current commitments to humanitarian programming and
should not be to the detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for development;
35. Encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations humanitarian organizations, to
ensure that the basic humanitarian needs of affected populations, including food, shelter, health, clean water and
protection, are addressed as components of humanitarian response, including through providing timely and adequate
resources, while ensuring that their collaborative efforts fully adhere to humanitarian principles;
36. Reaffirms the obligation of all States and parties to an armed conflict to protect civilians in armed
conflicts in accordance with international humanitarian law, and invites States to promote a culture of protection,
taking into account the particular needs of women, children, older persons and persons with disabilities;
37. Also reaffirms the obligations of all States and parties to an armed conflict, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, to respect and protect humanitarian personnel, including medical personnel,
facilities, transports and activities, which must not be attacked, and to ensure that the wounded and sick receive, to
the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the medical care and attention required;
38. Calls upon States to adopt preventive measures and effective responses to acts of violence committed
against civilian populations in armed conflicts and to ensure that those responsible are promptly brought to justice,
in accordance with national law and their obligations under international law;
39. Urges all Member States to address gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies and to ensure
that their laws and institutions are adequate to prevent, promptly investigate and prosecute gender-based violence,
and calls upon States, the United Nations and all relevant humanitarian organizations to improve coordination,
harmonize response and strengthen capacity, with a view to reducing such violence and ensuring support services to
victims and survivors of such violence, beginning in the earliest stages of emergency response;
40. Recognizes the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement223 as an important international framework
for the protection of internally displaced persons, encourages Member States and humanitarian agencies to continue
to work together, in collaboration with host communities, in endeavours to provide a more predictable response to
the needs of internally displaced persons, and in this regard calls for continued and enhanced international support,
upon request, for the capacity-building efforts of States;
41. Calls upon all States and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed conflict
and in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel, as
well as the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow such personnel to efficiently perform their task of
assisting affected civilian populations, including refugees and internally displaced persons;
42. Welcomes the progress made towards further enhancing the security management system of the United
Nations, and supports the approach taken by the Secretary-General to focus the efforts of the security management
system on enabling the United Nations system to deliver on its mandates, programmes and activities by effectively
managing the risks to which personnel are exposed, including in the provision of humanitarian assistance;
43. Encourages the United Nations and other relevant humanitarian actors to include, as part of their risk
management strategy, the building of good relations and trust with national and local governments and to promote
acceptance by local communities and all relevant actors in order to enable humanitarian assistance to be provided in
accordance with humanitarian principles;
44. Requests the Secretary-General to report on actions taken to enable the United Nations to continue to
strengthen its ability to recruit and deploy staff quickly and flexibly, to procure emergency relief materials and
services rapidly, cost-effectively and locally, where applicable, and to quickly disburse funds in order to support
Governments and United Nations country teams in the coordination of international humanitarian assistance;
_______________
223

132

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

45. Welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General to hold the first World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, Turkey, in 2016, aimed at sharing knowledge and best practices in the humanitarian field to improve the
coordination, capacity and effectiveness of humanitarian response, and requests the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to ensure an inclusive, consultative, transparent preparatory process;
46. Encourages Member States to give appropriate consideration in the discussion on the post-2015
development agenda to disaster risk reduction, including building resilience and national and local preparedness and
response capacity;
47. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 2014, on progress made in strengthening the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations and to submit a report to the Assembly on the detailed
use of the Central Emergency Response Fund.
RESOLUTION 68/103
A/RES/681/03

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.27 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Denmark, Fiji (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of
the Group of 77 and China), Finland, Germany, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey

68/103. International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991, the annex to which contains the guiding principles for
the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations system, as well as
all its resolutions on international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development, and recalling the resolutions of the humanitarian segments of the substantive sessions of the
Economic and Social Council,
Reaffirming also the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of
humanitarian assistance,
Reaffirming further the Hyogo Declaration,224 the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the
Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters225 and the common statement of the special session on the
Indian Ocean disaster: risk reduction for a safer future, 226 as adopted by the World Conference on Disaster
Reduction, held in Kobe, Hyogo, Japan, from 18 to 22 January 2005, and bearing in mind that the implementation
of the Hyogo Framework for Action is coming to an end in 2015,
Taking note with appreciation of the results of the midterm review of the Hyogo Framework for Action, and
noting the results of the fourth session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Geneva from
19 to 23 May 2013, and recognizing it as the main forum at the global level for strategic advice coordination and
partnership development for disaster risk reduction,
Recognizing that the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction will be held in Sendai, Japan, from
14 to 18 March 2015, to review the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action and to adopt a framework
for disaster risk reduction beyond 2015,
Emphasizing the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance,
Emphasizing also that the affected State has the primary responsibility in the initiation, organization,
coordination and implementation of humanitarian assistance within its territory and in the facilitation of the work of
humanitarian organizations in mitigating the consequences of natural disasters,
_______________
224

A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 1.
Ibid., resolution 2.
226
A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, annex II.
225

133

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Emphasizing further the primary responsibility of each State to undertake disaster risk reduction, including
through the implementation of and follow-up to the Hyogo Framework for Action, as well as response and early
recovery efforts, in order to minimize the impact of natural disasters, while recognizing the importance of
international cooperation in support of the efforts of affected countries which may have limited capacities in this
regard,
Expressing its deep concern at the increasing challenges to Member States and to the United Nations
humanitarian response capacity to deal with the consequences of natural disasters, given the effects of global
challenges, including the impact of climate change, the ongoing adverse impact of the global financial and
economic crisis and the negative impact of volatile food prices on food security and nutrition, and other key factors
that exacerbate the vulnerability of populations and exposure to natural hazards and the impact of natural disasters,
Expressing its deep concern also that rural and urban poor communities in the developing world are the
hardest hit by the effects of increased disaster risk,
Acknowledging the impacts of rapid urbanization in the context of natural disasters and that urban disaster
preparedness and responses require appropriate disaster risk reduction strategies, including in urban planning, and
early recovery strategies implemented from the initial stage of relief operations, as well as mitigation, rehabilitation
and sustainable development strategies,
Noting that local communities are the first responders in most disasters, underlining the critical role played by
in-country capacities in disaster risk reduction, including preparedness, as well as response and recovery, and
acknowledging the need to support efforts of Member States to develop and enhance national and local capacities
which are fundamental to improving the overall delivery of humanitarian assistance,
Recognizing the high numbers of persons affected by natural disasters, including in this respect internally
displaced persons, and the need to address the humanitarian and development needs arising from internal
displacement throughout the world owing to natural disasters, and encouraging all relevant actors to consider
making use of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement 227 when dealing with situations of internal
displacement,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in support of the efforts of the affected States in
dealing with natural disasters in all their phases, in particular in preparedness, response and the early recovery phase,
and of strengthening the response capacity of countries affected by disaster,
Recognizing the progress made by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER) in its mission, encouraging Member States to provide all
support necessary, on a voluntary basis, to UN-SPIDER, including financial support, to enable it to carry out its
workplan for 2014–2015, and reiterating the importance of enhancing international coordination and cooperation at
the global level in disaster management and emergency response through greater access to and use of space-based
services for all countries and by facilitating capacity-building and institutional strengthening for disaster
management, in particular in developing countries,
Noting the progress in the establishment of the Global Framework for Climate Services to develop and
provide science-based climate information and prediction for climate risk management and for adaptation to climate
variability and change, and looking forward to its implementation,
Welcoming the important role played by Member States, including developing countries, that have granted
necessary and continued generous assistance to countries and peoples stricken by natural disasters,
Recognizing the significant role played by national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, as part of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, in disaster preparedness and risk reduction, disaster response,
rehabilitation and development,
Emphasizing the need to address vulnerability and to integrate disaster risk reduction, including preparedness,
into all phases of natural disaster management, post-natural disaster recovery and development planning, through
close collaboration of all relevant actors and sectors,
_______________
227

134

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming that strengthening resilience contributes to withstanding, adapting to and quickly recovering from
disasters,
Recognizing that efforts to achieve economic growth, sustainable development and internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, can be adversely affected by natural disasters,
and noting the positive contribution that those efforts can make in strengthening the resilience of populations to such
disasters,
Recognizing also the clear relationship between emergency response, rehabilitation and development, and
reaffirming that, in order to ensure a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, emergency
assistance must be provided in ways that will be supportive of short- and medium-term recovery leading to longterm development and that certain emergency measures should be seen as a step towards sustainable development,
Emphasizing, in this context, the important role of development organizations and other relevant stakeholders
in supporting national efforts to mitigate the consequences of natural disasters,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;228

2. Expresses its deep concern at the increasing impact of natural disasters, resulting in massive losses of life
and property worldwide, in particular in vulnerable societies lacking adequate capacity to mitigate effectively the
long-term negative social, economic and environmental consequences of natural disasters;
3. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and development
actors to accelerate the full implementation of the Hyogo Declaration224 and the Hyogo Framework for Action
2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters,225 in particular those commitments
related to assistance for developing countries that are prone to natural disasters and for disaster-stricken States in the
transition phase towards sustainable physical, social and economic recovery, for risk-reduction activities in postdisaster recovery and for rehabilitation processes;
4. Emphasizes the need to promote and strengthen disaster preparedness activities at all levels, in particular
in hazard-prone areas, and encourages Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian
and development actors to increase funding and cooperation for disaster risk reduction activities, including disaster
preparedness;
5. Encourages Member States to provide dedicated financial contributions to preparedness, response and
recovery efforts in a harmonized, flexible and complementary approach that fully utilizes and helps to coordinate
humanitarian and development funding options and potential;
6. Calls upon all States to adopt, where required, and to continue to implement effectively, necessary
legislative and other appropriate measures to mitigate the effects of natural disasters and integrate disaster risk
reduction strategies into development planning, as well as to incorporate a gender perspective into policies, planning
and funding, and in this regard requests the international community to continue to assist developing countries as
well as countries with economies in transition, as appropriate;
7. Acknowledges that climate change, among other factors, contributes to environmental degradation and to
the increase in the intensity and frequency of climate and extreme weather events, both of which amplify disaster
risk, and in this regard encourages Member States, as well as relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with their specific mandates, to support adaptation to the adverse effects of climate
change and to strengthen disaster risk reduction and early warning systems in order to minimize the humanitarian
consequences of natural disasters, including through the provision of technology and support for capacity-building
in developing countries;
8. Welcomes the growing number of initiatives undertaken at the regional and national levels to promote
the implementation of the Guidelines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster Relief
and Initial Recovery Assistance, encourages Member States and, where applicable, regional organizations to take
further steps to review and strengthen operational and legal frameworks for international disaster relief, taking into
_______________
228

A/68/89.

135

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

account the Guidelines, as appropriate, and welcomes the recent efforts of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat and the InterParliamentary Union to develop a model act on the subject;
9. Also welcomes the effective cooperation among the affected States, relevant bodies of the United
Nations system, donor countries, regional and international financial institutions and other relevant organizations,
such as the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, and civil society, in the coordination and delivery
of emergency relief, and stresses the need to continue such cooperation and delivery throughout relief operations
and medium- and long-term rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, in a manner that reduces vulnerability to future
natural hazards;
10. Reiterates the commitment to support, as a matter of priority, the efforts of countries, in particular
developing countries, to strengthen their capacities at all levels in order to reduce risks, prepare for and respond
rapidly to natural disasters and mitigate their impact;
11. Urges Member States to develop, update and strengthen early warning systems, disaster preparedness
and risk reduction measures at all levels, in accordance with the Hyogo Framework for Action, taking into account
their own circumstances and capacities and in coordination with relevant actors, as appropriate, and encourages the
international community and relevant United Nations entities to continue to support national efforts in this regard;
12. Also urges Member States to improve their response to early warning information in order to ensure that
early warning leads to early action, and encourages all stakeholders to support the efforts of Member States in this
regard;
13. Encourages Member States to consider elaborating and presenting to the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction secretariat their national platforms for disaster reduction in accordance with the Hyogo
Framework for Action, and also encourages States to cooperate with each other to reach this objective;
14. Recognizes the importance of applying a multi-hazard approach to preparedness, and encourages
Member States, taking into account their specific circumstances, and the United Nations system to continue to apply
the approach to their preparedness activities, including by giving due regard to, inter alia, secondary environmental
hazards stemming from industrial and technological accidents;
15. Stresses that, to increase further the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, particular international
cooperation efforts should be undertaken to enhance and broaden further the utilization of national and local
capacities and, where appropriate, of regional and subregional capacities for disaster preparedness and response,
which may be made available in closer proximity to the site of a disaster, and more efficiently and at lower cost;
16. Also stresses, in this context, the importance of strengthening international cooperation, particularly
through the effective use of multilateral mechanisms, in the timely provision of humanitarian assistance through all
phases of a disaster, from relief and recovery to development, including the provision of adequate resources;
17. Encourages all relevant stakeholders, including Member States, to take appropriate measures to reduce
and discourage the sending of unsolicited, unneeded or inappropriate relief goods in response to disasters;
18. Encourages all Member States to facilitate, to the extent possible, the transit of emergency humanitarian
assistance and development assistance, provided in the context of international efforts, including in the phase from
relief to development, in full accordance with the provisions of resolution 46/182 and the annex thereto, and in full
respect of the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, and their obligations
under international law, including international humanitarian law;
19. Encourages Member States to put in place, as appropriate, customs measures to improve effectiveness
in responding to natural disasters;
20. Reaffirms the leading role of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as the focal point
within the overall United Nations system for advocacy for and coordination of humanitarian assistance among
United Nations humanitarian organizations and other humanitarian partners;
21. Welcomes the important contribution of the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
system to the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance in supporting Member States, upon their request, and the
United Nations system in preparedness and humanitarian response, and encourages the continued incorporation into
this mechanism of experts from developing countries that are prone to natural disasters;
136

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

22. Also welcomes the important contribution of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group to the
effectiveness of international urban search and rescue assistance, and encourages Member States to continue to
support the Advisory Group, in line with General Assembly resolution 57/150 of 16 December 2002;
23. Urges Member States, the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to consider the specific
and differentiated consequences of natural disasters both in rural and urban areas when designing and implementing
disaster risk reduction, prevention and mitigation, preparedness, humanitarian assistance and early recovery
strategies, giving special emphasis to addressing the needs of those living in rural and urban poor areas prone to
natural disasters;
24. Welcomes the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to build partnerships
with regional organizations and the private sector, and encourages Member States and the United Nations system to
continue to strengthen partnerships at the global, regional, national and local levels in support of national efforts in
situations of natural disasters, in order to cooperate effectively in providing humanitarian assistance to those in need
and ensure that their collaborative efforts adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence;
25. Recognizes that information and telecommunications technology can play an important role in disaster
response, encourages Member States to develop emergency response telecommunications capacities and
encourages the international community to assist the efforts of developing countries in this area, where needed,
including in the recovery phase, and in this regard encourages Member States that have not acceded to or ratified the
Tampere Convention on the Provision of Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief
Operations229 to consider doing so;
26. Encourages the further use of space-based and ground-based remote-sensing technologies, including as
provided by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency
Response (UN-SPIDER), as well as the sharing of geographical data, for the prevention, mitigation and
management of natural disasters, where appropriate, and invites Member States to continue to provide their support
to the consolidation of the United Nations capability in the area of satellite-derived geographical information for
early warning, preparedness, response and early recovery;
27. Recognizes the opportunities for new technologies, when utilized in a coordinated fashion and based on
humanitarian principles, potentially to improve the effectiveness and accountability of humanitarian response, and
encourages Member States, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to consider engaging, inter alia, with
the volunteer and technical communities in order to make use of the variety of data and information available during
emergencies and disaster risk efforts;
28. Encourages Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and international financial
institutions to enhance the global capacity for sustainable post-disaster recovery in areas such as coordination with
traditional and non-traditional partners, identification and dissemination of lessons learned, development of
common tools and mechanisms for recovery needs assessment, strategy development and programming, and
incorporation of risk reduction into all recovery processes, and welcomes the ongoing efforts to this end;
29. Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to support national initiatives that address
the differentiated impacts of natural disasters on the affected population, including through the collection and
analysis of data disaggregated, inter alia, by sex, age and disability, using, inter alia, the existing information
provided by States, and through the development of tools, methods and procedures that will result in more timely
and useful initial needs assessments that lead to targeted and more effective assistance;
30. Calls upon United Nations humanitarian organizations, in consultation with Member States, as
appropriate, to strengthen the evidence base for effective humanitarian assistance by further developing common
mechanisms to improve the quality, transparency and reliability of, and make further progress towards, common
humanitarian needs assessments, to assess their performance in assistance and to ensure the most effective use of
humanitarian resources by these organizations;
_______________
229

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2296, No. 40906.

137

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

31. Encourages Member States to take steps to develop or to improve data collection and analysis and to
facilitate the exchange of information with humanitarian organizations of the United Nations, in order to support
preparedness efforts and to improve the effectiveness of a needs-based humanitarian response, and encourages the
United Nations system, as appropriate, and other relevant actors to continue to assist developing countries in their
efforts to build local and national capacities for data collection and analysis;
32. Encourages Member States, regional organizations, the United Nations and humanitarian and
development organizations to continue to improve the identification, mapping and analysis of risks and
vulnerabilities, including the local impact of future disaster risk drivers, and the development and implementation of
appropriate strategies and programmes to address them, and in this regard encourages all the relevant stakeholders
to support Governments in capacity development, including at the regional and local levels, through the sharing of
expertise and tools and the provision of necessary resources, as appropriate, to ensure that effective disaster
management plans and capacities are in place in accordance with national priorities for disaster risk management;
33. Stresses the importance of the full and equal participation of women in decision-making and of gender
mainstreaming in developing and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness, response and recovery
strategies, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue ensuring that gender mainstreaming is better
taken into account in all aspects of humanitarian responses and activities;
34. Encourages Governments, local authorities, the United Nations system and regional organizations, and
invites donors and other assisting countries, to address the vulnerabilities and capacities of women and girls through
gender-responsive programming, including means to address sexual and gender-based violence and various forms
of exploitation in post-disaster environments, and the allocation of resources in their disaster risk reduction, response
and recovery efforts in coordination with the Governments of affected countries;
35. Encourages Member States and relevant regional and international organizations to identify and
improve the dissemination of best practices for improving disaster preparedness, response and early recovery and to
scale up successful local initiatives, as appropriate;
36. Requests the United Nations humanitarian and development organizations to improve their coordination
of disaster recovery efforts, from relief to development, inter alia, by strengthening institutional, coordination and
strategic planning efforts in disaster preparedness, resilience-building and recovery, in support of national
authorities, and by ensuring that development actors participate in strategic planning at an early stage;
37. Encourages the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to support national,
subnational and local governments and communities in their responsibility to develop long-term strategies and
multi-year operational plans for preparedness that are embedded within disaster risk reduction and resilience
strategies in line with the Hyogo Framework for Action;
38. Calls upon the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to improve the dissemination of
tools and services to support enhanced disaster risk reduction, in particular preparedness, and early recovery;
39. Calls upon relevant United Nations humanitarian and development organizations, in consultation with
Member States, to strengthen tools and mechanisms to ensure that early recovery needs and support are integrated
into the planning and implementation of disaster preparedness, humanitarian response and development cooperation
activities, as appropriate;
40. Encourages the United Nations system and humanitarian organizations to continue their efforts to
mainstream early recovery into humanitarian programming, acknowledges that early recovery is an important step
towards resilience-building and should receive further funding, and encourages the provision of timely, flexible and
predictable funding for early recovery, including through established and complementary humanitarian and
development instruments;
41. Stresses the need to strengthen resilience at all levels, and in this regard encourages Member States, the
United Nations system and other relevant actors to support efforts, as appropriate, to integrate resilience in
humanitarian and development programming;
42. Encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and development actors to
support humanitarian coordinators and resident coordinators, in order to strengthen their capacity, inter alia, to
support the host Government in implementing preparedness measures and to coordinate preparedness activities of
country teams in support of national efforts, and encourages the United Nations system and other relevant
138

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

humanitarian actors to further strengthen the ability to quickly and flexibly deploy humanitarian professionals to
support Governments and country teams in the immediate aftermath of a disaster;
43. Emphasizes the need to mobilize adequate, flexible and sustainable resources for recovery, preparedness
and disaster risk reduction activities in order to ensure predictable and timely access to resources for humanitarian
assistance in emergencies resulting from disasters associated with natural hazards;
44. Welcomes the achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund and its contribution to the
promotion and enhancement of early humanitarian response, calls upon all Member States, and invites the private
sector and all concerned individuals and institutions, to consider increasing voluntary contributions to the Fund,
including, when possible, through multi-year and early commitments, and emphasizes that contributions should be
additional to current commitments to humanitarian programming and not to the detriment of resources made
available for international cooperation for development;
45. Strongly encourages giving appropriate consideration to disaster risk reduction and the building of
resilience to disasters within the post-2015 development agenda and promoting a complementary and coherent
approach between that agenda and the post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction;
46. Invites Member States, the private sector and all concerned individuals and institutions to consider
voluntary contributions to other humanitarian funding mechanisms;
47. Welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General to hold the first World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, Turkey, in 2016, aimed at sharing knowledge and best practices in the humanitarian field to improve the
coordination, capacity and effectiveness of humanitarian response, and requests the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to ensure an inclusive, consultative transparent preparatory process;
48. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the international response to natural disasters and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session and to include in his report recommendations on how
to ensure that humanitarian assistance is provided in ways supportive of the transition from relief to development.
RESOLUTION 68/125
A/RES/681/25

Adopted at the 69th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.28 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

68/125. Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Charter of the United Nations, including the purposes and principles contained therein,
and especially the dedication to saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recalling the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which states
that, “since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed”,
Recognizing the importance of the Declaration230 and Programme of Action231 on a Culture of Peace, which
serve as the universal mandate for the international community, particularly the United Nations system, for the
promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence that benefits humanity, in particular future generations,
_______________
230
231

Resolution 53/243 A.
Resolution 53/243 B.

139

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling its previous resolutions on a culture of peace, in particular resolution 52/15 of 20 November 1997
proclaiming 2000 the International Year for the Culture of Peace, resolution 53/25 of 10 November 1998
proclaiming the period 2001–2010 the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the
Children of the World, and resolutions 56/5 of 5 November 2001, 57/6 of 4 November 2002, 58/11 of 10 November
2003, 59/143 of 15 December 2004, 60/3 of 20 October 2005, 61/45 of 4 December 2006, 62/89 of 17 December
2007, 63/113 of 5 December 2008, 64/80 of 7 December 2009, 65/11 of 23 November 2010, 66/116 of
12 December 2011 and 67/106 of 17 December 2012, adopted under its agenda item entitled “Culture of peace”,
Reaffirming the United Nations Millennium Declaration,232 which calls for the active promotion of a culture
of peace,
Taking note of the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly,233
Welcoming the observance of 2 October as the International Day of Non-Violence, as proclaimed by the
United Nations,234
Recognizing that all efforts made by the United Nations system in general and the international community at
large for peacekeeping, peacebuilding, the prevention of conflicts, disarmament, sustainable development, the
promotion of human dignity and human rights, democracy, the rule of law, good governance and gender equality at
the national and international levels contribute greatly to the culture of peace,
Recognizing also the importance of respect and understanding for religious and cultural diversity throughout
the world, of choosing negotiations over confrontation and of working together and not against each other,
Welcoming the report of the Director General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, submitted
pursuant to resolution 67/106 and transmitted by the Secretary-General,235
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace,236
Recalling the proclamation by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of
21 February as International Mother Language Day, which aims at protecting, promoting and preserving linguistic
and cultural diversity and multilingualism, in order to foster and enrich a culture of peace, social harmony, crosscultural dialogue and mutual understanding,
Recalling also the proclamation by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of
30 April as International Jazz Day, which aims to develop and increase intercultural exchanges and understanding
between cultures for the purpose of mutual comprehension, tolerance and the promotion of a culture of peace,
Expressing its appreciation for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in
promoting a culture of peace through a number of practical projects in the areas of youth, education, media and
migrations, in collaboration with Governments, international organizations, foundations and civil society groups, as
well as media and the private sector,
Welcoming the successful holding on 6 September 2013 of the General Assembly High-level Forum on the
Culture of Peace, convened by the President of the Assembly, and the high-level participation, wide-ranging
partnership and inclusive collaboration among Member States, international organizations and civil society, as
evidenced at the Forum,
Welcoming also the adoption by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization at its thirty-sixth session of a programme of action for a culture of peace and non-violence,
_______________
232

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
234
Resolution 61/271.
235
A/68/216.
236
A/68/286.
233

140

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and noting that the objectives of that programme of action are in line with the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace adopted by the General Assembly,
Encouraging the continued and increasing efforts and activities on the part of civil society organizations
throughout the world in advancing the culture of peace as envisaged in the Declaration and Programme of Action,
1. Reiterates that the objective of the effective implementation of the Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace231 is to strengthen further the global movement for a culture of peace following the observance of the
International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World, 2001–2010, and calls
upon all concerned to renew their attention to this objective;
2. Notes the mention by the Secretary-General in the report235 that peace should be given due consideration
in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
3. Invites Member States to continue to place greater emphasis on and expand their activities promoting a
culture of peace at the national, regional and international levels and to ensure that peace and non-violence are
fostered at all levels;
4. Invites the entities of the United Nations system, within their existing mandates, to integrate, as
appropriate, the eight action areas of the Programme of Action into their programmes of activities, focusing on
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence at the national, regional and international levels;
5. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, for which the
promotion of a culture of peace is the expression of its fundamental mandate, for further strengthening the activities
it has undertaken to promote a culture of peace;
6. Commends the practical initiatives and actions by relevant United Nations bodies, including the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the University for Peace, as well as their activities in further promoting a culture of peace and
non-violence, including the promotion of peace education and activities related to specific areas identified in the
Programme of Action, and encourages them to continue and further strengthen and expand their efforts;
7. Encourages the Peacebuilding Commission to continue to promote peacebuilding activities and to
advance a culture of peace and non-violence in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts at the country level;
8. Urges the appropriate authorities to provide age-appropriate education in children’s schools that builds a
culture of peace, including lessons in mutual understanding, tolerance, active citizenship and human rights;
9. Encourages the involvement of media, especially the mass media, in promoting a culture of peace and
non-violence, with particular regard to children and young people;
10. Commends civil society, non-governmental organizations and young people for their activities in further
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence, including through their campaign to raise awareness on a culture of
peace and the peaceful settlement of disputes;
11. Encourages civil society and non-governmental organizations to further strengthen their efforts to
promote a culture of peace, inter alia, by adopting their own programme of activities to complement the initiatives
of Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and other international and regional
organizations, in line with the Declaration230 and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace;
12. Stresses the role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in mobilizing
all relevant stakeholders within and outside the United Nations system in support of a culture of peace, cultural
diversity and intercultural dialogue, and invites the Organization to continue to enhance communication and
outreach, including through the culture of peace website;
13. Invites Member States, all parts of the United Nations system and civil society organizations to accord
increasing attention to their observance of the International Day of Peace on 21 September each year as a day of
global ceasefire and non-violence, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 55/282 of 7 September 2001;
14. Requests the President of the General Assembly to consider convening a high-level forum, as
appropriate and within existing resources, devoted to the implementation of the Programme of Action on the
occasion of the anniversary of its adoption, on or around 13 September;
141

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

15. Invites the Secretary-General, within existing resources, in consultation with the Member States and
taking into account the observations of civil society organizations, to explore mechanisms and strategies, in
particular strategies in the sphere of information and communications technology, for the implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action and to initiate outreach efforts to increase global awareness of the
Programme of Action and its eight areas of action aimed at their implementation;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
actions undertaken system-wide by all concerned entities of the United Nations to implement the present resolution
and on heightened activities by the Organization and its affiliated agencies to implement the Programme of Action
and to promote a culture of peace and non-violence;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Culture of peace”.
RESOLUTION 68/126
A/RES/681/26

Adopted at the 69th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.30 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Chile, China, Egypt, Hungary,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Montenegro, Myanmar, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Russian Federation, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovenia, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Viet Nam

68/126. Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,237 in particular the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Recalling its resolution 67/104 of 17 December 2012 on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace and its other related resolutions,
Recalling also that in its resolution 67/104 the General Assembly proclaimed the period 2013–2022 as the
International Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures,
Encouraging, in this regard, activities aimed at promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue in order to
enhance peace and social stability, respect for diversity and mutual respect and to create, at the global level, and also
at the regional, national and local levels, an environment conducive to peace and mutual understanding,
Recalling its resolution 64/14 of 10 November 2009 on the Alliance of Civilizations, in which it welcomed
efforts to promote greater understanding and respect among people from different civilizations, cultures and religions,
Bearing in mind the valuable contribution that interreligious and intercultural dialogue can make to an
improved awareness and understanding of the common values shared by all humankind,
Noting that interreligious and intercultural dialogue has made significant contributions to mutual
understanding, tolerance and respect, as well as to the promotion of a culture of peace and an improvement of
overall relations among people from different cultural and religious backgrounds and among nations,
Recognizing that cultural diversity and the pursuit of cultural development by all peoples and nations are
sources of mutual enrichment for the cultural life of humankind,
Bearing in mind that tolerance of cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic diversities contributes towards peace,
mutual understanding and friendship among people of different cultures and nations and that these diversities should
be made part of intercultural and interreligious dialogue efforts, as appropriate,
Emphasizing the importance of culture for development and its contribution to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard noting the close links between cultural diversity, dialogue and
development,
_______________
237

142

Resolution 217 A (III).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the various initiatives at the local, national, regional and international levels for enhancing dialogue,
understanding and cooperation among religions, cultures and civilizations, which are mutually reinforcing and
interrelated,
Welcoming the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
promoting intercultural dialogue, as well as the work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the Anna
Lindh Foundation and the ongoing work of the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious
and Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna,
Welcoming also the provisions of the Vientiane Declaration on interfaith dialogue, adopted on 6 November
2012 by the Asia-Europe Meeting, and recognizing the importance it places on interfaith dialogue and its valuable
contribution to promoting social cohesion, peace and development,
Acknowledging the positive contribution of individuals and of relevant civil society organizations to the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and the culture of peace,
Recognizing the contributions of the media and of new information and communications technology to
promoting peoples’ understanding of different cultures and religions, including through the promotion of dialogue,
Reaffirming the importance of sustaining the process of engaging all stakeholders, including young men and
women as relevant actors, in interreligious and intercultural dialogue within the appropriate initiatives at various
levels, which aims to challenge prejudices and improve mutual understanding,
Recognizing the commitment of all religions to peace and the need for voices of moderation from all religions
and beliefs to work together in order to build a more secure and peaceful world,
1. Reaffirms that mutual understanding and interreligious and intercultural dialogue constitute important
dimensions of the dialogue among civilizations and of the culture of peace;
2.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;238

3. Recognizes the importance of interreligious dialogue and its valuable contribution to promoting social
cohesion, peace and development, and calls upon Member States to consider, as appropriate and where applicable,
interreligious and intercultural dialogue as an important tool in efforts aimed at achieving peace and social stability
and the full realization of the Millennium Development Goals;
4. Also recognizes the efforts by relevant stakeholders to foster peaceful and harmonious coexistence
within societies by promoting respect for religious and cultural diversity, including by engendering sustained and
robust interaction among various segments of society;
5. Notes the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on
intercultural dialogue and its contribution to interreligious dialogue, as well as its activities related to the culture of
peace and non-violence and its focus on concrete actions at the global, regional and subregional levels;
6. Welcomes the launch of the International Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures (2013–2022), for
which the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in consultation with Member States
and the relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, will provide a plan of action to enhance
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and to promote tolerance and mutual understanding;
7. Reaffirms the solemn commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote universal respect for
and observance and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights237 and other instruments relating to human rights
and international law, the universal nature of these rights and freedoms being beyond question;
8. Welcomes the outcome of the Seventh Asia-Europe Meeting Interfaith Dialogue, on harnessing the
benefits and addressing the challenges of migration through interfaith and intercultural dialogue, held in Manila in
2011, and looks forward to the Asia-Europe Meeting High-level International Conference on Intercultural and
Interfaith Dialogue, to be held in St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, in July 2014;
_______________
238

A/68/286.

143

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Also welcomes the outcome document entitled “Vienna Declaration on the Alliance of Civilizations” of
the Fifth Global Forum of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, held in Vienna on 27 and 28 February 2013,
and looks forward to the Sixth Global Forum of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, to be held in Bali,
Indonesia, in August 2014;
10. Underlines the importance of moderation as a value within societies for countering extremism in all its
aspects and for further contributing to the promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, tolerance,
understanding and cooperation;
11. Welcomes the efforts by the media to promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue, encourages the
further promotion of dialogue among the media from all cultures and civilizations, emphasizes that everyone has the
right to freedom of expression, and reaffirms that the exercise of this right carries with it special duties and
responsibilities and may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but that these shall be only such as are provided
by law and necessary for respect of the rights or reputations of others, protection of national security or of public
order, or of public health or morals;
12. Also welcomes the efforts to use information and communications technology, including the Internet, to
promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue, including through the Interfaith Dialogue e-Portal established
following the Special Non-Aligned Movement Ministerial Meeting on Interfaith Dialogue and Cooperation for
Peace and Development, held in Manila in 2010, and encourages relevant stakeholders to utilize the opportunity to
disseminate their best practices and experiences on interreligious and intercultural dialogue by contributing to the
Interfaith Dialogue e-Portal;
13. Encourages Member States to consider, as and where appropriate, initiatives that identify areas for
practical action in all sectors and levels of society for the promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
tolerance, understanding and cooperation, inter alia, the ideas suggested during the High-level Dialogue on
Interreligious and Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for Peace, held in New York in October 2007,
including the idea of an enhanced process of dialogue among world religions, as well as the ideas suggested during
the third High Panel on Peace and Dialogue among Cultures, held in Paris in November 2012;
14. Acknowledges the active engagement of the United Nations system with faith-based organizations
and relevant non-governmental organizations in the promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and in bringing together people of different cultures, religions, faiths or beliefs to discuss common issues and
objectives;
15. Also acknowledges the important role of civil society, including academia, in fostering interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, and encourages support for practical measures that mobilize civil society, including building
capacities, opportunities and frameworks for cooperation;
16. Invites Member States to further promote reconciliation to help to ensure durable peace and sustained
development, including through reconciliatory measures and acts of service and by encouraging forgiveness and
compassion among individuals;
17. Recognizes that the Office for Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination in the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat plays a valuable role as focal point within the
Secretariat on the issue, and encourages it to continue to interact and coordinate with the relevant entities of the
United Nations system and coordinate their contribution to the intergovernmental process aimed at promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/127
A/RES/681/27

Adopted at the 69th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.31 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Libya, Montenegro,
Nicaragua, Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Turkey, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

144

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

68/127. A world against violence and violent extremism
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,239
Recalling its resolutions 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, 36/103 of 9 December 1981, 39/11 of
12 November 1984, 49/60 of 9 December 1994, 53/243 of 13 September 1999, 55/282 of 7 September 2001, 56/6
of 9 November 2001, 60/288 of 8 September 2006, 64/14 of 10 November 2009, 66/171 of 19 December 2011,
67/99 of 14 December 2012 and 67/173, 67/178 and 67/179 of 20 December 2012 and the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action,240
Reaffirming that the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter include, inter alia, to develop friendly
relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, to take
other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace, and to achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind such as to race, colour,
sex, language, religion, political or other opinions, national or social origin, property, birth or other status,
Underlining that all Member States have undertaken to refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations,
Alarmed by the acts of intolerance, violent extremism, violence, including sectarian violence, and terrorism in
various parts of the world, which claim innocent lives, cause destruction and displace people, and rejecting the use
of violence, regardless of any motivation,
Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter to promote and encourage universal respect
for and observance of all human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction, and reaffirming also that
States are under the obligation to protect and respect all human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons,
Convinced that wars and armed conflicts can lead to radicalization and the spread of violent extremism and
disrupt development of human societies and thwart the well-being of humankind,
Recognizing that a primary responsibility of each State is to ensure a peaceful and violence-free life for its
people, while fully respecting their human rights without distinction of any kind, to live together in peace with its
neighbours, in full respect for political independence and the principle of sovereign equality of others, and to help
maintain international peace and security,
Recalling that, as affirmed in the Preamble to the Charter, the practice of tolerance is one of the principles to
be applied to attain the ends pursued by the United Nations of preventing war and maintaining peace, and convinced
that the respect for and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons, as well as tolerance,
the recognition and appreciation of others and the ability to live together with and to listen to others, form a sound
foundation of any society and of peace,
Welcoming the efforts made by the Secretary-General and his High Representative for the Alliance of
Civilizations to promote greater understanding and respect among civilizations, cultures and religions,
Reaffirming that violent extremism constitutes a serious common concern for all Member States, threatening
the security and well-being of human societies, and convinced that there is no justification for violent extremism,
whatever the motivation,
Recognizing the need for a comprehensive approach to countering violent extremism and addressing the
conditions conducive to its spread,
_______________
239

Resolution 217 A (III).
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

240

145

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Stressing that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat violent extremism complies with their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, and
underscoring that counter-terrorism measures and the protection of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the
rule of law are not conflicting goals, but complementary and mutually reinforcing, and are an essential part of a
successful effort to counter violent extremism,
Recognizing the commitment of all religions to peace, and determined to condemn violent extremism, which
spreads hate and threatens lives,
Reaffirming that violent extremism, in all its forms and manifestations, cannot and should not be associated
with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
1. Stresses the international obligations of all States under the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, in particular refraining in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the United Nations and settling their international disputes by peaceful means on the basis of the Charter;
2. Condemns the targeting of civilian populations, including women and children, in violation of
international law, in particular human rights and humanitarian law, including by violent extremists, as well as the
attempts to disrupt and divert the popular quest for political reform, moderation and inclusive development in
different societies and drive it away from the hard work of development towards violence;
3. Deplores attacks on religious places and shrines and cultural sites in violation of international law, in
particular human rights and humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of relics and monuments;
4. Urges all Member States to unite against violent extremism in all its forms and manifestations as well as
sectarian violence, encourages the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities the causes of violent
extremism and discrimination and to evolve strategies to address these causes, and underlines that States, regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in
promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity;
5. Stresses that it is important that States strongly condemn all forms of violence against women and refrain
from invoking any custom, tradition or religious consideration to avoid their obligations with respect to its
elimination, as set out in the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women;241
6. Encourages all States and international organizations to generate public awareness, to enlighten the
public about the dangers of intolerance and sectarian violence and to react with renewed commitment and action in
support of the promotion of tolerance and human rights, and invites them to continue to pay attention to the
importance of mutual cooperation, understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion of moderation and
tolerance and respect for human rights;
7. Calls upon all States to respect and protect, in their fight against violent extremism, all human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law and to support all actions at the local, national, regional and international
levels, in cooperation with civil society, to foster understanding, tolerance and non-violence, inter alia, through
programmes and institutions in the fields of education, science, culture, communication and information, strengthen
democratic institutions, ensure the all-inclusiveness of the development process, eliminate all forms of intolerance
and violence, eradicate poverty and illiteracy and reduce inequalities within and among nations in order to leave no
one behind;
8. Underlines the vital importance of education, including human rights education, as the most effective
means of promoting tolerance, in preventing the spread of extremism by instilling respect for life and promoting the
practice of non-violence, moderation, dialogue and cooperation, and encourages all States, the specialized agencies
of the United Nations and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to contribute actively to this
endeavour by, inter alia, placing emphasis on civic education and life skills as well as democratic principles and
practices at all levels of formal, informal and non-formal education;
_______________
241

146

Resolution 48/104.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Recommends promoting community engagement in countering violent extremism, including by
strengthening ties between communities and emphasizing their common bonds and interests;
10. Calls upon Member States to advocate for and disseminate information on tolerance and mutual respect,
and underlines the potential contribution of the media and new communications technologies, including the Internet,
to promoting respect for all human rights, to developing a better understanding among all religions, beliefs, cultures
and peoples, to enhancing tolerance and mutual respect and thus to strengthening the rejection of violent extremism;
11. Recognizes the positive contribution that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression, particularly
by the media and new technologies, including the Internet, and full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information can make to the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
and reiterates the need to respect the editorial independence and autonomy of the media in this regard;
12. Strongly condemns any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence;
13. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, regional and non-governmental
organizations and other relevant stakeholders to endeavour to fulfil, in an appropriate manner, the objectives set out
in the present resolution;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session on the
implementation of the present resolution and to recommend ways and means by which the United Nations system
and the Secretariat could assist Member States, upon their request and within existing resources, in generating
public awareness about the dangers of intolerance, as well as in fostering understanding and non-violence.
RESOLUTION 68/128
A/RES/681/28

Adopted at the 69th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.29 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland

68/128. The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of rough
diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the trade in conflict diamonds continues to be a matter of serious international concern,
which can be directly linked to the fuelling of armed conflict, the activities of rebel movements aimed at
undermining or overthrowing legitimate Governments and the illicit traffic in and proliferation of armaments,
especially small arms and light weapons,
Recognizing also the devastating impact of conflicts fuelled by the trade in conflict diamonds on the peace,
safety and security of people in affected countries, and the systematic and gross human rights violations that have
been perpetrated in such conflicts,
Noting the negative impact of such conflicts on regional stability and the obligations placed upon States by the
Charter of the United Nations regarding the maintenance of international peace and security,
Recognizing that continued action to curb the trade in conflict diamonds is imperative,
Noting with appreciation that the Kimberley Process, as an international initiative led by the Governments of
participant States, has pursued its deliberations on an inclusive basis involving concerned stakeholders, including
producing, exporting and importing States, the diamond industry and civil society, as well as applicant States and
international organizations,
Recalling that the elimination of conflict diamonds from legitimate trade is the primary objective of the
Kimberley Process, and stressing the need to continue its activities in order to achieve this objective,
147

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the important contribution of the Kimberley Process, which was initiated by African diamondproducing countries, and calling for the consistent implementation of commitments made by Kimberley Process
participant States and the diamond industry and civil society organizations, as observers,
Acknowledging the successful role that the Kimberley Process has played in stemming the flow of conflict
diamonds in the past decade of its existence and the significant developmental impact it has had in improving the
lives of people dependent on the trade in diamonds, and noting that the plenary meeting of the Process, in looking
towards the future, committed to continue to ensure that the Process remains relevant as a credible tool in curbing
the illegal flow of rough diamonds,
Acknowledging also that the diamond sector is an important catalyst for promoting economic and social
development, which are necessary for poverty reduction and meeting the requirements of the Millennium
Development Goals in many producing countries, particularly in developing countries,
Bearing in mind the positive benefits of the legitimate diamond trade to producing countries, and underlining
the need for continued international action to prevent the problem of conflict diamonds from negatively affecting the
trade in legitimate diamonds, which makes a critical contribution to the economies of the producing, exporting and
importing States,
Noting that the vast majority of rough diamonds produced in the world are from legitimate sources,
Recalling the Charter and all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council related to conflict diamonds, and
determined to contribute to and support the implementation of the measures provided for in those resolutions,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1459 (2003) of 28 January 2003, in which the Council strongly
supported the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme242 as a valuable contribution against trafficking in conflict
diamonds,
Noting with satisfaction that the implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme continues to
have a positive impact in reducing the opportunity for conflict diamonds to play a role in fuelling armed conflict and
would help to protect legitimate trade and ensure the effective implementation of the relevant resolutions on trade in
conflict diamonds,
Acknowledging that lessons learned from the Kimberley Process may be useful for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission in its consideration of the countries included in its agenda, as appropriate,
Recalling its resolutions 55/56 of 1 December 2000, 56/263 of 13 March 2002, 57/302 of 15 April 2003,
58/290 of 14 April 2004, 59/144 of 15 December 2004, 60/182 of 20 December 2005, 61/28 of 4 December 2006,
62/11 of 26 November 2007, 63/134 of 11 December 2008, 64/109 of 11 December 2009, 65/137 of 16 December
2010, 66/252 of 25 January 2012 and 67/135 of 18 December 2012, in which it called for the development and
implementation as well as a periodic review of proposals for a simple, effective and pragmatic international
certification scheme for rough diamonds,
Welcoming, in this regard, the implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme in such a way
as not to impede the legitimate trade in diamonds or impose an undue burden on Governments or industry,
particularly smaller producers, nor hinder the development of the diamond industry,
Welcoming also the decision of the 54 Kimberley Process Participants, representing 81 countries, including
the 28 members of the European Union represented by the European Commission, to address the problem of
conflict diamonds by participating in the Process and implementing the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme,
Noting the outcomes of the eleventh plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process, hosted in Johannesburg by
South Africa from 19 to 22 November 2013,
Welcoming the important contribution to fulfilling the purposes of the Kimberley Process that has been made
and continues to be made by civil society organizations from across participant countries, and the diamond industry,
in particular the World Diamond Council, which represents all aspects of the diamond industry in the Process, to
assist international efforts to stop the trade in conflict diamonds,
_______________
242

148

See A/57/489.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming also the voluntary self-regulation initiatives for the diamond industry announced by the World
Diamond Council, and recognizing that a system of such voluntary self-regulation contributes, as described in the
Interlaken Declaration of 5 November 2002 on the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme for Rough
Diamonds,242 to ensuring the effectiveness of national systems of internal control for rough diamonds,
Recognizing that State sovereignty should be fully respected and that the principles of equality, mutual benefits
and consensus should be adhered to,
Recognizing also that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, which came into effect on 1 January 2003,
will be credible only if all Participants have requisite national legislation coupled with effective and credible internal
systems of control designed to eliminate the presence of conflict diamonds in the chain of producing, exporting and
importing rough diamonds within their own territories, while taking into account that differences in production
methods and trading practices, as well as differences in institutional controls thereof, may require different
approaches to meeting minimum standards,
Welcoming the efforts to improve the normative framework of the Kimberley Process through the elaboration
of new rules and procedural norms to regulate the activities of its working bodies, Participants and observers and the
streamlining of the procedures for preparation and adoption of the decisions and documents of the Kimberley
Process, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme,
1. Reaffirms its strong and continuing support for the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme242 and the
Kimberley Process as a whole;
2. Recognizes that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme can help to ensure the effective
implementation of relevant resolutions of the Security Council containing sanctions on the trade in conflict
diamonds and contributes to the prevention of future conflicts fuelled by diamonds, and calls for the full
implementation of existing Council measures targeting the illicit trade in rough diamonds, particularly conflict
diamonds which play a role in fuelling conflict;
3. Welcomes the admission in June 2013 of Mali as a full Participant in the Kimberley Process, as approved
through written procedure;
4. Recognizes the important contributions that the international efforts to address the problem of conflict
diamonds, including the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, have made to the settlement of conflicts and the
consolidation of peace in Angola, Liberia and Sierra Leone;
5. Notes the efforts to further strengthen implementation of the Kimberley Process, including efforts to
continue to examine the application of Kimberley Process Certification Scheme requirements in cross-border
Internet sales;
6. Also notes the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of 15 May 2003
granting a waiver with respect to the measures taken to implement the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme,
effective from 1 January 2003 to 31 December 2006, the decision of the General Council of 17 November 2006
granting an extension of the waiver until 31 December 2012, and the decision of the General Council of
11 December 2012 granting an extension of the waiver until 31 December 2018;
7. Takes note of the report of the Chair of the Kimberley Process submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 67/135, 243 and congratulates the participating Governments, the regional economic integration
organization,244 the diamond industry and civil society organizations involved in the Process for contributing to the
development, implementation and monitoring of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme;
8. Acknowledges the progress made by Kimberley Process working groups, Participants and observers
during 2013 in fulfilling the objectives set by the Chair to strengthen implementation of the peer review system,
increase the transparency and accuracy of statistics, promote research into the traceability of diamonds, promote
inclusiveness by broadening the level of involvement by Governments, industry and civil society in the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme, foster a sense of ownership by Participants, improve information and communication
flows and enhance the capacity of the Certification Scheme to respond to emerging challenges;
_______________
243
244

A/68/649, annex.
European Union.

149

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Notes that the annual reporting process on Kimberley Process Certification Scheme implementation is
the main comprehensive and regular source of information on the implementation of the Process provided by
Participants, and calls upon Participants to submit consistent and substantive annual reports in order to conform to
this requirement;
10. Expresses appreciation to Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, the Russian Federation, Singapore, South Africa and
Viet Nam for receiving review visits or missions in 2013, welcomes the commitment of those countries to
continuously open their certification systems to reviews and improvements, and calls upon other Participants that
have not already done so to make themselves available to receive review visits;
11. Acknowledges the efforts of the Kimberley Process to strengthen implementation and enforcement, and
in particular to ensure coordination of Kimberley Process actions in relation to the occurrence of fraudulent
certificates, to apply vigilance and ensure the detection and reporting of shipments of suspicious origin and to
facilitate the exchange of information in cases of infringement, and acknowledges with appreciation the increased
level of collaboration among Participants and with the World Customs Organization in this matter;
12. Stresses that the widest possible participation in the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme is essential,
encourages Member States to contribute to the work of the Kimberley Process by seeking membership,
participating actively in the Certification Scheme and complying with its undertakings, and acknowledges the
importance of the increased involvement of civil society organizations in the Process;
13. Calls upon the Participants of the Kimberley Process to continue to articulate and improve rules and
procedures to further enhance the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, and notes with
satisfaction the systematization of the work of the Process with respect to developing transparent and uniform rules
and procedures and improving the mechanism for consultations and coordination within the Process, including
through the adoption of rules related to non-compliance and statistical anomalies;
14. Notes with appreciation the willingness of Kimberley Process Participants and observers to support and
provide technical assistance to those Participants experiencing temporary difficulties in complying with the
requirements of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme;
15. Recognizes the importance of the Kimberley Process in promoting economic development, particularly
in the artisanal and small-scale diamond mining sector, and encourages an increased focus on issues related to
development, including through the work of the Diamond Development Initiative;
16. Notes with appreciation the continued cooperation of the Kimberley Process with the United Nations on
the issue of diamonds from Côte d’Ivoire, in accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution
2101 (2013) of 25 April 2013 and in line with the administrative decision on sharing information with the United
Nations;245
17. Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations of the review mission to Côte d’Ivoire, which took
place from 30 September to 4 October 2013, acknowledges the important steps taken by Côte d’Ivoire to ensure
compliance with Kimberley Process Certification Scheme minimum requirements pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2101 (2013), notes that, in its 2013 final communiqué, the Kimberley Process plenary meeting
recognized that Côte d’Ivoire has fulfilled the minimum requirements as far as possibly could be achieved under the
United Nations embargo, and recalls that the Council, pursuant to its resolution 2101 (2013), will review measures
in the light of progress made towards Kimberley Process implementation;
18. Encourages the Friends of Côte d’Ivoire to continue to provide support to Côte d’Ivoire to prepare it for
implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme;
19. Encourages the Kimberley Process to continue to actively collaborate with the United Nations Group of
Experts on Côte d’Ivoire, established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1584 (2005) of 1 February 2005, and,
through liaison, with Côte d’Ivoire, with the ultimate objective of meeting the preconditions for the lifting of United
Nations sanctions on the trade in rough diamonds from Côte d’Ivoire;
_______________
245

150

See A/64/559, annex, attachment I.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

20. Acknowledges Liberia’s active involvement in the work carried out by the Kimberley Process regional
team for cooperation in the Mano River region, encourages the Process, in collaboration with the Panel of Experts
on Liberia, established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2025 (2011) of 14 December 2011, to support the
efforts of Liberia to continue reinforcing its internal controls system and to continue to address the challenges to the
implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, and notes the review visit to Liberia from 18 to
27 March 2013;
21. Welcomes the initiative from Kimberley Process Participants in West Africa to enhance their cooperation
on Kimberley Process implementation and policy harmonization efforts in the context of the regional approach for
the Mano River region, and acknowledges the region’s plans for developing a regional strategy and road map as the
outcome of a high-level workshop on regional cooperation in West Africa early in 2014;
22. Notes that the plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process restated the administrative decision on the
temporary suspension of the Central African Republic, as approved through written procedure of 23 May 2013, and
the reported willingness of the Central African Republic to address issues of non-compliance with Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme minimum requirements and strengthen its internal control systems;
23. Recalls the decision of the plenary meeting regarding the continued participation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela in the Kimberley Process, acknowledges the positive step represented by the submissions
presented by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in response to the decision of the plenary meeting, and invites
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to continue its efforts to fully reintegrate into the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme through the steps outlined in the Kimberley Process communiqué of 30 November 2012;246
24. Notes with appreciation the role played by the Kimberley Process Administrative Support Mechanism,
with the World Diamond Council acting as host for 2013;
25. Notes the discussions during 2013 on the subject of the Kimberley Process reforms and the proposed
changes to the definition of “conflict diamonds”, among other proposals, also notes that consensus was not reached
on whether or not to change the definition of “conflict diamonds”, and further notes that the Chair, Participants and
observers were encouraged to continue dialogue on this issue;
26. Acknowledges that the plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process adopted a proposal for modifications
to the Kimberley Process core document aimed at strengthening the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme within
its current remit;
27. Acknowledges the adoption by the plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process of seven administrative
decisions, on technical definitions; guidelines for the preparation, review and analysis of Kimberley Process
statistical data; the chairmanship of Kimberley Process working bodies; Kimberley Process Participants’
applications for membership and participation in working bodies; protection guidelines for the use of the Kimberley
Process logo; the dissolution of the Participation and Selection Committees and the formation of the Committee on
Participation and Chairmanship; and technical certificates for scientific research;
28. Notes with appreciation the continued support of the Antwerp World Diamond Centre for the Kimberley
Process website, which has been enhanced significantly to make it a more efficient and effective tool;
29. Reaffirms the importance of the tripartite nature of the Kimberley Process, and welcomes the
commitment of the plenary meeting to continue its constructive engagement with civil society in recognition of the
role that civil society plays in the Kimberley Process;
30. Encourages further improvement in enforcement of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, and
notes the new efforts made to increase information-sharing and collaboration in enforcement;
31. Acknowledges with great appreciation the important contribution that South Africa, as Chair of the
Kimberley Process in 2013, has made to curbing the trade in conflict diamonds, and welcomes the selection of
China as the Chair and Angola as the Vice-Chair of the Process for 2014;
_______________
246

A/67/640, annex, enclosure.

151

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

32. Requests the Chair of the Kimberley Process to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session
a report on the implementation of the Process;
33. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “The role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
RESOLUTION 68/129
A/RES/681/29

Adopted at the 69th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.32 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Belgium, Canada, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Poland, Slovenia, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

68/129. Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,247
Recalling the findings and recommendations of the independent inquiry commissioned by the SecretaryGeneral, with the approval of the Security Council, into the actions of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide
in Rwanda,248
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 249 particularly its recognition that all individuals, in
particular vulnerable people, are entitled to freedom from fear and freedom from want, with an equal opportunity to
enjoy all their rights and fully develop their human potential,
Recalling further its resolution 59/137 of 10 December 2004, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
encourage relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to continue to work with the
Government of Rwanda to develop and implement programmes aimed at supporting vulnerable groups that
continue to suffer from the effects of the 1994 genocide,
Recalling its resolution 60/225 of 23 December 2005, in which it urged Member States to develop educational
programmes on the lessons of the genocide in Rwanda, and also requested the Secretary-General to establish a
programme of outreach for Rwanda genocide victim remembrance and education, in order to prevent future acts of
genocide,
Recognizing the numerous difficulties faced by survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly the
orphans, widows and victims of sexual violence, who are poorer and more vulnerable as a result of the genocide,
especially the many victims of sexual violence who have contracted HIV and have since either died or become
seriously ill with AIDS,
Commending the significant efforts of the Government and people of Rwanda and civil society
organizations, as well as international efforts, to provide support for restoring the dignity of the survivors,
including the allocation by the Government of 5 per cent of its national budget every year to support the most
vulnerable genocide survivors,
Recalling Security Council resolution 1966 (2010) of 22 December 2010, in which the Council requested the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994 to take all possible measures to expeditiously complete all its remaining work no
later than 31 December 2014, to prepare its closure and to ensure a smooth transition to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,
_______________
247

Resolution 217 A (III).
See S/1999/1257.
249
Resolution 60/1.
248

152

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Firmly convinced of the necessity of restoring the dignity of the survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda,
which would help to promote reconciliation and healing in Rwanda,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General,250
1. Recalls its resolution 58/234 of 23 December 2003, in which it designated 7 April 2004 as the
International Day of Reflection on the Genocide in Rwanda, and calls upon the United Nations and the international
community to join the Rwandan people for the twentieth commemoration of the 1994 Rwandan genocide in April
2014 and to renew the commitment to the fight against genocide throughout the world;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to encourage the relevant agencies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations system to implement resolution 59/137 expeditiously, inter alia, by providing assistance in the
areas of education for orphans, medical care and treatment for victims of sexual violence, including HIV-positive
victims, trauma and psychological counselling, and skills training and microcredit programmes aimed at promoting
self-sufficiency and alleviating poverty;
3. Calls upon Member States and the United Nations system to urgently implement the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General;250
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the activities of the programme of outreach entitled “The
Rwanda Genocide and the United Nations” aimed at Rwanda genocide victim remembrance and education, in order
to help to prevent future acts of genocide;
5. Notes the importance of residual issues, including witness protection and victim support, the archives of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and judicial issues, and capacity-building for the Rwandan judiciary
and the Genocide Fugitive Tracking Unit of the Ministry of Justice of the Government of Rwanda, and underlines
the need for increased and sustained attention to these issues;
6. Welcomes the adoption of Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), in which the Council decided to
establish the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and in this regard calls upon the Mechanism
to conclude the remaining cases within the initial period set out in resolution 1966 (2010), and calls upon Member
States to support that effort;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Government of Rwanda, to continue to
encourage the relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to take appropriate steps to
support, in particular, efforts to enhance judicial capacity-building, transparency and victim support in Rwanda;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General, in view of the critical situation of the survivors of the 1994
genocide in Rwanda and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda completion strategy, to continue to take all
necessary and practicable measures for the implementation of the present resolution and to submit a report thereon
to the General Assembly, at its seventieth session, with concrete recommendations for appropriate solutions to the
remaining needs of survivors of the Rwandan genocide of 1994;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session the item entitled “Assistance to
survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of sexual violence”.
RESOLUTION 68/237
A/RES/682/37

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2013, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.34,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

68/237. Proclamation of the International Decade for People of African Descent
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/111 of 12 December 1997, by which it decided to convene the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, and its resolutions 56/266 of 27 March
_______________
250

A/68/497.

153

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2002, 57/195 of 18 December 2002, 58/160 of 22 December 2003, 59/177 of 20 December 2004 and 60/144 of
16 December 2005, which guided the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference and the effective
implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,251
Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and have the potential to
contribute constructively to the development and well-being of their societies, and that any doctrine of racial
superiority is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must be rejected, together
with theories that attempt to determine the existence of separate human races,
Acknowledging the efforts and initiatives undertaken by States to prohibit discrimination and segregation and
to engender the full enjoyment of economic, social and cultural as well as civil and political rights,
Emphasizing that, despite efforts in this regard, millions of human beings continue to be victims of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their contemporary manifestations, some of
which take violent forms,
Emphasizing also its resolution 64/169 of 18 December 2009, by which it proclaimed 2011 as the
International Year for People of African Descent,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 38/14 of 22 November 1983 and 48/91 of
20 December 1993, by which it proclaimed the three Decades to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, and
conscious of the fact that their objectives are yet to be attained,
Underlining its resolution 67/155 of 20 December 2012, by which it requested the President of the General
Assembly, in consultation with Member States, relevant United Nations programmes and organizations and civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, to launch an informal consultative preparatory process for the
proclamation of the International Decade for People of African Descent, with the theme “People of African descent:
recognition, justice and development”, with a view to proclaiming the International Decade in 2013,
Recalling paragraph 61 of its resolution 66/144 of 19 December 2011, by which it encouraged the Working
Group of Experts on People of African Descent to develop a programme of action, including a theme, for adoption
by the Human Rights Council, and in this regard taking note of Council resolution 21/33 of 28 September 2012,252
in which the Council welcomed the draft programme of action for the Decade for People of African Descent253 and
decided to transmit it to the General Assembly with a view to its adoption,
Taking note with appreciation of the work undertaken by the Working Group of Experts on People of African
Descent in producing a draft programme of action that is comprehensive and covers a wide range of areas that could
serve as a broad framework for the programme of action for the International Decade for People of African Descent,
and the report of the Secretary-General on how to make the International Decade effective,254
1. Proclaims the International Decade for People of African Descent, commencing on 1 January 2015 and
ending on 31 December 2024, with the theme “People of African descent: recognition, justice and development”, to
be officially launched immediately following the general debate of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly, through the facilitator, to continue consultations with
States members of the General Assembly and other stakeholders, with a view to elaborating a programme for the
implementation of the International Decade, with a draft programme developed by the Intergovernmental Working
Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action as its basis, to be
finalized and adopted during the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly and not later than 30 June 2014;
3. Calls for the allocation of predictable funding from the regular budget and extrabudgetary resources of
the United Nations for the effective implementation of the programme of action and activities under the
International Decade.
_______________
251

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
253
A/HRC/21/60/Add.2.
254
A/67/879.
252

154

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/23.

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures....................................... 157

68/24.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace............................................................... 159

68/25.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty ........................................................................................................... 161

68/26.

Consolidation of the regime established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ................................................................................................................ 162

68/27.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East.......................................................... 163

68/28.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons ..................................................................................................................................... 165

68/29.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space ............................................................................................................... 168

68/30.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer
of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction.................................................................................................. 170

68/31.

The Arms Trade Treaty......................................................................................................................................... 172

68/32.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament .................................... 173

68/33.

Women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control ...................................................................................... 175

68/34.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them........................ 176

68/35.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.......................................................................... 178

68/36.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament and
arms control ......................................................................................................................................................... 180

68/37.

Relationship between disarmament and development.............................................................................................. 181

68/38.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation......................................................... 182

68/39.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments ......... 185

68/40.

Reducing nuclear danger....................................................................................................................................... 189

68/41.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.............................................................. 190

68/42.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use
of nuclear weapons ............................................................................................................................................... 192

68/43.

Transparency in armaments................................................................................................................................... 194

68/44.

National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and technology ............................... 197

68/45.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction..................................................................................................... 198

68/46.

Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations ................................................................................ 201

68/47.

Nuclear disarmament ............................................................................................................................................ 203

68/48.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects............................................................................. 208

68/49.

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty) ......................................................... 211

68/50.

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities................................................................. 213
155

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/51.

United action towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons ............................................................................... 214

68/52.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus ....................................... 218

68/53.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes.................................................................................................... 220

68/54.

Regional disarmament .......................................................................................................................................... 222

68/55.

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context .................................................................... 223

68/56.

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels............................................................................. 224

68/57.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament .................................................................................... 225

68/58.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons................................................................................ 227

68/59.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific ................................................ 228

68/60.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean....... 229

68/61.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa .................................................................... 231

68/62.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa ...................................................................................................................... 233

68/63.

Report of the Disarmament Commission................................................................................................................ 237

68/64.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament............................................................................................................. 238

68/65.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East................................................................................................. 240

68/66.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects .................................................................... 242

68/67.

Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region .................................................................... 244

68/68.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty............................................................................................................... 246

68/69.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction ........................................................................................................ 248

68/243.

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security.................. 250

156

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/23
A/RES/68/23

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/401, para. 8)1

68/23.

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/72 of 4 December 1998, 54/43 of 1 December 1999, 56/14 of 29 November 2001,
58/28 of 8 December 2003, 60/44 of 8 December 2005, 62/13 of 5 December 2007, 64/22 of 2 December 2009 and
66/20 of 2 December 2011 on objective information on military matters, including transparency of military
expenditures,
Recalling also its resolution 35/142 B of 12 December 1980, which introduced the United Nations system for
the standardized reporting of military expenditures, its resolutions 48/62 of 16 December 1993, 49/66 of
15 December 1994, 51/38 of 10 December 1996 and 52/32 of 9 December 1997, in which the General Assembly
called upon all Member States to participate in the system, and its resolution 47/54 B of 9 December 1992, in which
the Assembly endorsed the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters and
invited Member States to provide the Secretary-General with relevant information regarding their implementation,
Noting that, since then, national reports on military expenditures and on the guidelines and recommendations
for objective information on military matters have been submitted by a number of Member States belonging to
different geographical regions,
Convinced that the improvement of international relations forms a sound basis for promoting further openness
and transparency in all military matters,
Convinced also that transparency in military matters is an essential element for building a climate of trust and
confidence between States worldwide and that a better flow of objective information on military matters can help to
relieve international tension and is therefore an important contribution to conflict prevention,
Noting the role of the standardized reporting system, as instituted through its resolution 35/142 B, as an
important instrument to enhance transparency in military matters,
Conscious that the value of the standardized reporting system would be enhanced by a broader participation of
Member States,
Noting that a periodic review of the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures could facilitate its further
development and maintain its continued relevance and operation, and recalling that, in its resolution 66/20, the
General Assembly recommended the establishment of a process for periodic reviews and that another review of the
continuing relevance and operation of the Report be conducted in five years,
Recalling, in that regard, the report of the Secretary-General on ways and means to implement the guidelines
and recommendations for objective information on military matters, including, in particular, on how to strengthen
and broaden participation in the standardized reporting system,2
Recalling also the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the Operation and Further Development of
the United Nations Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military Expenditures on further ways and means to
implement the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters, including, in
particular, on how to strengthen and broaden participation in the standardized reporting system,3
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
2
A/54/298.
3
A/66/89 and Corr.1–3.

157

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the work of the Secretariat on migrating data submitted on military expenditures to its new,
interactive web platform, which includes an online reporting feature, thus increasing user-friendliness and
facilitating the submission of reports, in accordance with resolution 66/20,
Noting the efforts of several regional organizations to promote transparency of military expenditures,
including standardized annual exchanges of relevant information among their member States,
Noting with concern the downward trend in reporting to the Report on Military Expenditures over the past
decade,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the Report on Military Expenditures under the current political and
economic circumstances,
Recalling that, in its resolution 66/20, the General Assembly recommended that, for the purpose of reporting
by Member States of their national military expenditures in the framework of the Report on Military Expenditures,
“military expenditures” be commonly understood to refer to all financial resources that a State spends on the uses
and functions of its military forces and information on military expenditures represent an actual outlay in current
prices and domestic currency,
Mindful of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including its Article 26,
1. Calls upon Member States, with a view to achieving the broadest possible participation, to provide the
Secretary-General, by 30 April annually, with a report on their military expenditures for the latest fiscal year for
which data are available, using, preferably and to the extent possible, one of the online reporting forms, including a
nil report if appropriate, or, as appropriate, any other format developed in the context of similar reporting on military
expenditures to other international or regional organizations;
2. Recommends the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters to all
Member States for implementation, fully taking into account specific political, military and other conditions
prevailing in a region, on the basis of initiatives and with the agreement of the States of the region concerned;
3. Invites Member States in a position to do so to supplement their reports, on a voluntary basis, with
explanatory remarks regarding submitted data to explain or clarify the figures provided in the reporting forms, such
as the total military expenditures as a share of gross domestic product, major changes from previous reports and any
additional information reflecting their defence policy, military strategies and doctrines;
4.

Invites Member States to provide, preferably with their annual report, their national points of contact;

5. Encourages relevant international bodies and regional organizations to promote transparency of military
expenditures and to enhance complementarities among reporting systems, taking into account the particular
characteristics of each region, and to consider the possibility of an exchange of information with the United Nations;
6.

Takes note of the annual reports of the Secretary-General;4

7.

Requests the Secretary-General, within available resources:

(a) To continue the practice of sending an annual note verbale to Member States requesting the submission
of their report on military expenditures;
(b) To circulate annually a note verbale to Member States detailing which reports on military expenditures
were submitted and are available online;
(c) To establish a group of governmental experts, on the basis of equitable geographical representation, to
review the operation and further development of the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures, including the
establishment of a process for periodic reviews in order to ensure the continued relevance and operation of the
Report, commencing in 2016, taking into account the views expressed by Member States on the subject and the
reports of the Secretary-General on objective information on military matters, including transparency of military
expenditures, and to transmit the report of the group of experts to the General Assembly for consideration at its
seventy-second session;
_______________
4

A/58/202 and Add.1–3, A/59/192 and Add.1, A/60/159 and Add.1–3, A/61/133 and Add.1–3, A/62/158 and Add.1–3, A/63/97 and Add.1
and 2, A/64/113 and Add.1 and 2, A/65/118 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and 2, A/66/117 and Add.1, A/67/128 and Add.1 and A/68/131 and
Add.1.

158

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(d) To continue consultations with relevant international bodies, with a view to ascertaining requirements
for adjusting the present instrument in order to encourage wider participation, and to make recommendations, based
on the outcome of those consultations and taking into account the views of Member States, on necessary changes to
the content and structure of the standardized reporting system;
(e) To encourage relevant international bodies and organizations to promote transparency of military
expenditures and to consult with those bodies and organizations with emphasis on examining possibilities for
enhancing complementarities among international and regional reporting systems and for exchanging related
information between those bodies and the United Nations;
(f) To continue to foster further cooperation with relevant regional organizations with a view to raising
awareness of the Report on Military Expenditures and its role as a confidence-building measure;
(g) To encourage the United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament in Africa, in Asia and the
Pacific, and in Latin America and the Caribbean to assist Member States in their regions in enhancing their
knowledge of the standardized reporting system;
(h) To promote international and regional or subregional symposiums and training seminars and to support
the development of an online training course by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, with the
financial and technical support of interested States, with a view to explaining the purpose of the standardized
reporting system, facilitating the electronic filing of reports and providing relevant technical instructions;
(i)

To report on experiences gained during such symposiums and training seminars;

(j) To provide, upon request, technical assistance to Member States lacking the capacity to report data and
to encourage Member States to voluntarily provide bilateral assistance to other Member States;
8.

Encourages Member States:

(a) To inform the Secretary-General about possible problems with the standardized reporting system and
their reasons for not submitting the requested data;
(b) To continue to provide the Secretary-General with their views and suggestions on ways and means to
improve the future functioning of and broaden participation in the standardized reporting system, including
necessary changes to its content and structure, as well as recommendations to facilitate its further development;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the item entitled “Reduction
of military budgets”, the sub-item entitled “Objective information on military matters, including transparency of
military expenditures”.
RESOLUTION 68/24
A/RES/68/24

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/402, para. 7),5
by a recorded vote of 130 to 4, with 45 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and

_______________
5
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).

159

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: France, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine

68/24.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of
16 December 1971, and recalling also its resolutions 54/47 of 1 December 1999, 56/16 of 29 November 2001,
58/29 of 8 December 2003, 60/48 of 8 December 2005, 62/14 of 5 December 2007, 64/23 of 2 December 2009 and
66/22 of 2 December 2011 and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, held in
New York from 2 to 13 July 1979,6
Recalling further paragraph 102 of the Final Document of the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Kuala Lumpur on 24 and 25 February 2003,7 in which it was noted,
inter alia, that the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean would continue his informal consultations
on the future work of the Committee,
Emphasizing the need to foster consensual approaches that are conducive to the pursuit of such endeavours,
Noting the initiatives taken by countries of the region to promote cooperation, in particular economic
cooperation, in the Indian Ocean area and the possible contribution of such initiatives to overall objectives of a zone
of peace,
Convinced that the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime
users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would assist the progress of a
mutually beneficial dialogue to develop conditions of peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region,
Considering that greater efforts and more time are required to develop a focused discussion on practical
measures to ensure conditions of peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee,8
1.

Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean;8

2. Reiterates its conviction that the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the
major maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would greatly
facilitate the development of a mutually beneficial dialogue to advance peace, security and stability in the Indian
Ocean region;
3. Requests the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee to continue his informal consultations with the members
of the Committee and to report through the Committee to the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render, within existing resources, all necessary assistance
to the Ad Hoc Committee, including the provision of summary records;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session the item entitled “Implementation
of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace”.
_______________
6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 45 and corrigendum (A/34/45 and Corr.1).
A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/68/29).
7

160

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/25
A/RES/68/25

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/403, para. 7)9

68/25.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/53 of 10 December 1996 and 56/17 of 29 November 2001 and all its other
relevant resolutions, as well as those of the Organization of African Unity and of the African Union,
Recalling also the signing of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba)10 in Cairo
on 11 April 1996,
Recalling further the Cairo Declaration adopted on that occasion,11 in which it was emphasized that nuclearweapon-free zones, especially in regions of tension, such as the Middle East, enhance global and regional peace and
security,
Recalling the statement made by the President of the Security Council on behalf of the members of the
Council on 12 April 1996,12 in which the Council affirmed that the signature of the Treaty constituted an important
contribution by the African countries to the maintenance of international peace and security,
Considering that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, especially in the Middle East, would
enhance the security of Africa and the viability of the African nuclear-weapon-free zone,
1. Recalls with satisfaction the entry into force of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of
Pelindaba)10 on 15 July 2009;
2.

Calls upon African States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Treaty as soon as possible;

3. Welcomes the convening of the first Conference of States Parties to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba), in Addis Ababa on 4 November 2010, and of the second Conference of States
Parties, also in Addis Ababa, on 12 and 13 November 2012;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the nuclear-weapon States that have signed the Protocols to the Treaty10
that concern them, and calls upon those that have not yet ratified the Protocols that concern them to do so as soon as
possible;
5. Calls upon the States contemplated in Protocol III to the Treaty that have not yet done so to take all
measures necessary to ensure the speedy application of the Treaty to territories for which they are, de jure or de
facto, internationally responsible and which lie within the limits of the geographical zone established in the Treaty;
6. Calls upon the African States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons13 that
have not yet done so to conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with the International Atomic Energy
Agency pursuant to the Treaty, thereby satisfying the requirements of article 9 (b) of and annex II to the Treaty of
Pelindaba, and to conclude additional protocols to their safeguards agreements on the basis of the model protocol
approved by the Board of Governors of the Agency on 15 May 1997;
7. Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency for the diligence with
which they have rendered effective assistance to the signatories to the Treaty;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “African NuclearWeapon-Free Zone Treaty”.
_______________
9

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Chile, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.
10
A/50/426, annex.
11
A/51/113-S/1996/276, annex.
12
S/PRST/1996/17; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1996.
13
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

161

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/26
A/RES/68/26

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/404, para. 8)14

68/26.

Consolidation of the regime established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty
of Tlatelolco)15 was opened for signature in Mexico City on 14 February 1967,
Recalling also that, in its preamble, the Treaty of Tlatelolco states that military denuclearized zones are not an
end in themselves but rather a means for achieving general and complete disarmament at a later stage,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, the General Assembly welcomed
with special satisfaction the Treaty of Tlatelolco as an event of historic significance in the efforts to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and to promote international peace and security,
Recalling that, in 1990, 1991 and 1992, the General Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean approved and opened for signature a set of amendments to the Treaty
of Tlatelolco,16 with the aim of enabling the full entry into force of that instrument,
Highlighting the fact that the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which is in force for 33 sovereign States of the region,
consolidated the first nuclear-weapon-free zone established in a densely populated region,
Recognizing the important contribution of the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga,17 Bangkok18 and Pelindaba19
and the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia, as well as the Antarctic Treaty20 and the declaration
by Mongolia of its nuclear-weapon-free status, to the achievement of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament,
Recalling all relevant United Nations resolutions in support of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
Highlighting the value of enhancing cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty members,
including through the holding of joint meetings of States parties, signatories and observers to those treaties,
Welcoming the holding of the second Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, in New York on 30 April 2010, as an important contribution to
achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Noting the two preparatory meetings for the third Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties
that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, held in Vienna on 27 April 2012 and in Geneva on
26 April 2013,
Welcoming the international seminar on the theme “The experience of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin
America and the Caribbean and the perspective towards 2015 and beyond”, held on the occasion of the forty-fifth
anniversary of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, in Mexico City on 14 and 15 February 2012,
_______________
14

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
15
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
16
See resolutions 267 (E-V), 268 (XII) and 290 (VII), adopted by the General Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean on 3 July 1990, 9 May 1991 and 26 August 1992.
17
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
18
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
19
A/50/426, annex.
20
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.

162

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming also the granting, on 23 October 2013, of the Gold Future Policy Award for sustainable
disarmament to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, in recognition of its invaluable contribution to advancing regional peace
and security,
Noting that the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, in its final document,21 encouraged the establishment of further nuclear-weapon-free zones and the
fostering of cooperation and enhanced consultation mechanisms among the existing nuclear-weapon-free zones
through the establishment of concrete measures, in order to fully implement the principles and objectives of the
relevant nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties, and commending the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean for its leadership in this endeavour,
Reaffirming the importance of the Agency as the appropriate legal and political forum for ensuring full
compliance with and implementation of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as well as cooperation with the entities of other
nuclear-weapon-free zones,
1. Welcomes the fact that the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the
Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco)15 is in force for the sovereign States of the region;
2. Urges the countries of the region that have not yet done so to sign or deposit their instruments of
ratification of the amendments to the Treaty of Tlatelolco approved by the General Conference of the Agency for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean in its resolutions 267 (E-V), 268 (XII) and
290 (VII);
3. Encourages States that have ratified the relevant Protocols to the Treaty of Tlatelolco to review any
reservations in this regard, in accordance with action 9 of the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;22
4. Encourages States members of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean to continue the activities and efforts of the Agency with a view to implementing the agreements
reached at the first and second conferences of States parties and signatories to treaties that establish nuclear-weaponfree zones;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Consolidation
of the regime established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)”.
RESOLUTION 68/27
A/RES/68/27

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/407, para. 7)23

68/27.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/71 of
10 December 1976, 32/82 of 12 December 1977, 33/64 of 14 December 1978, 34/77 of 11 December 1979, 35/147
of 12 December 1980, 36/87 A and B of 9 December 1981, 37/75 of 9 December 1982, 38/64 of 15 December
1983, 39/54 of 12 December 1984, 40/82 of 12 December 1985, 41/48 of 3 December 1986, 42/28 of 30 November
1987, 43/65 of 7 December 1988, 44/108 of 15 December 1989, 45/52 of 4 December 1990, 46/30 of 6 December
1991, 47/48 of 9 December 1992, 48/71 of 16 December 1993, 49/71 of 15 December 1994, 50/66 of 12 December
1995, 51/41 of 10 December 1996, 52/34 of 9 December 1997, 53/74 of 4 December 1998, 54/51 of 1 December
_______________
21

2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
22
Ibid., vol. I (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions, section I, entitled “Nuclear
disarmament”.
23
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Egypt.

163

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1999, 55/30 of 20 November 2000, 56/21 of 29 November 2001, 57/55 of 22 November 2002, 58/34 of
8 December 2003, 59/63 of 3 December 2004, 60/52 of 8 December 2005, 61/56 of 6 December 2006, 62/18 of
5 December 2007, 63/38 of 2 December 2008, 64/26 of 2 December 2009, 65/42 of 8 December 2010, 66/25 of
2 December 2011 and 67/28 of 3 December 2012 on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region
of the Middle East,
Recalling also the recommendations for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East consistent with paragraphs 60 to 63, and in particular paragraph 63 (d), of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,24
Emphasizing the basic provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions, in which all parties directly concerned
are called upon to consider taking the practical and urgent steps required for the implementation of the proposal to
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East and, pending and during the establishment of
such a zone, to declare solemnly that they will refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, acquiring or in any
other way possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices and from permitting the stationing of nuclear
weapons on their territory by any third party, to agree to place their nuclear facilities under International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards and to declare their support for the establishment of the zone and to deposit such
declarations with the Security Council for consideration, as appropriate,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all States to acquire and develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
Emphasizing the need for appropriate measures on the question of the prohibition of military attacks on
nuclear facilities,
Bearing in mind the consensus reached by the General Assembly since its thirty-fifth session that the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East would greatly enhance international
peace and security,
Desirous of building on that consensus so that substantial progress can be made towards establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Welcoming all initiatives leading to general and complete disarmament, including in the region of the Middle
East, and in particular on the establishment therein of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons,
Noting the peace negotiations in the Middle East, which should be of a comprehensive nature and represent an
appropriate framework for the peaceful settlement of contentious issues in the region,
Recognizing the importance of credible regional security, including the establishment of a mutually verifiable
nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Emphasizing the essential role of the United Nations in the establishment of a mutually verifiable nuclearweapon-free zone,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 67/28,25
1. Urges all parties directly concerned seriously to consider taking the practical and urgent steps required
for the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and, as a means of promoting this objective,
invites the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;26
2. Calls upon all countries of the region that have not yet done so, pending the establishment of the zone, to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
3. Takes note of resolution GC(57)/RES/15, adopted on 20 September 2013 by the General Conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency at its fifty-seventh regular session, concerning the application of Agency
safeguards in the Middle East;
_______________
24

Resolution S-10/2.
A/68/124 (Part I) and Add.1.
26
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
25

164

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Notes the importance of the ongoing bilateral Middle East peace negotiations and the activities of the
multilateral Working Group on Arms Control and Regional Security in promoting mutual confidence and security in
the Middle East, including the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
5. Invites all countries of the region, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region
of the Middle East, to declare their support for establishing such a zone, consistent with paragraph 63 (d) of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,24 and to deposit those declarations with the
Security Council;
6. Also invites those countries, pending the establishment of the zone, not to develop, produce, test or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or permit the stationing on their territories, or territories under their control, of
nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices;
7. Invites the nuclear-weapon States and all other States to render their assistance in the establishment of
the zone and at the same time to refrain from any action that runs counter to both the letter and the spirit of the
present resolution;
8.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 67/28;25

9. Invites all parties to consider the appropriate means that may contribute towards the goal of general and
complete disarmament and the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the region of the
Middle East;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to pursue consultations with the States of the region and
other concerned States, in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 46/30 and taking into account the evolving
situation in the region, and to seek from those States their views on the measures outlined in chapters III and IV of
the study annexed to the report of the Secretary-General of 10 October 199027 or other relevant measures, in order to
move towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East”.
RESOLUTION 68/28
A/RES/68/28

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/408, para. 7),28
by a recorded vote of 127 to none, with 57 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,

_______________
27

A/45/435.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bangladesh, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
28

165

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

68/28.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the world with regard to ensuring
lasting security for their peoples,
Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest threat to mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Noting that the renewed interest in nuclear disarmament should be translated into concrete actions for the
achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove
the danger of nuclear war,
Determined to abide strictly by the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations on the non-use of
force or threat of force,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States need to
be safeguarded against the use or threat of use of force, including the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the
international community to develop effective measures and arrangements to ensure the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures and arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons can contribute positively to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,
the first special session devoted to disarmament,29 in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue efforts to
conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons, and desirous of promoting the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Final
Document,
Recalling the relevant parts of the special report of the Committee on Disarmament30 submitted to the General
Assembly at its twelfth special session, the second special session devoted to disarmament,31 and of the special
report of the Conference on Disarmament submitted to the Assembly at its fifteenth special session, the third special
session devoted to disarmament,32 as well as the report of the Conference on its 1992 session,33
Recalling also paragraph 12 of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, contained in
the annex to its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980, in which it is stated, inter alia, that all efforts should be
exerted by the Committee on Disarmament urgently to negotiate with a view to reaching agreement on effective
international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting the in-depth negotiations undertaken in the Conference on Disarmament and its Ad Hoc Committee on
Effective International Arrangements to Assure Non-Nuclear-Weapon States against the Use or Threat of Use of
Nuclear Weapons,34 with a view to reaching agreement on this question,
_______________
29

Resolution S-10/2.
The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.
31
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/S-12/2), sect. III.C.
32
Ibid., Fifteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/S-15/2), sect. III.F.
33
Ibid., Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27), sect. III.F.
34
Ibid., Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/48/27), sect. III.E.
30

166

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note of the proposals submitted under the item in the Conference on Disarmament, including the drafts
of an international convention,
Taking note also of the relevant decision of the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Kuala Lumpur on 24 and 25 February 2003, 35 which was reiterated at the
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Conferences of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana
on 15 and 16 September 2006,36 and in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 15 and 16 July 2009,37 as well as the relevant
recommendations of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
Taking note further of the unilateral declarations made by all the nuclear-weapon States on their policies of
non-use or non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear-weapon States,
Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the
elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, as well as the difficulties pointed out in evolving a common approach acceptable to all,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 984 (1995) of 11 April 1995 and the views expressed on it,
Recalling its relevant resolutions adopted in previous years, in particular resolutions 45/54 of 4 December
1990, 46/32 of 6 December 1991, 47/50 of 9 December 1992, 48/73 of 16 December 1993, 49/73 of 15 December
1994, 50/68 of 12 December 1995, 51/43 of 10 December 1996, 52/36 of 9 December 1997, 53/75 of 4 December
1998, 54/52 of 1 December 1999, 55/3l of 20 November 2000, 56/22 of 29 November 2001, 57/56 of 22 November
2002, 58/35 of 8 December 2003, 59/64 of 3 December 2004, 60/53 of 8 December 2005, 61/57 of 6 December
2006, 62/19 of 5 December 2007, 63/39 of 2 December 2008, 64/27 of 2 December 2009, 65/43 of 8 December
2010, 66/26 of 2 December 2011 and 67/29 of 3 December 2012,
1. Reaffirms the urgent need to reach an early agreement on effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Conference on Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the
idea of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons, although the difficulties with regard to evolving a common approach acceptable to all have also been
pointed out;
3. Appeals to all States, especially the nuclear-weapon States, to work actively towards an early agreement
on a common approach and, in particular, on a common formula that could be included in an international
instrument of a legally binding character;
4. Recommends that further intensive efforts be devoted to the search for such a common approach or
common formula and that the various alternative approaches, including, in particular, those considered in the
Conference on Disarmament, be further explored in order to overcome the difficulties;
5. Also recommends that the Conference on Disarmament actively continue intensive negotiations with a
view to reaching early agreement and concluding effective international agreements to assure the non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, taking into account the widespread support for
the conclusion of an international convention and giving consideration to any other proposals designed to secure the
same objective;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Conclusion of
effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons”.

_______________
35

See A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
See A/61/472-S/2006/780, annex I.
37
See A/63/965-S/2009/514, annex I.
36

167

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/29
A/RES/68/29

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/409, para. 7),38
by a recorded vote of 180 to none, with 2 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Israel, United States of America

68/29.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Reaffirming the will of all States that the exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other
celestial bodies, shall be for peaceful purposes and shall be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all
countries, irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific development,
Reaffirming also the provisions of articles III and IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,39
Recalling the obligation of all States to observe the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations regarding
the use or threat of use of force in their international relations, including in their space activities,
Reaffirming paragraph 80 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,40 in
which it is stated that, in order to prevent an arms race in outer space, further measures should be taken and
appropriate international negotiations held in accordance with the spirit of the Treaty,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this issue, and taking note of the proposals submitted to the General
Assembly at its tenth special session and at its regular sessions and of the recommendations made to the competent
organs of the United Nations and to the Conference on Disarmament,
Recognizing that the prevention of an arms race in outer space would avert a grave danger for international
peace and security,
_______________
38

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Malaysia,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Samoa, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Zimbabwe.
39
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
40
Resolution S-10/2.

168

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Emphasizing the paramount importance of strict compliance with existing arms limitation and disarmament
agreements relevant to outer space, including bilateral agreements, and with the existing legal regime concerning the
use of outer space,
Considering that wide participation in the legal regime applicable to outer space could contribute to enhancing
its effectiveness,
Noting that the Ad Hoc Committee on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, taking into account its
previous efforts since its establishment in 1985 and seeking to enhance its functioning in qualitative terms,
continued the examination and identification of various issues, existing agreements and existing proposals, as well
as future initiatives relevant to the prevention of an arms race in outer space, and that this contributed to a better
understanding of a number of problems and to a clearer perception of the various positions,
Noting also that there were no objections in principle in the Conference on Disarmament to the
re-establishment of the Ad Hoc Committee, subject to re-examination of the mandate contained in the decision of
the Conference on Disarmament of 13 February 1992,41
Emphasizing the mutually complementary nature of bilateral and multilateral efforts for the prevention of an
arms race in outer space, and hoping that concrete results will emerge from those efforts as soon as possible,
Convinced that further measures should be examined in the search for effective and verifiable bilateral and
multilateral agreements in order to prevent an arms race in outer space, including the weaponization of outer space,
Stressing that the growing use of outer space increases the need for greater transparency and better information
on the part of the international community,
Recalling, in this context, its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 45/55 B of 4 December 1990,
47/51 of 9 December 1992 and 48/74 A of 16 December 1993, in which, inter alia, it reaffirmed the importance of
confidence-building measures as a means conducive to ensuring the attainment of the objective of the prevention of
an arms race in outer space,
Conscious of the benefits of confidence- and security-building measures in the military field,
Recognizing that negotiations for the conclusion of an international agreement or agreements to prevent an
arms race in outer space remain a priority task of the Conference on Disarmament and that the concrete proposals
on confidence-building measures could form an integral part of such agreements,
Noting with satisfaction the constructive, structured and focused debate on the prevention of an arms race in
outer space at the Conference on Disarmament in 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013,
Noting the introduction by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference on Disarmament of the draft
treaty on the prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of the threat or use of force against outer
space objects,42
Taking note of the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to establish for its 2009 session a working
group to discuss, substantially, without limitation, all issues related to the prevention of an arms race in outer space,
1. Reaffirms the importance and urgency of preventing an arms race in outer space and the readiness of all
States to contribute to that common objective, in conformity with the provisions of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies;39
2. Reaffirms its recognition, as stated in the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Prevention of an Arms
Race in Outer Space, that the legal regime applicable to outer space by itself does not guarantee the prevention of an
arms race in outer space, that the regime plays a significant role in the prevention of an arms race in that
environment, that there is a need to consolidate and reinforce that regime and enhance its effectiveness and that it is
important to comply strictly with existing agreements, both bilateral and multilateral;
_______________
41
42

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27), para. 76.
See CD/1839.

169

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Emphasizes the necessity of further measures with appropriate and effective provisions for verification
to prevent an arms race in outer space;
4. Calls upon all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to contribute actively to the
objective of the peaceful use of outer space and of the prevention of an arms race in outer space and to refrain from
actions contrary to that objective and to the relevant existing treaties in the interest of maintaining international
peace and security and promoting international cooperation;
5. Reiterates that the Conference on Disarmament, as the sole multilateral disarmament negotiating forum,
has the primary role in the negotiation of a multilateral agreement or agreements, as appropriate, on the prevention
of an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;
6. Invites the Conference on Disarmament to establish a working group under its agenda item entitled
“Prevention of an arms race in outer space” as early as possible during its 2014 session;
7. Recognizes, in this respect, the growing convergence of views on the elaboration of measures designed
to strengthen transparency, confidence and security in the peaceful uses of outer space;
8. Urges States conducting activities in outer space, as well as States interested in conducting such
activities, to keep the Conference on Disarmament informed of the progress of bilateral and multilateral negotiations
on the matter, if any, so as to facilitate its work;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Prevention of an
arms race in outer space”.
RESOLUTION 68/30
A/RES/68/30

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),43 by a recorded vote of 165 to none, with 19 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Lebanon,
Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, United States
of America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe

68/30.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/54 B of 1 December 1999, 55/33 V of 20 November 2000, 56/24 M of
29 November 2001, 57/74 of 22 November 2002, 58/53 of 8 December 2003, 59/84 of 3 December 2004, 60/80 of
_______________
43

170

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Cambodia and Slovenia.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8 December 2005, 61/84 of 6 December 2006, 62/41 of 5 December 2007, 63/42 of 2 December 2008, 64/56 of
2 December 2009, 65/48 of 8 December 2010, 66/29 of 2 December 2011 and 67/32 of 3 December 2012,
Reaffirming its determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties caused by anti-personnel mines,
which kill or injure thousands of people – women, girls, boys and men – every year, and which place people living
in affected areas at risk and hinder the development of their communities,
Believing it necessary to do the utmost to contribute in an efficient and coordinated manner to facing the
challenge of removing anti-personnel mines placed throughout the world and to assure their destruction,
Wishing to do the utmost in ensuring assistance for the care and rehabilitation, including the social and
economic reintegration, of mine victims,
Noting with satisfaction the work undertaken to implement the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction 44 and the substantial
progress made towards addressing the global anti-personnel landmine problem,
Recalling the first to twelfth meetings of the States parties to the Convention, held in Maputo (1999), Geneva
(2000), Managua (2001), Geneva (2002), Bangkok (2003), Zagreb (2005), Geneva (2006), the Dead Sea (2007),
Geneva (2008), Geneva (2010), Phnom Penh (2011) and Geneva (2012), and the First Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Convention, held in Nairobi (2004),
Recalling also the Second Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention, held in Cartagena,
Colombia, from 30 November to 4 December 2009, at which the international community reviewed the
implementation of the Convention and the States parties adopted the Cartagena Declaration and the Cartagena
Action Plan 2010–2014 to support enhanced implementation and promotion of the Convention,
Noting with satisfaction that an additional State has ratified the Convention, bringing the total number of
States that have formally accepted the obligations of the Convention to 161,
Emphasizing the desirability of attracting the adherence of all States to the Convention, and determined to
work strenuously towards the promotion of its universalization and norms,
Noting with regret that anti-personnel mines continue to be used in some conflicts around the world, causing
human suffering and impeding post-conflict development,
1. Invites all States that have not signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction44 to accede to it without delay;
2.
delay;

Urges the one remaining State that has signed but has not ratified the Convention to ratify it without

3. Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of and compliance with the Convention,
including through the continued implementation of the Cartagena Action Plan 2010–2014;
4. Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete and timely information as
required under article 7 of the Convention in order to promote transparency and compliance with the Convention;
5. Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to provide, on a voluntary basis,
information to make global mine action efforts more effective;
6. Renews its call upon all States and other relevant parties to work together to promote, support and
advance the care, rehabilitation and social and economic reintegration of mine victims, mine risk education
programmes and the removal and destruction of anti-personnel mines placed or stockpiled throughout the world;
7. Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political level and, where in a position to do
so, to promote adherence to the Convention through bilateral, subregional, regional and multilateral contacts,
outreach, seminars and other means;
_______________
44

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.

171

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8. Reiterates its invitation and encouragement to all interested States, the United Nations, other relevant
international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and
relevant non-governmental organizations to attend the Thirteenth Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention, to
be held in Geneva from 2 to 5 December 2013, and to participate in the future meeting programme of the
Convention;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with article 12, paragraph 1, of the Convention, to
undertake the preparations necessary to convene the Third Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention and, on behalf of the States parties and in accordance with article 12, paragraph 3, of the Convention, to
invite States not parties to the Convention, as well as the United Nations, other relevant international organizations
or institutions, regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental
organizations, to attend the Third Review Conference as observers;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction”.
RESOLUTION 68/31
A/RES/68/31

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),45 by a recorded vote of 152 to none, with 29 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America, Uruguay, Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mauritania,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zimbabwe

68/31.

The Arms Trade Treaty

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 61/89 of 6 December 2006, 63/240 of 24 December 2008, 64/48 of 2 December
2009, 67/234 A of 24 December 2012 and 67/234 B of 2 April 2013, and its decision 66/518 of 2 December 2011,
1.

Welcomes the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty on 2 April 2013;46

2. Notes that the Treaty was opened for signature at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 3 June
2013, will remain open for signature thereafter until its entry into force and, following its entry into force, will be
open for accession for any State that has not signed the Treaty;
_______________
45

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Australia, Costa Rica, Finland, Japan,
Kenya and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
46
See resolution 67/234 B.

172

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to sign and, thereafter, according to their respective
constitutional processes, ratify, accept or approve the Treaty at the earliest possible date;
4. Calls upon those States in a position to do so to provide assistance, including legal or legislative
assistance, institutional capacity-building and technical, material or financial assistance, to requesting States that
intend to become parties to the Treaty, in order to facilitate its early entry into force;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, as depositary of the Treaty, to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session on the status of signature and ratification, acceptance or approval of the Treaty;
6.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
RESOLUTION 68/32

A/RES/68/32

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),47 by a recorded vote of 137 to 28, with 20 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Palau,
Poland, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Georgia, Greece, Japan, Montenegro, Norway,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine

68/32.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/39 of 3 December 2012,
Welcoming the convening of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament, on
26 September 2013, and recognizing its contribution to furthering the objective of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons,
Emphasizing the importance of seeking a safer world for all and achieving peace and security in a world
without nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that effective measures of nuclear disarmament have the highest priority, as affirmed at the first
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the total elimination of nuclear weapons are the only absolute
guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
_______________
47
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).

173

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Acknowledging the significant contribution made by a number of countries towards realizing the objective of
nuclear disarmament by the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as by voluntary renunciation of
nuclear weapon programmes or withdrawal of all nuclear weapons from their territories, and strongly supporting the
speedy establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East,
Recalling the resolve of the Heads of State and Government, as contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,48 to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, and to
keep all options open for achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening an international conference to
identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Reaffirming the central role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament, and also reaffirming the
continued importance and relevance of multilateral disarmament machinery as mandated by the General Assembly
at its first special session devoted to disarmament,
Acknowledging the important role of civil society, including non-governmental organizations, academia,
parliamentarians and the mass media, in advancing the objective of nuclear disarmament,
Sharing the deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and
in this context reaffirming the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,49 particularly to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating
to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Determined to work collectively towards the realization of nuclear disarmament,
1. Underlines the strong support, expressed at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear
disarmament, held on 26 September 2013, for taking urgent and effective measures to achieve the total elimination
of nuclear weapons;
2. Calls for urgent compliance with the legal obligations and the fulfilment of the commitments undertaken
on nuclear disarmament;
3. Endorses the wide support expressed at the high-level meeting for a comprehensive convention on
nuclear weapons;
4. Calls for the urgent commencement of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament for the early
conclusion of a comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons to prohibit their possession, development,
production, acquisition, testing, stockpiling, transfer, use or threat of use and to provide for their destruction;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States with regard to achieving the
objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons, in particular on the elements of a comprehensive convention
on nuclear weapons, and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, and also to
transmit the report to the Conference on Disarmament;
6. Decides to convene, no later than 2018, a United Nations high-level international conference on nuclear
disarmament to review the progress made in this regard;
7. Declares 26 September as the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons devoted
to furthering this objective, including through enhancing public awareness and education about the threat posed to
humanity by nuclear weapons and the necessity for their total elimination, in order to mobilize international efforts
towards achieving the common goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to make all the arrangements necessary to commemorate and promote
the International Day;
_______________
48
49

174

Resolution 55/2.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, academia, parliamentarians, the mass media and individuals, to commemorate and promote the
International Day through all means of educational and public awareness-raising activities;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on nuclear disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 68/33
A/RES/68/33

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)50

68/33.

Women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Charter of the United Nations reaffirms the equal rights of women and men,
Recalling also its resolutions 65/69 of 8 December 2010 and 67/48 of 3 December 2012,
Recalling further General Assembly and Security Council resolutions on the issue of women and peace and
security,
Recognizing that the equal, full and effective participation of both women and men is one of the essential
factors for the promotion and attainment of sustainable peace and security,
Recognizing also the valuable contribution of women to practical disarmament measures carried out at the
local, national, subregional and regional levels in the prevention and reduction of armed violence and armed
conflict, and in promoting disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control,
Recognizing further that the role of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control should be
further developed,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of Member States to increase the participation of women in their national
and regional coordination mechanisms on disarmament-related matters, including in efforts to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects,
1. Urges Member States, relevant subregional and regional organizations, the United Nations and the
specialized agencies to promote equal opportunities for the representation of women in all decision-making
processes with regard to matters related to disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control, in particular as it relates
to the prevention and reduction of armed violence and armed conflict;
2. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the measures taken by Member States to implement
General Assembly resolution 67/48;51
3. Also welcomes the continuing efforts of the United Nations organs, agencies, funds and programmes to
accord high priority to the issue of women and peace and security, and in this regard notes the role of the United
_______________
50

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
51
A/68/166 and Add.1.

175

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) in promoting the
implementation of all resolutions related to women in the context of peace and security;
4. Urges Member States to support and strengthen the effective participation of women in organizations in
the field of disarmament at the local, national, subregional and regional levels;
5. Calls upon all States to empower women, including through capacity-building efforts, as appropriate, to
participate in the design and implementation of disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control efforts;
6. Requests the relevant United Nations organs, agencies, funds and programmes to assist States, upon
request, in promoting the role of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control, including in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on ways and means of promoting
the role of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control and to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control”.
RESOLUTION 68/34
A/RES/68/34

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)52

68/34.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/41 of 3 December 2012 on assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons and collecting them,
Deeply concerned by the magnitude of human casualty and suffering, especially among children, caused by
the illicit proliferation and use of small arms and light weapons,
Concerned by the negative impact that the illicit proliferation and use of those weapons continue to have on
the efforts of States in the Sahelo-Saharan subregion in the areas of poverty eradication, sustainable development
and the maintenance of peace, security and stability,
Bearing in mind the Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation,
Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, adopted in Bamako on 1 December 2000,53
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General entitled “In larger freedom: towards development, security and
human rights for all”,54 in which he emphasized that States must strive just as hard to eliminate the threat of small
arms and light weapons as they do to eliminate the threat of weapons of mass destruction,
Recalling also the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, adopted on 8 December 2005,55
_______________
52

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Economic Community of West African States), Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
53
A/CONF.192/PC/23, annex.
54
A/59/2005.
55
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and Corr.2, annex.

176

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling further the expression of support in the 2005 World Summit Outcome for the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects,56
Recalling the adoption, on 14 June 2006 in Abuja at the thirtieth ordinary summit of the Economic
Community of West African States, of the Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and
Other Related Materials, in replacement of the moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons in West Africa,
Recalling also the entry into force of the Convention on 29 September 2009,
Recalling further the decision taken by the Economic Community to establish the Small Arms Unit,
responsible for advocating appropriate policies and developing and implementing programmes, as well as the
establishment of the Economic Community’s Small Arms Control Programme, launched on 6 June 2006 in
Bamako, in replacement of the Programme for Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development,
Taking note of the latest report of the Secretary-General on assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons and collecting them and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects,57
Recalling, in that regard, the decision of the European Union to significantly support the Economic
Community in its efforts to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
Recognizing the important role that civil society organizations play, by raising public awareness, in efforts to
curb the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons,
Recalling the reports of the United Nations Conferences to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, held in New York from 26 June to 7 July 2006 and from 27 August to 7 September 2012,58
Welcoming the inclusion of small arms and light weapons in the scope of the Arms Trade Treaty,59 as well as
the inclusion of international assistance in its provisions,
1. Commends the United Nations and international, regional and other organizations for their assistance to
States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;
2. Encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts in the context of the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 49/75 G of 15 December 1994 and the recommendations of the United Nations advisory
missions aimed at curbing the illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons and collecting them in the affected
States that so request, with the support of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa
and in close cooperation with the African Union;
3. Encourages the international community to support the implementation of the Economic Community of
West African States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials;
4. Encourages the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan subregion to facilitate the effective functioning of
national commissions to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and in that regard invites
the international community to lend its support wherever possible;
5. Encourages the collaboration of civil society organizations and associations in the efforts of the national
commissions to combat the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and in the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects;60
_______________
56

Resolution 60/1, para. 94.
A/68/171.
58
A/CONF.192/2006/RC/9 and A/CONF.192/2012/RC/4.
59
See resolution 67/234 B.
60
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
57

177

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

6. Encourages cooperation among State organs, international organizations and civil society in support of
programmes and projects aimed at combating the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;
7. Calls upon the international community to provide technical and financial support to strengthen the
capacity of civil society organizations to take action to help to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons;
8. Invites the Secretary-General and those States and organizations that are in a position to do so to continue
to provide assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider the matter and to report to the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons and collecting them”.
RESOLUTION 68/35
A/RES/68/35

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),61 by a recorded vote of 120 to 53, with 9 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, China, India, Malawi, Morocco, Nauru, Pakistan, Samoa, Togo

68/35.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its various resolutions in the field of nuclear disarmament, including resolutions 60/72 of
8 December 2005, 62/24 of 5 December 2007, 64/31 of 2 December 2009, 66/28 of 2 December 2011 and 67/33
and 67/60 of 3 December 2012,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June 1968, the annex to which contains the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,62
Noting the provisions of article VIII, paragraph 3, of the Treaty regarding the convening of review conferences
at five-year intervals,
_______________
61
62

178

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Ecuador and Iran (Islamic Republic of).
See also United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling its resolution 50/70 Q of 12 December 1995, in which the General Assembly noted that the States
parties to the Treaty affirmed the need to continue to move with determination towards the full realization and
effective implementation of the provisions of the Treaty, and accordingly adopted a set of principles and objectives,
Recalling also that, on 11 May 1995, the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons adopted three decisions on, respectively, strengthening the review
process for the Treaty, principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and extension of the
Treaty,63
Reaffirming the resolution on the Middle East adopted on 11 May 1995 by the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference,63 in which the Conference reaffirmed the importance of the early realization of universal adherence to
the Treaty and placement of nuclear facilities under full-scope International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Reaffirming also its resolution 55/33 D of 20 November 2000, in which the General Assembly welcomed the
adoption by consensus on 19 May 2000 of the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,64 including, in particular, the documents entitled “Review of
the operation of the Treaty, taking into account the decisions and the resolution adopted by the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference” and “Improving the effectiveness of the strengthened review process for the Treaty”,65
Taking into consideration the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, in the Final Document
of the 2000 Review Conference, to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear
disarmament, to which all States parties to the Treaty are committed under article VI of the Treaty,
Welcoming the adoption by the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons of a substantive Final Document containing conclusions and recommendations for follow-on
actions relating to nuclear disarmament,66
1. Recalls that the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons reaffirmed the continued validity of the practical steps agreed to in the Final Document of the 2000
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;67
2. Determines to pursue practical steps for systematic and progressive efforts to implement article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons62 and paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the decision on principles and
objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;63
3. Calls for practical steps, as agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be taken by all nuclear-weapon States, which would lead to nuclear
disarmament in a way that promotes international stability and, based on the principle of undiminished security
for all:
(a)

Further efforts to be made by the nuclear-weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals unilaterally;

(b) Increased transparency by the nuclear-weapon States with regard to nuclear weapons capabilities and the
implementation of agreements pursuant to article VI of the Treaty and as a voluntary confidence-building measure
to support further progress in nuclear disarmament;
(c) The further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on unilateral initiatives and as an integral
part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process;
_______________
63

See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
64
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
65
Ibid., vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I.
66
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions, sect. I.
67
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.

179

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(d)

Concrete agreed measures to reduce further the operational status of nuclear weapons systems;

(e) A diminishing role for nuclear weapons in security policies so as to minimize the risk that these weapons
will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total elimination;
(f) The engagement, as soon as appropriate, of all the nuclear-weapon States in the process leading to the
total elimination of their nuclear weapons;
4. Notes that the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences agreed that legally binding security assurances by the
five nuclear-weapon States to the non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime;
5. Urges the States parties to the Treaty to follow up on the implementation of the nuclear disarmament
obligations under the Treaty agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences within the framework of
review conferences and their preparatory committees;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the
1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons”.
RESOLUTION 68/36
A/RES/68/36

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)68

68/36.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on
disarmament and arms control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/70 M of 12 December 1995, 51/45 E of 10 December 1996, 52/38 E of 9 December
1997, 53/77 J of 4 December 1998, 54/54 S of 1 December 1999, 55/33 K of 20 November 2000, 56/24 F of
29 November 2001, 57/64 of 22 November 2002, 58/45 of 8 December 2003, 59/68 of 3 December 2004, 60/60 of
8 December 2005, 61/63 of 6 December 2006, 62/28 of 5 December 2007, 63/51 of 2 December 2008, 64/33 of
2 December 2009, 65/53 of 8 December 2010, 66/31 of 2 December 2011 and 67/37 of 3 December 2012,
Emphasizing the importance of the observance of environmental norms in the preparation and implementation
of disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
Recognizing that it is necessary to take duly into account the agreements adopted at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, as well as prior relevant agreements, in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms limitation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 67/37,69
Noting that the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012, welcomed the adoption by the General Assembly, without a vote, of resolution
66/31 on the observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament
and arms control,70
Mindful of the detrimental environmental effects of the use of nuclear weapons,
_______________
68
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
69
A/68/118 and Add.1.
70
See A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.

180

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1. Reaffirms that international disarmament forums should take fully into account the relevant
environmental norms in negotiating treaties and agreements on disarmament and arms limitation and that all States,
through their actions, should contribute fully to ensuring compliance with the aforementioned norms in the
implementation of treaties and conventions to which they are parties;
2. Calls upon States to adopt unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral measures so as to contribute to
ensuring the application of scientific and technological progress within the framework of international security,
disarmament and other related spheres, without detriment to the environment or to its effective contribution to
attaining sustainable development;
3. Welcomes the information provided by Member States on the implementation of the measures they have
adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution;69
4. Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General information on the measures they
have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a report containing that information to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control”.
RESOLUTION 68/37
A/RES/68/37

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)71

68/37.

Relationship between disarmament and development

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Charter of the United Nations envisages the establishment and maintenance of international
peace and security with the least diversion for armaments of the world’s human and economic resources,
Recalling also the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly
concerning the relationship between disarmament and development,72 as well as the adoption on 11 September
1987 of the Final Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and
Development,73
Recalling further its resolutions 49/75 J of 15 December 1994, 50/70 G of 12 December 1995, 51/45 D of
10 December 1996, 52/38 D of 9 December 1997, 53/77 K of 4 December 1998, 54/54 T of 1 December 1999,
55/33 L of 20 November 2000, 56/24 E of 29 November 2001, 57/65 of 22 November 2002, 59/78 of 3 December
2004, 60/61 of 8 December 2005, 61/64 of 6 December 2006, 62/48 of 5 December 2007, 63/52 of 2 December
2008, 64/32 of 2 December 2009, 65/52 of 8 December 2010, 66/30 of 2 December 2011 and 67/40 of 3 December
2012, and its decision 58/520 of 8 December 2003,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012,74
Mindful of the changes in international relations that have taken place since the adoption in 1987 of the Final
Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, including
the development agenda that has emerged over the past decade,
_______________
71

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
72
See resolution S-10/2.
73
See Report of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, New York, 24 August–
11 September 1987 (A/CONF.130/39).
74
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.

181

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Bearing in mind the new challenges for the international community in the fields of development, poverty
eradication and the elimination of the diseases that afflict humanity,
Stressing the importance of the symbiotic relationship between disarmament and development and the
important role of security in this connection, and concerned at increasing global military expenditure, which could
otherwise be spent on development needs,
Recalling the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the relationship between disarmament and
development75 and its reappraisal of this significant issue in the current international context,
Bearing in mind the importance of following up on the implementation of the action programme adopted at
the 1987 International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development,73
1. Stresses the central role of the United Nations in the relationship between disarmament and development,
and requests the Secretary-General to strengthen further the role of the Organization in this field, in particular the highlevel Steering Group on Disarmament and Development, in order to ensure continued and effective coordination
and close cooperation between the relevant United Nations departments, agencies and subagencies;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action, through appropriate organs and within
available resources, for the implementation of the action programme adopted on 11 September 1987 at the
International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development;73
3. Urges the international community to devote part of the resources made available by the implementation
of disarmament and arms limitation agreements to economic and social development, with a view to reducing the
ever-widening gap between developed and developing countries;
4. Encourages the international community to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to make
reference to the contribution that disarmament could provide in meeting them when it reviews its progress towards
this purpose in 2013, as well as to make greater efforts to integrate disarmament, humanitarian and development
activities;
5. Encourages the relevant regional and subregional organizations and institutions, non-governmental
organizations and research institutes to incorporate issues related to the relationship between disarmament and
development into their agendas and, in this regard, to take into account the report of the Group of Governmental
Experts on the relationship between disarmament and development;75
6. Reiterates its invitation to Member States to provide the Secretary-General with information regarding
measures and efforts to devote part of the resources made available by the implementation of disarmament and arms
limitation agreements to economic and social development, with a view to reducing the ever-widening gap between
developed and developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including the information provided by Member States pursuant to
paragraph 6 above;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Relationship between disarmament and development”.
RESOLUTION 68/38
A/RES/68/38

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),76 by a recorded vote of 127 to 5, with 52 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,

_______________
75

See A/59/119.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Brazil, and Indonesia (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
76

182

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine

68/38.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation

The General Assembly,
Determined to foster strict respect for the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 56/24 T of 29 November 2001 on multilateral cooperation in the area of disarmament
and non-proliferation and global efforts against terrorism and other relevant resolutions, as well as its resolutions
57/63 of 22 November 2002, 58/44 of 8 December 2003, 59/69 of 3 December 2004, 60/59 of 8 December 2005,
61/62 of 6 December 2006, 62/27 of 5 December 2007, 63/50 of 2 December 2008, 64/34 of 2 December 2009,
65/54 of 8 December 2010, 66/32 of 2 December 2011 and 67/38 of 3 December 2012 on the promotion of
multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation,
Recalling also the purpose of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security and, to that end,
to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace and for the suppression
of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with
the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace, as enshrined in the Charter,
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration,77 in which it is stated, inter alia, that the
responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social development, as well as threats to international peace
and security, must be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally and that, as the
most universal and most representative organization in the world, the United Nations must play the central role,
Convinced that, in the globalization era and with the information revolution, arms regulation, non-proliferation
and disarmament problems are more than ever the concern of all countries in the world, which are affected in one
way or another by these problems and therefore should have the possibility to participate in the negotiations that
arise to tackle them,
Bearing in mind the existence of a broad structure of disarmament and arms regulation agreements resulting
from non-discriminatory and transparent multilateral negotiations with the participation of a large number of
countries, regardless of their size and power,
Aware of the need to advance further in the field of arms regulation, non-proliferation and disarmament on the
basis of universal, multilateral, non-discriminatory and transparent negotiations with the goal of reaching general
and complete disarmament under strict international control,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral negotiations on disarmament,
_______________
77

Resolution 55/2.

183

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recognizing also that the proliferation and development of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons, are among the most immediate threats to international peace and security which need to be dealt with,
with the highest priority,
Considering that the multilateral disarmament agreements provide the mechanism for States parties to consult
one another and to cooperate in solving any problems which may arise in relation to the objective of, or in the
application of, the provisions of the agreements and that such consultations and cooperation may also be undertaken
through appropriate international procedures within the framework of the United Nations and in accordance with
the Charter,
Stressing that international cooperation, the peaceful settlement of disputes, dialogue and confidence-building
measures would make an essential contribution to the creation of multilateral and bilateral friendly relations among
peoples and nations,
Being concerned at the continuous erosion of multilateralism in the field of arms regulation, non-proliferation
and disarmament, and recognizing that a resort to unilateral actions by Member States in resolving their security
concerns would jeopardize international peace and security and undermine confidence in the international security
system as well as the foundations of the United Nations itself,
Noting that the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012, welcomed the adoption of resolution 66/32 on the promotion of multilateralism
in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation, and underlined the fact that multilateralism and multilaterally
agreed solutions, in accordance with the Charter, provide the only sustainable method of addressing disarmament
and international security issues,78
Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
and determined to promote multilateralism as an essential way to develop arms regulation and disarmament
negotiations,
1. Reaffirms multilateralism as the core principle in negotiations in the area of disarmament and nonproliferation with a view to maintaining and strengthening universal norms and enlarging their scope;
2. Also reaffirms multilateralism as the core principle in resolving disarmament and non-proliferation
concerns;
3. Urges the participation of all interested States in multilateral negotiations on arms regulation, nonproliferation and disarmament in a non-discriminatory and transparent manner;
4. Underlines the importance of preserving the existing agreements on arms regulation and disarmament,
which constitute an expression of the results of international cooperation and multilateral negotiations in response to
the challenges facing mankind;
5. Calls once again upon all Member States to renew and fulfil their individual and collective
commitments to multilateral cooperation as an important means of pursuing and achieving their common objectives
in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation;
6. Requests the States parties to the relevant instruments on weapons of mass destruction to consult and
cooperate among themselves in resolving their concerns with regard to cases of non-compliance as well as on
implementation, in accordance with the procedures defined in those instruments, and to refrain from resorting or
threatening to resort to unilateral actions or directing unverified non-compliance accusations against one another to
resolve their concerns;
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General containing the replies of Member States on the
promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation, submitted pursuant to resolution
67/38;79
_______________
78
79

184

See A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.
A/68/152 and Add.1.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on the issue of the promotion of
multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation and to submit a report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation.
RESOLUTION 68/39
A/RES/68/39

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),80 by a recorded vote of 171 to 7, with 5 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, France, India, Israel, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Bhutan, China, Micronesia (Federated States of), Pakistan, Palau

68/39.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament
commitments

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1 (I) of 24 January 1946 and 67/34 of 3 December 2012,
Reiterating its grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by nuclear weapons, which should inform all
deliberations, decisions and actions relating to nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,
Recalling the expression of deep concern by the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons, and its resolve to seek a safer world for all and to achieve the peace and security of a world without
nuclear weapons,81
Bearing in mind the discussions held at the Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons,
hosted by Norway on 4 and 5 March 2013, aimed at developing a greater awareness and understanding of the
catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons detonations, and welcoming the announcement by Mexico of its
intention to convene a meeting on 13 and 14 February 2014 on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons,
_______________
80

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Malta, Mexico,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, South Africa and Trinidad and Tobago.
81
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.

185

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the convening on 26 September 2013 of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
nuclear disarmament, which was aimed at bolstering efforts towards a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Welcoming also the convening of the Open-ended Working Group established by the General Assembly in its
resolution 67/56 of 3 December 2012 to develop proposals to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament
negotiations for the achievement and maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons, and acknowledging the final
report of the Working Group,82
Underlining the importance of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation education,
Reaffirming that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing processes
requiring urgent irreversible progress on both fronts,
Recalling the decisions and the resolution adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 83 the basis upon which the Treaty was
indefinitely extended, and the Final Documents of the 200084 and the 201085 Review Conferences of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and in particular the unequivocal undertaking by the
nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament,
in accordance with commitments made under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,86
Reaffirming the commitment of all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to
apply the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency in relation to the implementation of their treaty
obligations,
Recalling that the 2010 Review Conference reaffirmed and recognized that the total elimination of nuclear
weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons and the legitimate interest
of non-nuclear-weapon States in receiving unequivocal and legally binding negative security assurances from
nuclear-weapon States pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the continued vital importance of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty87 to the advancement of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation objectives, and welcoming the
recent ratification of the Treaty by Brunei Darussalam, Chad, Guinea-Bissau and Iraq,
Reaffirming the conviction that, pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, the establishment and
maintenance of nuclear-weapon-free zones enhances global and regional peace and security, strengthens the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and contributes towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament,
urging further concrete progress towards strengthening all existing nuclear-weapon-free zones, including
through the withdrawal of any reservations or interpretative declarations contrary to the object and purpose of
the treaties establishing these zones, recognizing the second preparatory meeting for the third Conference of
States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, held in
Geneva on 26 April 2013, and welcoming the announcement by Indonesia of its intention to host the third
Conference in 2015,
Recalling the encouragement expressed at the 2010 Review Conference for the establishment of further
nuclear-weapon-free zones, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region
concerned, reaffirming the expectation that this will be followed by concerted international efforts to create such
_______________
82

A/68/514.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
84
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
85
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
86
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
87
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
83

186

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

zones in areas where they do not currently exist, especially in the Middle East, and in that context recognizing the
agreement at the 2010 Review Conference on practical steps to fully implement the 1995 resolution on the
Middle East,
Acknowledging the ongoing efforts towards the full implementation of the Treaty between the Russian
Federation and the United States of America on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms, while re-emphasizing the encouragement of the 2010 Review Conference to both States to
continue discussions on follow-on measures in order to achieve deeper reductions in their nuclear arsenals,
Deeply disappointed at the continued absence of progress towards multilateral negotiations on nuclear
disarmament issues, in particular in the Conference on Disarmament, despite intensive efforts during its 2013
session to agree on a programme of work, and underlining the importance of multilateralism in relation to nuclear
disarmament, while recognizing also the value of bilateral and regional initiatives,
Acknowledging the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held in Geneva from 22 April to 3 May 2013,
and emphasizing the importance of a constructive and successful preparatory process leading to the 2015 Review
Conference, which should contribute to strengthening the Treaty and making progress towards achieving its full
implementation and universality, and monitor the implementation of commitments made and actions agreed at the
1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences,
1. Reiterates that each article of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons86 is binding on
the States parties at all times and in all circumstances and that all States parties should be held fully accountable
with respect to strict compliance with their obligations under the Treaty, and calls upon all States parties to
comply fully with all decisions, resolutions and commitments made at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences;
2. Also reiterates the deep concern expressed by the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons, and the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law;
3. Recalls the reaffirmation of the continued validity of the practical steps agreed to in the Final Document
of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,88
including the specific reaffirmation of the unequivocal undertaking of the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties are committed
under article VI of the Treaty, recalls the commitment of the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate concrete progress
on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament as envisaged in action 5 of the action plan on nuclear disarmament
contained in the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference,81 and calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to
take all steps necessary to accelerate the fulfilment of their commitments, including the requirement to report to the
Preparatory Committee in 2014;
4. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their commitment to undertake further efforts to reduce
and ultimately eliminate all types of nuclear weapons, deployed and non-deployed, including through unilateral,
bilateral, regional and multilateral measures;
5. Underlines the recognition by the 2010 Review Conference of the legitimate interests of non-nuclearweapon States in the constraining by the nuclear-weapon States of the development and qualitative improvement of
nuclear weapons and their ending the development of advanced new types of nuclear weapons, and calls upon the
nuclear-weapon States to take steps in this regard;
6. Encourages further steps by all nuclear-weapon States, in accordance with the action plan on nuclear
disarmament contained in the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference, to ensure the irreversible removal of
all fissile material designated by each nuclear-weapon State as no longer required for military purposes, and calls
_______________
88
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.

187

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

upon all States to support, within the context of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the development of
appropriate nuclear disarmament verification capabilities and legally binding verification arrangements, thereby
ensuring that such material remains permanently outside military programmes in a verifiable manner;
7. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to work towards
the full implementation of the resolution on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,83 and recognizes the endorsement by the
2010 Review Conference of practical steps in a process leading to the full implementation of the 1995 resolution,
including the convening of a conference in 2012 to be attended by all States of the region on the establishment of a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction;
8. Expresses its profound disappointment at the failure to convene a conference in 2012 on the
establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction, and
calls upon the Secretary-General and the co-sponsors of the 1995 resolution to convene the conference without any
further delay;
9. Continues to emphasize the fundamental role of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
in achieving nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, and calls upon all States parties to spare no effort to
achieve the universality of the Treaty, and in this regard urges India, Israel and Pakistan to accede to the Treaty as
non-nuclear-weapon States promptly and without conditions, and to place all of their nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
10. Urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to fulfil its commitments under the Six-Party Talks,
including those in the September 2005 joint statement, to abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear
programmes, to return, at an early date, to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to adhere to
its International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards agreement,89 with a view to achieving the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula in a peaceful manner, and reaffirms its firm support for the Six-Party Talks;
11. Urges all States to work together to overcome obstacles within the international disarmament machinery
that are inhibiting efforts to advance the cause of nuclear disarmament in a multilateral context, and to immediately
implement the three specific recommendations of the 2010 Review Conference action plan addressed to the
Conference on Disarmament, and urges the Conference on Disarmament to commence without delay substantive
work that advances the agenda of nuclear disarmament;
12. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to implement their nuclear disarmament commitments in a
manner that enables the States parties to regularly monitor progress, and to agree as soon as possible on a standard
reporting format to facilitate reporting and to enhance confidence not only among the nuclear-weapon States but
also between the nuclear-weapon States and the non-nuclear-weapon States;
13. Welcomes the announcements made by some nuclear-weapon States providing information about their
nuclear arsenals, policies and disarmament efforts, and urges those nuclear-weapon States that have not yet done so
also to provide this information, which would build increased confidence and trust and would contribute to
sustainable disarmament;
14. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to implement all
elements of the 2010 Review Conference action plan in a faithful and timely manner so that progress across all of
the pillars of the Treaty can be realized;
15. Urges Member States to pursue multilateral negotiations in good faith towards a nuclear-weapon-free
world, in keeping with the spirit and purpose of General Assembly resolution 1 (I) and article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments” and to review the implementation of the present resolution
at that session.
_______________
89

188

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1677, No. 28986.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/40
A/RES/68/40

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),90 by a recorded vote of 125 to 50, with 10 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, China, Georgia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Uzbekistan

68/40.

Reducing nuclear danger

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to mankind and to the survival
of civilization,
Reaffirming that any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would constitute a violation of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects would seriously enhance the danger of
nuclear war,
Convinced also that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to
remove the danger of nuclear war,
Considering that, until nuclear weapons cease to exist, it is imperative on the part of the nuclear-weapon States
to adopt measures that assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering also that the hair-trigger alert of nuclear weapons carries unacceptable risks of unintentional or
accidental use of nuclear weapons, which would have catastrophic consequences for all mankind,
Emphasizing the need to adopt measures to avoid accidental, unauthorized or unexplained incidents arising
from computer anomaly or other technical malfunctions,
Conscious that limited steps relating to de-alerting and de-targeting have been taken by the nuclear-weapon
States and that further practical, realistic and mutually reinforcing steps are necessary to contribute to the
improvement in the international climate for negotiations leading to the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful that a diminishing role for nuclear weapons in the security policies of nuclear-weapon States would
positively impact on international peace and security and improve the conditions for the further reduction and the
elimination of nuclear weapons,
_______________
90

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan,
Cambodia, Chile, Congo, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Fiji, Gabon, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Libya,
Malaysia, Mauritius, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zambia.

189

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly91 and by the international community,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons92 that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Recalling also the call, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,93 to seek to eliminate the dangers posed
by weapons of mass destruction and the resolve to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly nuclear weapons, including the possibility of convening an international conference to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers,
1. Calls for a review of nuclear doctrines and, in this context, immediate and urgent steps to reduce the
risks of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear weapons, including through de-alerting and de-targeting nuclear
weapons;
2.
above;

Requests the five nuclear-weapon States to take measures towards the implementation of paragraph 1

3. Calls upon Member States to take the measures necessary to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons in all its aspects and to promote nuclear disarmament, with the objective of eliminating nuclear weapons;
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 5 of its resolution
67/45 of 3 December 2012;94
5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts and support initiatives that would contribute towards the
full implementation of the seven recommendations identified in the report of the Advisory Board on Disarmament
Matters that would significantly reduce the risk of nuclear war,95 and also to continue to encourage Member States to
consider the convening of an international conference, as proposed in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,93 to
identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Reducing nuclear danger”.
RESOLUTION 68/41
A/RES/68/41

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)96

68/41.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/44 of 3 December 2012,
Recognizing the determination of the international community to combat terrorism, as evidenced in relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
_______________
91

Resolution S-10/2.
A/51/218, annex.
93
Resolution 55/2.
94
A/68/137.
95
A/56/400, para. 3.
96
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
92

190

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Deeply concerned by the growing risk of linkages between terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, and in
particular by the fact that terrorists may seek to acquire weapons of mass destruction,
Cognizant of the steps taken by States to implement Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) on the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction, adopted on 28 April 2004,
Recalling the entry into force on 7 July 2007 of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism,97
Recalling also the adoption, by consensus, of amendments to strengthen the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material98 by the International Atomic Energy Agency on 8 July 2005,
Noting the support expressed in the Final Document of the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which was held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012,99 for measures to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction,
Noting also that the Group of Eight, the European Union, the Regional Forum of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and others have taken into account in their deliberations the dangers posed by the likely acquisition
by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction and the need for international cooperation in combating it, and that the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism has been launched jointly by the Russian Federation and the United
States of America,
Noting further the holding of the Nuclear Security Summit on 12 and 13 April 2010 in Washington, D.C., and
on 26 and 27 March 2012 in Seoul,
Noting the holding of the high-level meeting on countering nuclear terrorism, with a focus on strengthening
the legal framework, in New York on 28 September 2012,
Acknowledging the consideration of issues relating to terrorism and weapons of mass destruction by the
Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters,100
Noting the holding by the International Atomic Energy Agency of the International Conference on Nuclear
Security: Enhancing Global Efforts, in Vienna from 1 to 5 July 2013, and taking note of the relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Conference of the Agency at its fifty-seventh regular session,
Noting also the tenth anniversary of the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources,
approved by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency on 8 September 2003,
Taking note of the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on 16 September 2005101 and the adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy102
on 8 September 2006,
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 67/44,103
Mindful of the urgent need for addressing, within the United Nations framework and through international
cooperation, this threat to humanity,
Emphasizing that progress is urgently needed in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation in order to
maintain international peace and security and to contribute to global efforts against terrorism,
1. Calls upon all Member States to support international efforts to prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery;
_______________
97

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2445, No. 44004.
Ibid., vol. 1456, No. 24631.
99
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.
100
See A/59/361.
101
Resolution 60/1.
102
Resolution 60/288.
103
A/68/164 and Add.1.
98

191

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Appeals to all Member States to consider early accession to and ratification of the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism;97
3. Urges all Member States to take and strengthen national measures, as appropriate, to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery and materials and technologies related to their
manufacture;
4. Encourages cooperation among and between Member States and relevant regional and international
organizations for strengthening national capacities in this regard;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to compile a report on measures already taken by international
organizations on issues relating to the linkage between the fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and to seek the views of Member States on additional relevant measures, including national
measures, for tackling the global threat posed by the acquisition by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction and to
report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction”.
RESOLUTION 68/42
A/RES/68/42

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),104 by a recorded vote of 133 to 24, with 25 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Canada, Croatia, Finland, Georgia, Iceland, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Micronesia (Federated States of), Montenegro, Norway, Palau, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Serbia, Sweden, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan

68/42.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat
or use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 K of 15 December 1994, 51/45 M of 10 December 1996, 52/38 O of
9 December 1997, 53/77 W of 4 December 1998, 54/54 Q of 1 December 1999, 55/33 X of 20 November 2000,
56/24 S of 29 November 2001, 57/85 of 22 November 2002, 58/46 of 8 December 2003, 59/83 of 3 December
_______________
104

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.

192

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2004, 60/76 of 8 December 2005, 61/83 of 6 December 2006, 62/39 of 5 December 2007, 63/49 of 2 December 2008,
64/55 of 2 December 2009, 65/76 of 8 December 2010, 66/46 of 2 December 2011 and 67/33 of 3 December 2012,
Convinced that the continuing existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to humanity and all life on Earth,
and recognizing that the only defence against a nuclear catastrophe is the total elimination of nuclear weapons and
the certainty that they will never be produced again,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the realization of the goal of a nuclearweapon-free world through the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,105 particularly to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating
to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament adopted at the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,106 the
unequivocal commitment of nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals
leading to nuclear disarmament, agreed at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,107 and the action points agreed at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as part of the conclusions and recommendations for followon actions on nuclear disarmament,108
Sharing the deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and
in this context reaffirming the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law,
Calling upon all nuclear-weapon States to undertake concrete disarmament efforts, and stressing that all States
need to make special efforts to achieve and maintain a world without nuclear weapons,
Noting the five-point proposal for nuclear disarmament of the Secretary-General, in which he proposes, inter
alia, the consideration of negotiations on a nuclear weapons convention or agreement on a framework of separate
mutually reinforcing instruments, backed by a strong system of verification,
Recalling the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in its resolution 50/245 of
10 September 1996, and expressing its satisfaction at the increasing number of States that have signed and ratified
the Treaty,
Recognizing with satisfaction that the Antarctic Treaty, 109 the treaties of Tlatelolco, 110 Rarotonga, 111
Bangkok112 and Pelindaba113 and the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia, as well as Mongolia’s
nuclear-weapon-free status, are gradually freeing the entire southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered by
those treaties from nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the need for a multilaterally negotiated and legally binding instrument to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the threat or use of nuclear weapons pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
_______________
105

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex, decision 2.
107
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
108
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)), vol. I, part I.
109
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
110
Ibid., vol. 634, No. 9068.
111
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
112
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
113
A/50/426, annex.
106

193

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming the central role of the Conference on Disarmament as the sole multilateral disarmament
negotiating forum,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence negotiations on a phased programme
for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of time,
Stressing the urgent need for the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate concrete progress on the 13 practical
steps to implement article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons leading to nuclear
disarmament, contained in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference,107
Taking note of the Model Nuclear Weapons Convention that was submitted to the Secretary-General by Costa
Rica and Malaysia in 2007 and circulated by the Secretary-General,114
Desiring to achieve the objective of a legally binding prohibition of the development, production, testing,
deployment, stockpiling, threat or use of nuclear weapons and their destruction under effective international control,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,115
1. Underlines once again the unanimous conclusion of the International Court of Justice that there exists an
obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control;
2. Calls once again upon all States immediately to fulfil that obligation by commencing multilateral
negotiations leading to an early conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention prohibiting the development,
production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, transfer, threat or use of nuclear weapons and providing for their
elimination;
3. Requests all States to inform the Secretary-General of the efforts and measures they have taken with
respect to the implementation of the present resolution and nuclear disarmament, and requests the Secretary-General
to apprise the General Assembly of that information at its sixty-ninth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons”.
RESOLUTION 68/43
A/RES/68/43

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),116 by a recorded vote of 154 to none, with 28 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,

_______________
114

A/62/650, annex.
A/51/218, annex.
116
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
115

194

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Algeria, Bahrain, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zimbabwe

68/43.

Transparency in armaments

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/36 L of 9 December 1991, 47/52 L of 15 December 1992, 48/75 E of
16 December 1993, 49/75 C of 15 December 1994, 50/70 D of 12 December 1995, 51/45 H of 10 December 1996,
52/38 R of 9 December 1997, 53/77 V of 4 December 1998, 54/54 O of 1 December 1999, 55/33 U of
20 November 2000, 56/24 Q of 29 November 2001, 57/75 of 22 November 2002, 58/54 of 8 December 2003,
60/226 of 23 December 2005, 61/77 of 6 December 2006, 63/69 of 2 December 2008, 64/54 of 2 December 2009
and 66/39 of 2 December 2011, entitled “Transparency in armaments”,
Continuing to take the view that an enhanced level of transparency in armaments contributes greatly to
confidence-building and security among States and that the establishment of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms constitutes an important step forward in the promotion of transparency in military matters,
Welcoming the consolidated reports of the Secretary-General on the Register, which include the returns of
Member States for 2009,117 2010118 and 2011,119
Welcoming also the response of Member States to the request contained in paragraphs 9 and 10 of resolution
46/36 L to provide data on their imports and exports of arms, as well as available background information regarding
their military holdings, procurement through national production and relevant policies,
Welcoming further the inclusion by Member States in a position to do so of their transfers of small arms and
light weapons in their annual report to the Register as part of their additional background information,
Welcoming the adoption on 2 April 2013 of the Arms Trade Treaty,120 as well as its signatures and ratifications
up to the present date, and the increase in transparency in armaments that will be provided by the Treaty,
Expressing its hope that the Treaty will soon enter into force,
Noting the focused discussions on transparency in armaments that took place in the Conference on
Disarmament in 2010, 2011 and 2012,
Expressing its concern with respect to the reduction in reporting to the Register, in particular the low level of
reporting to the Register in 2012,
Stressing that the continuing operation of the Register and its further development should be reviewed in order
to secure a Register that is capable of attracting the widest possible participation,
1. Reaffirms its determination to ensure the effective operation of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, as provided for in paragraphs 7 to 10 of resolution 46/36 L;
_______________
117

A/65/133 and Add.1–5.
A/66/127 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1.
119
A/67/212 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1 and 2.
120
See resolution 67/234 B.
118

195

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the continuing operation of the Register and its further
development and the recommendations contained in the consensus report of the 2013 group of governmental
experts;121
3. Calls upon Member States, with a view to achieving universal participation, to provide the SecretaryGeneral, by 31 May annually, with the requested data and information for the Register, including nil reports if
appropriate, on the basis of resolutions 46/36 L and 47/52 L, the recommendations contained in paragraph 64 of the
1997 report of the Secretary-General on the continuing operation of the Register and its further development,122 the
recommendations contained in paragraph 94 of the 2000 report of the Secretary-General and the appendices and
annexes thereto,123 the recommendations contained in paragraphs 112 to 114 of the 2003 report of the SecretaryGeneral,124 the recommendations contained in paragraphs 123 to 127 of the 2006 report of the Secretary-General,125
the recommendations contained in paragraphs 71 to 75 of the 2009 report of the Secretary-General126 and the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 69 to 76 of the 2013 report of the Secretary-General;121
4. Invites Member States in a position to do so, pending further development of the Register, to provide
additional information on procurement through national production and military holdings and to make use of the
“Remarks” column in the standardized reporting form to provide additional information such as types or models;
5. Also invites Member States in a position to do so to provide additional information on transfers of small
arms and light weapons on the basis of the optional standardized reporting form, as adopted by the 2006 group of
governmental experts,127 or by any other methods they deem appropriate;
6. Reaffirms its decision, with a view to further development of the Register, to keep the scope of and
participation in the Register under review, and to that end:
(a) Recalls its request to Member States to provide the Secretary-General with their views on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development, including on whether the absence of small arms and light
weapons as a main category in the Register has limited its relevance and directly affected decisions on participation,
and on transparency measures related to weapons of mass destruction;
(b) Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a group of governmental experts to be convened
in 2016, within existing resources, with the broadest possible participation, in line with the recommendation
contained in paragraph 76 of the 2013 report of the Secretary-General, and on the basis of equitable geographical
representation, to prepare a report on the continuing operation and relevance of the Register and its further
development, taking into account the work of the Conference on Disarmament, relevant deliberations within the
United Nations, the views expressed by Member States and the reports of the Secretary-General on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development, with a view to taking a decision at its seventy-first session;
(c) Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist Member States to build capacity to submit
meaningful reports, and encourages States in a position to do so to provide assistance for this purpose upon request,
including capacity to report on small arms and light weapons;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to implement the recommendations contained in his 2000, 2003, 2006,
2009 and 2013 reports on the continuing operation of the Register and its further development and to ensure that
sufficient resources are made available for the Secretariat to operate and maintain the Register;
8. Invites the Conference on Disarmament to consider continuing its work undertaken in the field of
transparency in armaments;
_______________
121

A/68/140.
A/52/316 and Corr.2.
123
A/55/281.
124
A/58/274.
125
A/61/261.
126
A/64/296.
127
A/61/261, annexes I and II.
122

196

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Reiterates its call upon all Member States to cooperate at the regional and subregional levels, taking
fully into account the specific conditions prevailing in the region or subregion, with a view to enhancing and
coordinating international and regional efforts aimed at increased openness and transparency in armaments;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on progress
made in implementing the present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Transparency in armaments”.
RESOLUTION 68/44
A/RES/68/44

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),128 by a recorded vote of 177 to none, with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda

68/44.

National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and technology

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security,
Recalling that effective national control of the transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and
technology, including those transfers that could contribute to proliferation activities, is an important tool for
achieving those objectives,
Recalling also that the States parties to the international disarmament and non-proliferation treaties have
undertaken to facilitate the fullest possible exchange of materials, equipment and technological information for
peaceful purposes, in accordance with the provisions of those treaties,
Considering that the exchange of national legislation, regulations and procedures on the transfer of arms,
military equipment and dual-use goods and technology contributes to mutual understanding and confidence among
Member States,
Convinced that such an exchange would be beneficial to Member States that are in the process of developing
such legislation,
Welcoming the electronic database established by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, in
which all information exchanged pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 57/66 of 22 November 2002, 58/42 of
_______________
128

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the Netherlands.

197

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8 December 2003, 59/66 of 3 December 2004, 60/69 of 8 December 2005, 62/26 of 5 December 2007, 64/40 of
2 December 2009 and 66/41 of 2 December 2011, entitled “National legislation on transfer of arms, military
equipment and dual-use goods and technology”, can be consulted,
Welcoming also the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty,129 which establishes the highest possible common
international standards for regulating the international trade in conventional arms and obliges States parties to
provide an initial report on national laws and other regulations and measures taken in order to implement the Treaty,
Considering that, as long as the Treaty has not yet entered into force, the electronic database established by the
Office for Disarmament Affairs will retain its added value,
Reaffirming the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations,
1. Invites Member States that are in a position to do so, without prejudice to the provisions contained in
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004 and subsequent relevant Council resolutions, to enact or
improve national legislation, regulations and procedures to exercise effective control over the transfer of arms,
military equipment and dual-use goods and technology, while ensuring that such legislation, regulations and
procedures are consistent with the obligations of States parties under international treaties, such as the Arms Trade
Treaty;129
2. Encourages Member States to provide, on a voluntary basis, information to the Secretary-General on
their national legislation, regulations and procedures on the transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods
and technology, as well as the changes therein, and requests the Secretary-General to make that information
accessible to Member States;
3.

Decides to remain attentive to the matter.
RESOLUTION 68/45

A/RES/68/45

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)130

68/45.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject of chemical weapons, in particular resolution 67/54 of
3 December 2012, adopted without a vote, in which the General Assembly noted with appreciation the ongoing
work to achieve the object and purpose of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,131
Determined to achieve the effective prohibition of the development, production, acquisition, transfer,
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and their destruction,
Noting that, since the adoption of resolution 67/54, two additional States have acceded to the Convention,
namely, Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic, bringing the total number of States parties to the Convention to 190,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations Mission to Investigate Allegations of the Use of Chemical
Weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic on the alleged use of chemical weapons in the Ghouta area of Damascus on
21 August 2013,132 in which the Mission concludes that chemical weapons have been used in the ongoing conflict
between the parties in the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as against civilians, including children, on a relatively large
scale,
_______________
129

See resolution 67/234 B.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Poland.
131
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.
132
A/67/997-S/2013/553.
130

198

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Condemning in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons,
Taking note of decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 of 27 September 2013 of the Executive Council of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and of Security Council resolution 2118 (2013) of the same date,
Reaffirming the importance of the outcome of the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties
to Review the Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, held in The Hague from 8 to 19 April 2013 (the
Third Review Conference), including its consensus final report, in which the Conference addressed all aspects of the
Convention and made important recommendations on its continued implementation,
Emphasizing that the Third Review Conference welcomed the fact that the Convention is a unique multilateral
agreement banning an entire category of weapons of mass destruction in a non-discriminatory and verifiable manner
under strict and effective international control and noted with satisfaction that the Convention continues to be a
remarkable success and an example of effective multilateralism,
Convinced that the Convention, 16 years after its entry into force, has reinforced its role as the international
norm against chemical weapons, and that it constitutes a major contribution to:
(a)

International peace and security,

(b)

Eliminating chemical weapons and preventing their re-emergence,

(c)
control,
(d)

The ultimate objective of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
Excluding completely, for the sake of all mankind, the possibility of the use of chemical weapons,

(e) Promoting international cooperation and exchange in scientific and technical information in the field of
chemical activities among States parties for peaceful purposes in order to enhance the economic and technological
development of all States parties,
1. Emphasizes that the universality of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction131 is essential to achieving its object and
purpose and to enhancing the security of States parties, as well as to international peace and security, underlines that
the objectives of the Convention will not be fully realized as long as there remains even a single State not party to
the Convention that could possess or acquire such weapons, and calls upon all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention without delay;
2. Underlines that the full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of all articles of the
Convention makes a major contribution to international peace and security through the elimination of existing
stockpiles of chemical weapons and the prohibition of their acquisition and use, and provides for assistance and
protection in the event of use or threat of use of chemical weapons and for international cooperation for peaceful
purposes in the field of chemical activities;
3. Notes the impact of scientific and technological progress on the effective implementation of the
Convention and the importance for the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its policymaking
organs of taking due account of such developments;
4. Reaffirms that the obligation of the States parties to complete the destruction of chemical weapons
stockpiles and the destruction or conversion of chemical weapons production facilities in accordance with the
provisions of the Convention and the Annex on Implementation and Verification (Verification Annex) and under the
verification of the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is essential for
the realization of the object and purpose of the Convention;
5. Stresses the importance to the Convention that all possessors of chemical weapons, chemical weapons
production facilities or chemical weapons development facilities, including previously declared possessor States,
should be among the States parties to the Convention, and welcomes progress to that end;
6. Recalls that the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review the Operation of
the Chemical Weapons Convention, held in The Hague from 8 to 19 April 2013 (the Third Review Conference)
expressed concern regarding the statement made by the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in his report to the Executive Council of the Organization at its sixty-eighth session, provided in
199

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

accordance with paragraph 2 of decision C-16/DEC.11 of 1 December 2011 adopted by the Conference of the
States Parties at its sixteenth session, that three possessor States parties, namely, Libya, the Russian Federation and
the United States of America, had been unable to fully meet the final extended deadline of 29 April 2012 for the
destruction of their chemical weapons stockpiles, and also expressed determination that the destruction of all
categories of chemical weapons should be completed in the shortest time possible in accordance with the provisions
of the Convention and the Verification Annex, and with the full application of the relevant decisions that have been
taken;
7. Notes with concern that, along with the threat of the possible production, acquisition and use of chemical
weapons by States, the international community also faces the danger of the production, acquisition and use of
chemical weapons by non-State actors, including terrorists, concerns which have highlighted the necessity of
achieving universal adherence to the Convention, as well as the high level of readiness of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and stresses that the full and effective implementation of all provisions of the
Convention, including those on national implementation (article VII) and assistance and protection (article X),
constitutes an important contribution to the efforts of the United Nations in the global fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations;
8. Emphasizes that the full implementation of the provisions of the Convention at the national level,
including the timely submission of accurate and complete declarations in accordance with the provisions of the
Convention, and updates to those declarations, is essential to ensuring the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Convention regime;
9. Notes that the effective application of the verification system builds confidence in compliance with the
Convention by States parties;
10. Stresses the importance of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in verifying
compliance with the provisions of the Convention as well as in promoting the timely and efficient accomplishment
of all its objectives;
11. Urges all States parties to the Convention to meet in full and on time their obligations under the
Convention and to support the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its implementation
activities;
12. Welcomes progress made in the national implementation of article VII obligations, commends the States
parties and the Technical Secretariat for assisting other States parties, on request, with the implementation of the
follow-up to the plan of action regarding article VII obligations, urges States parties that have not fulfilled their
obligations under article VII to do so without further delay, in accordance with their constitutional processes, and
notes that the Third Review Conference noted the commitment of States parties to adopt, in accordance with
constitutional processes, the measures necessary to fully implement their obligations under the Convention as a
matter of priority and to keep the effectiveness of these measures under review;
13. Emphasizes the continuing relevance and importance of the provisions of article X of the Convention,
welcomes the activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in relation to assistance and
protection against chemical weapons, supports further efforts by both States parties and the Technical Secretariat to
promote a high level of readiness to respond to chemical weapons threats as articulated in article X, and welcomes
the effectiveness and efficiency of the increased focus on making full use of regional and subregional capacities and
expertise, including taking advantage of established training centres;
14. Acknowledges with appreciation the establishment of the International Support Network for Victims of
Chemical Weapons and of a voluntary trust fund for that purpose;
15. Reaffirms that the provisions of the Convention shall be implemented in a manner that avoids hampering
the economic or technological development of States parties and international cooperation in the field of chemical
activities for purposes not prohibited under the Convention, including the international exchange of scientific and
technical information, and chemicals and equipment for the production, processing or use of chemicals for purposes
not prohibited under the Convention;
16. Underlines that the comprehensive implementation of article XI of the Convention reinforces capacitybuilding in each State party and, in doing so, reinforces the ability of States parties to fully implement the
Convention, and in this context also underlines the importance of assistance and national capacity-building in the
field of chemical activities for purposes not prohibited under the Convention;
200

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

17. Commends the adoption of decision C-16/DEC.10 of 1 December 2011 on the components of an agreed
framework for the full implementation of article XI by the Conference of the States Parties at its sixteenth session,
and recognizes that the decision provides guidance for the full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of
article XI and identifies avenues for further work that would advance its objectives;
18. Notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to achieve the object and purpose of the Convention, to ensure the full implementation of its provisions, including
those for international verification of compliance with it, and to provide a forum for consultation and cooperation
among States parties;
19. Commends the desire expressed at the Third Review Conference to improve interaction with the
chemical industry, the scientific community, academia and civil society organizations engaged in issues relevant to
the Convention, and to cooperate as appropriate with other relevant international and regional organizations, in
promoting the goals of the Convention;
20. Welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons within the framework of the relationship agreement between the United Nations and the
Organization,133 in accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
21. Also welcomes the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize for 2013 to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons for its extensive efforts to eliminate chemical weapons;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction”.
RESOLUTION 68/46
A/RES/68/46

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),134 by a recorded vote of 158 to 4, with 20 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: France, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Belarus, China, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Monaco,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkey, Uzbekistan

_______________
133

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2160, No. 1240.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Georgia, Ghana, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Malta, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria, Panama, Peru, Philippines,
Samoa, Slovenia, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay.
134

201

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

68/46.

Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/56 of 3 December 2012, by which the General Assembly established the Openended Working Group to develop proposals to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for the
achievement and maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons,
Deeply concerned about the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons,
Recalling the Declaration of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, the first special session
devoted to disarmament,135 in which it is stated, inter alia, that all the peoples of the world have a vital interest in the
success of disarmament negotiations and that all States have the right to participate in disarmament negotiations,
Reaffirming the role and functions of the Conference on Disarmament and the Disarmament Commission, as
set out in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,136
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,137 in which it is stated, inter alia, that responsibility for
managing worldwide economic and social development, as well as threats to international peace and security, must
be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally and that, as the most universal and
most representative organization in the world, the United Nations must play the central role,
Welcoming the efforts of Member States to secure progress in multilateral disarmament and the support of the
Secretary-General for such efforts, and noting in this regard the Secretary-General’s five-point proposal on nuclear
disarmament,
Recalling the outcome, including the action points, of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,138
Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
and determined to promote multilateralism as an essential way to develop arms regulation and disarmament
negotiations,
Recognizing the absence of concrete outcomes of multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations within the
United Nations framework for more than a decade,
Recognizing also the increased political attention to disarmament and non-proliferation issues and that the
international political climate is more conducive to the promotion of multilateral disarmament and moving towards
the goal of a world without nuclear weapons,
Welcoming the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament, held on 26 September
2013 pursuant to its resolution 67/39 of 3 December 2012, which highlighted the wish of the international
community for progress in this field,
Emphasizing the importance and urgency of substantive progress on priority disarmament and nonproliferation issues,
Recognizing the important contribution that civil society makes to multilateral disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms control processes,
Mindful of Article 11 of the Charter of the United Nations concerning the functions and powers of the General
Assembly to consider and make recommendations with regard to, inter alia, disarmament,
1. Notes with satisfaction that the Open-ended Working Group to develop proposals to take forward
multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for the achievement and maintenance of a world without nuclear
_______________
135

Resolution S-10/2, sect. II.
Ibid., sect. IV.
137
Resolution 55/2.
138
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
136

202

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

weapons, established by the General Assembly by its resolution 67/56, which met during 2013 as a step towards
taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations, engaged in discussions in an open, constructive,
transparent and interactive manner to address various issues related to nuclear disarmament;
2. Welcomes the report of the Working Group on its work,139 reflecting the discussions and proposals made
during its deliberations to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for the achievement and
maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons;
3. Recognizes the value of the contribution that international organizations, civil society, academia and
research make to taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations, as demonstrated during the work of
the Working Group;
4. Emphasizes that the universal objective of taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations
remains the achievement and maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons, and also emphasizes the importance
of addressing issues related to nuclear weapons in a comprehensive, interactive and constructive manner, for the
advancement of multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the report of the Working Group to the Conference on
Disarmament and the Disarmament Commission for their consideration;
6. Calls upon all Member States, international organizations and civil society to continue to enrich the
discussions on how to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations in the United Nations bodies in
which disarmament and peace and security are addressed, taking into account the report of the Working Group and
the proposals contained therein;
7. Encourages Member States, international organizations and civil society to take into account the report
of the Working Group and the proposals contained therein in the discussions in other forums in which humanitarian,
health, human rights, environmental and development affairs are addressed;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on how to take forward multilateral
nuclear disarmament negotiations, including on steps that Member States have already taken to that end, and to
submit a report on that subject to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
9. Decides to review at its sixty-ninth session progress made in the implementation of the present
resolution and to further explore options for taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations, including
if necessary through the Working Group;
10. Reaffirms the urgency of securing substantive progress in multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations,
and welcomes further efforts in this respect;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations”.
RESOLUTION 68/47
A/RES/68/47

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),140 by a recorded vote of 122 to 44, with 17 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran

_______________
139

A/68/514.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Fiji, Guinea, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Philippines, Samoa, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Uganda, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.

140

203

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Austria, Belarus, India, Ireland, Japan, Malta, Mauritius, Montenegro, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Serbia, South Africa, Sweden, Uzbekistan

68/47.

Nuclear disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/75 E of 15 December 1994 on a step-by-step reduction of the nuclear threat, and its
resolutions 50/70 P of 12 December 1995, 51/45 O of 10 December 1996, 52/38 L of 9 December 1997, 53/77 X of
4 December 1998, 54/54 P of 1 December 1999, 55/33 T of 20 November 2000, 56/24 R of 29 November 2001,
57/79 of 22 November 2002, 58/56 of 8 December 2003, 59/77 of 3 December 2004, 60/70 of 8 December 2005,
61/78 of 6 December 2006, 62/42 of 5 December 2007, 63/46 of 2 December 2008, 64/53 of 2 December 2009,
65/56 of 8 December 2010, 66/51 of 2 December 2011 and 67/60 of 3 December 2012 on nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Bearing in mind that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction of 1972141 and the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
of 1993142 have already established legal regimes on the complete prohibition of biological and chemical weapons,
respectively, and determined to achieve a nuclear weapons convention on the prohibition of the development,
testing, production, stockpiling, loan, transfer, use and threat of use of nuclear weapons and on their destruction, and
to conclude such an international convention at an early date,
Recognizing that there now exist conditions for the establishment of a world free of nuclear weapons, and
stressing the need to take concrete practical steps towards achieving this goal,
Bearing in mind paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,
the first special session devoted to disarmament,143 calling for the urgent negotiation of agreements for the cessation
of the qualitative improvement and development of nuclear-weapon systems and for a comprehensive and phased
programme with agreed time frames, wherever feasible, for the progressive and balanced reduction of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery, leading to their ultimate and complete elimination at the earliest possible time,
Reaffirming the conviction of the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons144
that the Treaty is a cornerstone of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, and the importance of the
decision on strengthening the review process for the Treaty, the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament, the decision on the extension of the Treaty and the resolution on the Middle
East, adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,145
_______________
141

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
Ibid., vol. 1974, No. 33757.
143
Resolution S-10/2.
144
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
145
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
142

204

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Stressing the importance of the 13 steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to achieve the objective of
nuclear disarmament leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons, as agreed to by the States parties in the
Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,146
Recognizing the important work done at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 147 and affirming its action plan as an impetus to intensify work aimed at
beginning negotiations for a nuclear weapons convention,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly and by the international community,
Reiterating its call for an early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,148
Noting the entry into force of the new strategic arms reduction treaty between the Russian Federation and the
United States of America, in order to achieve further deep cuts in their strategic and tactical nuclear weapons, and
stressing that such cuts should be irreversible, verifiable and transparent,
Recalling the entry into force of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Russian Federation
on Strategic Offensive Reductions (the Moscow Treaty)149 as a significant step towards reducing their deployed
strategic nuclear weapons, while calling for further irreversible deep cuts in their nuclear arsenals,
Noting the positive statements by nuclear-weapon States of their intention to pursue actions in achieving a
world free of nuclear weapons, while reaffirming the need for urgent concrete actions by nuclear-weapon States to
achieve this goal within a specified framework of time, and urging them to take further measures for progress on
nuclear disarmament,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral negotiations on nuclear
disarmament, and that bilateral negotiations can never replace multilateral negotiations in this respect,
Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the
elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, and the multilateral efforts in the Conference on Disarmament to reach agreement on such an
international convention at an early date,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,150 and welcoming the unanimous reaffirmation by all Judges of the Court
that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to
nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Mindful of paragraph 102 of the Final Document of the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana from 27 to 30 April 2009,151
Recalling paragraph 157 and other relevant recommendations in the Final Document of the Sixteenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August
2012,152 in which the Conference on Disarmament was called upon to establish, as soon as possible and as the
highest priority, an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament and to commence negotiations on a phased
programme for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified framework of time, including a
nuclear weapons convention,
_______________
146

2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
147
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
148
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
149
See CD/1674.
150
A/51/218, annex.
151
See A/63/858.
152
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.

205

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the adoption of the programme of work for the 2009 session by the Conference on Disarmament on
29 May 2009,153 after years of stalemate, while regretting that the Conference has not been able to undertake
substantive work on its agenda in 2013,
Welcoming the establishment of the informal working group with a mandate to produce a programme of
work robust in substance and progressive over time in implementation by the Conference on Disarmament on
16 August 2013,
Reaffirming the importance and validity of the Conference on Disarmament as the sole multilateral negotiating
forum on disarmament, and expressing the need to adopt and implement a balanced and comprehensive programme
of work on the basis of its agenda and dealing with, inter alia, four core issues, in accordance with the rules of
procedure,154 and by taking into consideration the security concerns of all States,
Reaffirming also the specific mandate conferred upon the Disarmament Commission by the General
Assembly, in its decision 52/492 of 8 September 1998, to discuss the subject of nuclear disarmament as one of its
main substantive agenda items,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,155 in which Heads of State and Government resolved
to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to keep all options
open for achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening an international conference to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers,
Recalling also the statement on the total elimination of nuclear weapons adopted by the Sixteenth Ministerial
Conference and Commemorative Meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Nusa Dua, Bali,
Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011,156 and recalled by the Heads of State and Government of Non-Aligned
Countries at their Sixteenth Conference, in which the Movement reiterated its call for an international conference to
identify ways and means of eliminating nuclear weapons at the earliest possible date,
Welcoming the successful convening of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear
disarmament on 26 September 2013, at which it was proposed that 26 September be designated the International
Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, States should refrain from the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons in settling their disputes in international relations,
Seized of the danger of the use of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, in terrorist acts
and the urgent need for concerted international efforts to control and overcome it,
1. Recognizes that the time is now opportune for all the nuclear-weapon States to take effective
disarmament measures to achieve the total elimination of these weapons at the earliest possible time;
2. Reaffirms that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are substantively interrelated and
mutually reinforcing, that the two processes must go hand in hand and that there is a genuine need for a systematic
and progressive process of nuclear disarmament;
3. Welcomes and encourages the efforts to establish new nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of
the world, including the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons, on the basis of agreements or
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the regions concerned, which is an effective measure for limiting
the further spread of nuclear weapons geographically and contributes to the cause of nuclear disarmament;
4. Welcomes the ongoing efforts between the States members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and the nuclear-weapon States, and encourages the nuclear-weapon States in their early signing of the
Protocol to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone;
_______________
153

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/64/27), para. 18.
CD/8/Rev.9.
155
Resolution 55/2.
156
A/65/896-S/2011/407, annex V.
154

206

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Recognizes that there is a genuine need to diminish the role of nuclear weapons in strategic doctrines and
security policies to minimize the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total
elimination;
6. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to stop immediately the qualitative improvement, development,
production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and their delivery systems;
7. Also urges the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to de-alert and deactivate immediately
their nuclear weapons and to take other concrete measures to reduce further the operational status of their nuclearweapon systems, while stressing that reductions in deployments and in operational status cannot substitute for
irreversible cuts in and the total elimination of nuclear weapons;
8. Reiterates its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the step-by-step reduction of the nuclear
threat and to carry out effective nuclear disarmament measures with a view to achieving the total elimination of
these weapons within a specified framework of time;
9. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, pending the achievement of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, to agree on an internationally and legally binding instrument on a joint undertaking not to be the first to
use nuclear weapons, and calls upon all States to conclude an internationally and legally binding instrument on
security assurances of non-use and non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States;
10. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to commence plurilateral negotiations among themselves at an
appropriate stage on further deep reductions of nuclear weapons as an effective measure of nuclear disarmament;
11. Underlines the importance of applying the principles of transparency, irreversibility and verifiability to
the process of nuclear disarmament and to nuclear and other related arms control and reduction measures;
12. Also underlines the importance of the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, in the
Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all
States parties are committed under article VI of the Treaty,146 and the reaffirmation by the States parties that the total
elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;157
13. Calls for the full and effective implementation of the 13 practical steps for nuclear disarmament
contained in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference;
14. Also calls for the full implementation of the action plan as set out in the conclusions and
recommendations for follow-on actions of the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference, particularly the
22-point action plan on nuclear disarmament;147
15. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to carry out further reductions of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based
on unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process;
16. Calls for the immediate commencement of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a nondiscriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices on the basis of the report of the Special
Coordinator158 and the mandate contained therein;
17. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to commence as early as possible its substantive work during its
2014 session, while welcoming the establishment of the informal working group with a mandate to produce a
programme of work robust in substance and progressive over time in implementation, on the basis of a
comprehensive and balanced programme of work that takes into consideration all the real and existing priorities in
the field of disarmament and arms control, including the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty
with a view to their conclusion within five years;
18. Calls for the conclusion of an international legal instrument or instruments on adequate and
unconditional security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States;
_______________
157

2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VII and the security of non-nuclear-weapon States”, para. 2.
158
CD/1299.

207

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

19. Also calls for the early entry into force and strict observance of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty,148 while welcoming the recent ratification of the Treaty by Brunei Darussalam, Chad, Guinea-Bissau and Iraq;
20. Expresses its regret that the Conference on Disarmament was unable to establish an ad hoc committee to
deal with nuclear disarmament in 2013, as called for by the General Assembly in its resolution 67/60;
21. Reiterates its call upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, as soon as possible and as the
highest priority, an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament in 2014 and to commence negotiations on a phased
programme of nuclear disarmament leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified
framework of time;
22. Calls for the convening of an international conference on nuclear disarmament in all its aspects at an
early date to identify and deal with concrete measures of nuclear disarmament;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Nuclear disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 68/48
A/RES/68/48

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)159

68/48.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/58 of 3 December 2012, as well as all previous resolutions entitled “The illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects”, including resolution 56/24 V of 24 December 2001,
Emphasizing the importance of the continued and full implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,160 and recognizing its
important contribution to international efforts on this matter,
Emphasizing also the importance of the continued and full implementation of the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons (the
International Tracing Instrument),161
Mindful of the implementation of the outcomes adopted by the follow-up meetings on the Programme of
Action,
Recalling the commitment of States to the Programme of Action as the main framework for measures within
the activities of the international community to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects,
_______________
159

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
160
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
161
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and Corr.2, annex.

208

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Underlining the need for States to enhance their efforts to build national capacity for the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument,
Welcoming the successful conclusion of the second United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York from 27 August to 7 September 2012 (the Second Review
Conference), and recalling the endorsement by the General Assembly of the outcome of the Conference,162
Welcoming also the designation of Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the United
Nations, as the Chair of the biennial meeting of States to be held in 2014,
Stressing the importance of voluntary national reporting to follow up on the Programme of Action as a means
of assessing overall implementation efforts, including implementation challenges and opportunities, and which
could greatly facilitate the rendering of international cooperation and assistance to affected States,
Noting that tools developed by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, including the
Programme of Action Implementation Support System, and those developed by Member States could be used to
assess progress made in the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Welcoming the coordinated efforts within the United Nations to implement the Programme of Action,
including by developing the Programme of Action Implementation Support System, which forms an integrated
clearing house for international cooperation and assistance for capacity-building in the area of small arms and light
weapons,
Taking into account the importance of regional approaches to the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Noting with satisfaction regional and subregional efforts being undertaken in support of the implementation of
the Programme of Action, and commending the progress that has already been made in this regard, including
tackling both supply and demand factors that are relevant to addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons,
Reiterating that illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons is a serious problem that the international
community should address urgently,
Recognizing the efforts undertaken by non-governmental organizations in the provision of assistance to States
for the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,163 which includes an overview of the implementation of
resolution 67/58,
Welcoming the inclusion of small arms and light weapons in the scope of the Arms Trade Treaty,164
1. Underlines the fact that the issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects
requires concerted efforts at the national, regional and international levels to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
manufacture, transfer and circulation of small arms and light weapons, and that their uncontrolled spread in many
regions of the world has a wide range of humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences and poses a serious threat
to peace, reconciliation, safety, security, stability and sustainable development at the individual, local, national,
regional and international levels;
2. Encourages all relevant initiatives, including those of the United Nations, other international
organizations, regional and subregional organizations, non-governmental organizations and civil society, for the
successful implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,160 and calls upon all Member States to contribute towards the continued
implementation of the Programme of Action at the national, regional and global levels;
_______________
162

A/CONF.192/2012/RC/4, annexes I and II.
A/68/171.
164
See resolution 67/234 B.
163

209

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Encourages States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 60/81 to consider further steps to enhance international
cooperation in preventing, combating and eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons;165
4. Recalls its endorsement of the outcome of the second United Nations Conference to Review Progress
Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York from 27 August to 7 September 2012 (the Second
Review Conference);162
5. Also recalls its decision, pursuant to the schedule of meetings for the period from 2012 to 2018 agreed at
the Second Review Conference,166 to convene, in accordance with the relevant provision of the Programme of
Action, a one-week biennial meeting of States, in New York in 2014 and 2016, and a one-week open-ended meeting
of governmental experts in 2015, to consider the full and effective implementation of the Programme of Action, and
decides to hold the next biennial meeting of States from 16 to 20 June 2014;
6. Further recalls its decision, in accordance with the decision of the Second Review Conference,166 to
hold the third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in
2018 for a period of two weeks, preceded by a one-week preparatory committee meeting early in 2018;
7. Emphasizes the fact that initiatives by the international community with respect to international
cooperation and assistance remain essential and complementary to national implementation efforts, as well as to
those at the regional and global levels;
8. Encourages States to consider ways to enhance cooperation and assistance and to assess their
effectiveness in order to ensure the implementation of the Programme of Action;
9. Recognizes the necessity for interested States to develop effective coordination mechanisms, where they
do not exist, in order to match the needs of States with existing resources to enhance the implementation of the
Programme of Action and to make international cooperation and assistance more effective, and in this regard
encourages States to make use, as appropriate, of the Programme of Action Implementation Support System;
10. Encourages States to consider, among other mechanisms, the coherent identification of needs, priorities,
national plans and programmes that may require international cooperation and assistance from States and regional
and international organizations in a position to do so;
11. Also encourages States to take full advantage of the benefits of cooperation with the United Nations
regional centres for peace and disarmament, the World Customs Organization, the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in accordance with their mandates
and consistent with national priorities;
12. Encourages all efforts to build national capacity for the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action, including those highlighted in the outcome documents of the Second Review Conference;
13. Encourages States to submit, on a voluntary basis, national reports on their implementation of the
Programme of Action, notes that States will submit national reports on their implementation of the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons (the International Tracing Instrument),161 encourages those States in a position to do so to use the reporting
template made available by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, and reaffirms the utility of
synchronizing such reports with biennial meetings of States and review conferences as a means of increasing the
submission rate and improving the utility of reports, as well as contributing substantively to meeting discussions;
14. Also encourages States, on a voluntary basis, to make increasing use of their national reports as another
tool for communicating assistance needs and information on the resources and mechanisms available to address
such needs, and encourages States in a position to render such assistance to make use of these national reports;
_______________
165
166

210

See A/62/163 and Corr.1.
A/CONF.192/2012/RC/4, annex I, sect. III, paras. 1 and 2.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

15. Encourages States, relevant international and regional organizations and civil society with the capacity
to do so to cooperate with and assist other States, upon request, in the preparation of comprehensive reports on their
implementation of the Programme of Action;
16. Calls upon all States to implement the International Tracing Instrument by, inter alia, including in their
national reports the name and contact information of the national points of contact and information on national
marking practices used to indicate country of manufacture and/or country of import, as applicable;
17. Recognizes the urgent need to maintain and enhance national controls, in accordance with the
Programme of Action, to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, including
their diversion to unauthorized recipients, taking into account, inter alia, their adverse humanitarian and
socioeconomic consequences for the affected States;
18. Encourages States in a position to do so to provide financial assistance, through a voluntary sponsorship
fund, that could be distributed, upon request, to States otherwise unable to participate in meetings on the Programme
of Action;
19. Encourages interested States and relevant international and regional organizations in a position to do so
to convene regional meetings to consider and advance the implementation of the Programme of Action, as well as
the International Tracing Instrument, including in preparation for the meetings on the Programme of Action;
20. Encourages civil society and relevant organizations to strengthen their cooperation and work with States
at the respective national and regional levels to achieve the implementation of the Programme of Action;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects”.
RESOLUTION 68/49
A/RES/68/49

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)167

68/49.

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/43 of 2 December 2011, entitled “Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-WeaponFree Zone (Bangkok Treaty)”,
Welcoming the desire of the South-East Asian States to maintain peace and stability in the region in the spirit
of peaceful coexistence and mutual understanding and cooperation,
Noting the entry into force on 15 December 2008 of the Charter of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations,168 in which it is stated, inter alia, that one of the purposes of the Association is to preserve South-East Asia
as a nuclear-weapon-free zone, free of all other weapons of mass destruction,
Noting also the convening of the second Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia,
_______________
167

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the States parties
to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)), China, Colombia, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Egypt, Fiji, France, Jamaica, Japan, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Timor-Leste, Tonga, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Uzbekistan.
168
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2624, No. 46745.

211

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming its conviction of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones, established, where appropriate,
on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among States of the region concerned and in accordance with the 1999
guidelines of the Disarmament Commission, 169 in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime, in
contributing towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament and in extending the areas of the world that are
free of nuclear weapons, and, with particular reference to the responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States, calling
upon all States to seek a safer world for all and to achieve peace and security in a world without nuclear weapons in
a way that promotes international stability and based on the principle of undiminished security for all,
Convinced that the establishment of a South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, as an essential component
of the Declaration on the Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality, signed in Kuala Lumpur on 27 November 1971,
will contribute towards strengthening the security of States within the Zone and towards enhancing international
peace and security as a whole,
Noting the entry into force of the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone170 on 27 March
1997 and the tenth anniversary of its entry into force in 2007,
Welcoming the reaffirmation of South-East Asian States that the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
shall continue to play a pivotal role in the area of confidence-building measures, preventive diplomacy and the
approaches to conflict resolution as enshrined in the Declaration of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Concord II (Bali Concord II),171
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in
conformity with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,172
Recognizing that, by signing and ratifying the relevant protocols to the treaties establishing nuclear-weaponfree zones, nuclear-weapon States would undertake individual legally binding commitments to respect the status of
such zones and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against States parties to such treaties,
Recalling the statement of the Chairman of the twenty-second Association of Southeast Asian Nations Summit
and the joint communiqué of the forty-sixth Ministerial Meeting of the Association,
Recalling also the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to the freedom of the high seas
and the rights of innocent passage, archipelagic sea lanes passage or transit passage of ships and aircraft, particularly
those of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,173
1. Welcomes the commitment and efforts of the Commission for the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone to further enhance and strengthen the implementation of the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-WeaponFree Zone (Bangkok Treaty)170 by implementing the plan of action for the period 2013–2017 adopted in Bandar Seri
Begawan on 30 June 2013, with a renewed commitment and a stronger emphasis on concrete actions, and the
decision of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Political-Security Community Council, established under the
Charter of the Association,168 to give priority to the implementation of the plan of action;
2. Encourages States parties to the Treaty to continue to engage nuclear-weapon States to resolve
comprehensively, in accordance with the objectives and principles of the Treaty, outstanding issues, with a view to
signing the Protocol thereto and its related documents expeditiously;
3. Underlines the value of enhancing and implementing further ways and means of cooperation among the
States parties to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties and the protocols thereto, with a view to strengthening the nonproliferation regime and to contributing towards realizing the objective of nuclear disarmament;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(Bangkok Treaty)”.
_______________
169

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
171
A/58/548, annex I.
172
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
173
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.
170

212

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/50
A/RES/68/50

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)174

68/50.

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/66 of 8 December 2005, 61/75 of 6 December 2006, 62/43 of 5 December 2007,
63/68 of 2 December 2008, 64/49 of 2 December 2009 and 65/68 of 8 December 2010, as well as its decision
66/517 of 2 December 2011,
Recalling also the report of the Secretary-General of 15 October 1993 to the General Assembly at its fortyeighth session, the annex to which contains the study by governmental experts on the application of confidencebuilding measures in outer space,175
Reaffirming the right of all countries to explore and use outer space in accordance with international law,
Reaffirming also that preventing an arms race in outer space is in the interest of maintaining international
peace and security and is an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international cooperation in
the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Recalling, in this context, its resolutions 45/55 B of 4 December 1990 and 48/74 B of 16 December 1993, in
which, inter alia, the General Assembly recognized the need for increased transparency and confirmed the
importance of confidence-building measures as a means of reinforcing the objective of preventing an arms race in
outer space,
Noting the constructive debates that the Conference on Disarmament has held on this subject and the views
expressed by Member States,
Noting also the introduction by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference on Disarmament of the
draft treaty on the prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of the threat or use of force against
outer space objects,176
Noting further that, since 2004, several States177 have introduced a policy of not being the first State to place
weapons in outer space,
Noting the presentation by the European Union of a draft of a non-legally binding international code of
conduct for outer space activities,
Recognizing the work that takes place within the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and its Legal Subcommittee, which makes a significant contribution to the
promotion of the long-term sustainability of outer space activities,
Noting the contribution of Member States that have submitted to the Secretary-General concrete proposals on
international outer space transparency and confidence-building measures pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution
61/75, paragraph 2 of resolution 62/43, paragraph 2 of resolution 63/68 and paragraph 2 of resolution 64/49,
_______________
174

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
175
A/48/305 and Corr.1.
176
See CD/1839.
177
Armenia, Belarus, Brazil, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Sri Lanka and Tajikistan.

213

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the work done in 2012 and 2013 by the group of governmental experts convened by the SecretaryGeneral, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, to conduct a study on outer space transparency and
confidence-building measures,
1. Welcomes the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Group of Governmental
Experts on Transparency and Confidence-building Measures in Outer Space Activities;178
2. Encourages Member States to review and implement, to the greatest extent practicable, the proposed
transparency and confidence-building measures contained in the report, through relevant national mechanisms, on a
voluntary basis and in a manner consistent with the national interests of Member States;
3. Decides, in order to further advance transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space, to
refer the recommendations contained in the report to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, the
Disarmament Commission and the Conference on Disarmament for consideration, as appropriate;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the report to all other relevant entities and organizations of
the United Nations system in order that they may assist in effectively implementing the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein, as appropriate;
5. Encourages relevant entities and organizations of the United Nations system to coordinate, as
appropriate, on matters related to the recommendations contained in the report;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General and
complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities”.
RESOLUTION 68/51
A/RES/68/51

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),179 by a recorded vote of 169 to 1, with 14 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Abstaining: Brazil, China, Ecuador, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Mauritius, Myanmar, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Zimbabwe

_______________
178

A/68/189.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan and Vanuatu.

179

214

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

68/51.

United action towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling the need for all States to take further practical steps and effective measures towards the total
elimination of nuclear weapons, with a view to achieving a peaceful and secure world free of nuclear weapons, and
in this regard confirming the determination of Member States to take united action,
Noting that the ultimate objective of the efforts of States in the disarmament process is general and complete
disarmament under strict and effective international control,
Recalling its resolution 67/59 of 3 December 2012,
Expressing deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and
reaffirming the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law, while convinced that every effort should be made to avoid the use of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that the catastrophic humanitarian consequences that would result from the use of nuclear
weapons should be fully understood, and noting in this regard that efforts should be made to increase such
understanding,
Reaffirming that the enhancement of international peace and security and the promotion of nuclear
disarmament are mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming also that further advancement in nuclear disarmament will contribute to consolidating the
international regime for nuclear non-proliferation, which is, inter alia, essential to international peace and security,
Reaffirming further the crucial importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons180 as
the cornerstone of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime and an essential foundation for the pursuit of
the three pillars of the Treaty, namely, nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy,
Recalling the decisions and the resolution of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons181 and the Final Documents of the 2000 182 and 2010 183
Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Welcoming the successful outcome of the 2010 Review Conference, held from 3 to 28 May 2010, in the year
of the sixty-fifth anniversary of the atomic bombings in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, and reaffirming the
necessity of fully implementing the action plan adopted at the Review Conference,184
Welcoming also the deliberations and results of the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held from 22 April to
3 May 2013,
Noting the high-level meeting on revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward
multilateral disarmament negotiations, convened by the Secretary-General on 24 September 2010, and the plenary
meeting of the General Assembly to follow up on the high-level meeting, held from 27 to 29 July 2011,
Noting also the meetings of the Open-ended Working Group “to take forward multilateral nuclear
disarmament negotiations” held in Geneva from 14 to 24 May, on 27 June and from 19 to 30 August 2013, as well
as the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament, held on 26 September 2013,
_______________
180

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
182
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
183
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
184
Ibid., vol. I, part I.
181

215

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the entry into force on 5 February 2011 of the Treaty between the Russian Federation and the
United States of America on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms,
Welcoming also the announcements on overall stockpiles of nuclear warheads by France, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, as well as the update of the Russian
Federation on its nuclear arsenals, which further enhance transparency and increase mutual confidence,
Welcoming further the high-level national statement made on 19 June 2013 regarding the long-term goal of
achieving the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons, and expressing renewed determination to
increase momentum for global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation,
Expressing deep concern regarding the growing dangers posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, inter alia, nuclear weapons, including that caused by proliferation networks,
Recognizing the importance of the objective of nuclear security, along with the shared goals of Member States
of nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy, welcoming the Nuclear
Security Summit held in Washington, D.C., on 12 and 13 April 2010 and in Seoul on 26 and 27 March 2012, and
looking forward to the Nuclear Security Summit to be held in the Netherlands in 2014,
Condemning in the strongest terms the nuclear test conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on 12 February 2013, recognizing the importance of the implementation of Security Council resolutions
1718 (2006) of 14 October 2006, 1874 (2009) of 12 June 2009, 2087 (2013) of 22 January 2013 and 2094 (2013) of
7 March 2013, noting the requirements of resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009) and 2094 (2013), which were
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, and in particular noting the requirements that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes and
immediately cease all related activities, in this respect expressing concern regarding the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s uranium enrichment programme and light water reactor construction, as well as the launches on
13 April and 12 December 2012 and its recent statements of its intention to readjust and restart its nuclear facilities
at Yongbyon, including the 5 MW(e) graphite-moderated reactor and uranium enrichment activities, and declaring
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea cannot have the status of a nuclear-weapon State under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, nor will it be accepted that it possess nuclear weapons under any
circumstances,
1. Reaffirms the importance of all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons180 complying with their obligations under all the articles of the Treaty;
2. Also reaffirms the vital importance of the universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, and calls upon all States not parties to the Treaty to accede as non-nuclear-weapon States to the Treaty
promptly and without any conditions and, pending their accession to the Treaty, to adhere to its terms and take
practical steps in support of the Treaty;
3. Further reaffirms the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons are committed under article VI thereof;
4. Calls upon nuclear-weapon States to undertake further efforts to reduce and ultimately eliminate all
types of nuclear weapons, deployed and non-deployed, including through unilateral, bilateral, regional and
multilateral measures;
5. Emphasizes the importance of applying the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency in
relation to the process of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation;
6. Recognizes that nuclear disarmament and achieving the peace and security of a world without nuclear
weapons require openness and cooperation, affirms the importance of enhanced confidence through increased
transparency and effective verification, emphasizes the importance of the commitment made by the nuclear-weapon
States at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to
accelerate concrete progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament contained in the Final Document of the
2000 Review Conference in a way that promotes international stability, peace and undiminished and increased
security, and the call upon the nuclear-weapon States to report their undertakings in 2014 to the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 Review Conference,184 and welcomes in this regard the convening, in Paris on 30 June and
216

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1 July 2011, in Washington, D.C., from 27 to 29 June 2012, and at the Mission of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations Office at Geneva on 18 and 19 April 2013, of the follow-up meetings to the 2010 Review
Conference of the five nuclear-weapon States as a transparency and confidence-building measure among them;
7. Welcomes the ongoing implementation by the Russian Federation and the United States of America of
the Treaty on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, and encourages them
to continue discussions on follow-on measures in order to achieve deeper reductions in their nuclear arsenals;
8. Urges all States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty185 at the earliest opportunity, with a view to its early entry into force and universalization, stresses the
importance of maintaining existing moratoriums on nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions
pending the entry into force of the Treaty, and reaffirms the importance of the continued development of the Treaty
verification regime, which will be a significant contribution to providing assurance of compliance with the Treaty;
9. Reiterates its call for the immediate commencement of negotiations on a treaty banning the production
of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices and its early conclusion, regrets that
negotiations have not yet started, and calls upon all nuclear-weapon States and States not parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to declare and maintain moratoriums on the production of fissile material for
any nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices pending the entry into force of the treaty;
10. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to take measures to further reduce the risk of an accidental or
unauthorized launch of nuclear weapons in ways that promote international stability and security, while welcoming
the measures already taken by several nuclear-weapon States in this regard;
11. Also calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to promptly engage with a view to further diminishing the
role and significance of nuclear weapons in all military and security concepts, doctrines and policies;
12. Recognizes the legitimate interest of non-nuclear-weapon States in receiving unequivocal and legally
binding security assurances from nuclear-weapon States which could strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation
regime;
13. Recalls Security Council resolution 984 (1995) of 11 April 1995, noting the unilateral statements by
each of the nuclear-weapon States, and calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to fully respect their existing
commitments with regard to security assurances;
14. Encourages the establishment of further nuclear-weapon-free zones, where appropriate, on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among States of the region concerned and in accordance with the 1999 guidelines of
the Disarmament Commission,186 and recognizes that, by signing and ratifying relevant protocols that contain
negative security assurances, nuclear-weapon States would undertake individual legally binding commitments with
respect to the status of such zones and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against States parties to such
treaties;
15. Urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea not to conduct any further nuclear tests and to comply
fully with its commitments under the joint statement of the Six-Party Talks of 19 September 2005 and its obligations
under the relevant Security Council resolutions;
16. Calls upon all States to redouble their efforts to prevent and curb the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and their means of delivery and to fully respect and comply with obligations undertaken to forswear nuclear
weapons;
17. Stresses the importance of the universalization of the comprehensive safeguards agreements of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to include States which have not yet adopted and implemented such an
agreement, while also strongly reaffirming the follow-on action of the 2010 Review Conference encouraging all
States which have not done so to conclude and bring into force as soon as possible the Model Protocol Additional to
the Agreement(s) between State(s) and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards
approved by the Board of Governors of the Agency on 15 May 1997, and the full implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004;
_______________
185
186

See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42).

217

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

18. Encourages every effort to secure all vulnerable nuclear and radiological material in order to, inter alia,
prevent nuclear terrorism, and calls upon all States to work cooperatively as an international community to advance
nuclear security, while requesting and providing assistance, including in the field of capacity-building, as necessary;
19. Encourages all States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations study on disarmament and non-proliferation education,187 in support of achieving a
world without nuclear weapons, and to voluntarily share information on efforts they have been undertaking to
that end;
20. Commends and further encourages the constructive role played by civil society in promoting nuclear
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, and encourages all States to promote, in cooperation with civil society,
disarmament and non-proliferation education which, inter alia, contributes to raising public awareness of the tragic
consequences of the use of nuclear weapons and strengthens the momentum of international efforts to promote
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “United action towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons”.
RESOLUTION 68/52
A/RES/68/52

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)188

68/52.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus

The General Assembly,
Mindful of contributing to the process initiated within the framework of the United Nations reform to make
the Organization more effective in maintaining peace and security by giving it the resources and tools it needs for
conflict prevention, peaceful resolution of disputes, peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction,
Underlining the importance of a comprehensive and integrated approach to disarmament through the
development of practical measures,
Welcoming the requirement of the Arms Trade Treaty189 that States parties establish and maintain a national
control system to regulate the export of relevant ammunition and munitions,
Taking note of the report of the Group of Experts on the problem of ammunition and explosives,190
Recalling the recommendation contained in paragraph 27 of the report of the Open-ended Working Group to
Negotiate an International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons,191 namely, to address the issue of small arms and light weapons ammunition in a
comprehensive manner as part of a separate process conducted within the framework of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the work and measures pursued at the regional and subregional levels with regard to
the issue of conventional ammunition,
_______________
187

A/57/124.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
189
See resolution 67/234 B.
190
See A/54/155.
191
A/60/88 and Corr.2.
188

218

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling its decision 59/515 of 3 December 2004 and its resolutions 60/74 of 8 December 2005 and 61/72 of
6 December 2006, its resolution 63/61 of 2 December 2008, by which it welcomed the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 61/72 to consider further steps to enhance cooperation with
regard to the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus,192 and its resolution 64/51 of 2 December 2009,
Taking note of the recommendations of the Group of Governmental Experts and encouraging the use, as
appropriate, of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines, which are available to States on a voluntary
basis, as well as the recommendations of the Group on improving knowledge resource management on technical
ammunition issues within the United Nations system, and noting the subsequent establishment, within the
Secretariat, of the SaferGuard knowledge resource management programme,193
1. Encourages all interested States to assess, on a voluntary basis, whether, in conformity with their
legitimate security needs, parts of their stockpiles of conventional ammunition should be considered to be in surplus,
and recognizes that the security of such stockpiles must be taken into consideration and that appropriate controls
with regard to the security and safety of stockpiles of conventional ammunition are indispensable at the national
level in order to eliminate the risk of explosion, pollution or diversion;
2. Appeals to all interested States to determine the size and nature of their surplus stockpiles of
conventional ammunition, whether they represent a security risk, their means of destruction, if appropriate, and
whether external assistance is needed to eliminate this risk;
3. Encourages States in a position to do so to assist interested States within a bilateral framework or
through international or regional organizations, on a voluntary and transparent basis, in elaborating and
implementing programmes to eliminate surplus stockpiles or to improve their management;
4. Encourages all Member States to examine the possibility of developing and implementing, within a
national, regional or subregional framework, measures to address accordingly the illicit trafficking related to the
accumulation of such stockpiles;
5. Takes note of the replies submitted by Member States in response to the request of the Secretary-General
for views regarding the risks arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus and
regarding national ways of strengthening controls on conventional ammunition;194
6. Continues to encourage States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the Group
of Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 61/72 to consider further steps to enhance cooperation
with regard to the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus;192
7. Recalls the completion of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines and the establishment of
the SaferGuard knowledge resource management programme for the stockpile management of conventional
ammunition, developed by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, with the full involvement of the
Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat, in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the report of the Group of Governmental Experts;
8. Welcomes the completion of implementation software and training materials that facilitate the
application of the Technical Guidelines in the field;
9. Encourages, in this regard, the safe and secure management of ammunition stockpiles in the planning
and conduct of peacekeeping operations,195 including through the training of peacekeepers, utilizing the Technical
Guidelines;
10. Welcomes the establishment of the SaferGuard quick-response mechanism, which allows ammunitions
experts to be deployed rapidly to assist States, upon request, in the urgent management of ammunition stockpiles,
including in the aftermath of unintended explosions of ammunition, and encourages States in a position to do so to
provide technical expertise or financial support to the mechanism;
_______________
192

A/63/182.
Ibid., paras. 72 and 73.
194
A/61/118 and Add.1 and A/62/166 and Add.1.
195
A/63/182, para. 74.
193

219

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

11. Encourages States wishing to improve their national stockpile management capacity, prevent the growth
of conventional ammunition surpluses and address wider risk mitigation to contact the SaferGuard programme, as
well as potential national donors and regional organizations, as appropriate, with a view to developing cooperation,
including, where relevant, technical expertise;
12. Reiterates its decision to address the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus in a
comprehensive manner;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus”.
RESOLUTION 68/53
A/RES/68/53

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)196

68/53.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind resolutions CM/Res.1153 (XLVIII) of 1988197 and CM/Res.1225 (L) of 1989,198 adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, concerning the dumping of nuclear and industrial
wastes in Africa,
Welcoming resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/530 establishing the Code of Practice on the International
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, adopted on 21 September 1990 by the General Conference of the
International Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-fourth regular session,
Taking note of the commitment made by the participants in the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security, held
in Moscow on 19 and 20 April 1996, to ban the dumping at sea of radioactive wastes,199
Considering its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which the General Assembly requested
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,200 inter alia, to consider effective methods of control against the
use of radiological methods of warfare,
Aware of the potential hazards underlying any use of radioactive wastes that would constitute radiological
warfare and its implications for regional and international security, in particular for the security of developing
countries,
Recalling all its resolutions on the matter since its forty-third session in 1988, including its resolution 51/45 J
of 10 December 1996,
Recalling also resolution GC(45)/RES/10, adopted by consensus on 21 September 2001 by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its forty-fifth regular session, in which States shipping
radioactive materials are invited to provide, as appropriate, assurances to concerned States, upon their request, that
the national regulations of the shipping State take into account the Agency’s transport regulations and to provide
them with relevant information relating to the shipment of such materials; with the information provided being in no
case contradictory to the measures of physical security and safety,
_______________
196

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Nigeria (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of African States).
197
See A/43/398, annex I.
198
See A/44/603, annex I.
199
A/51/131, annex I, para. 20.
200
The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament became the Committee on Disarmament as from the tenth special session of the
General Assembly. The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.

220

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the adoption, in Vienna on 5 September 1997, of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management,201 as recommended by the participants in the
Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security,
Welcoming also the convening by the International Atomic Energy Agency of the Ministerial Conference on
Nuclear Safety, in Vienna from 20 to 24 June 2011, and its outcome, the Declaration of the International Atomic
Energy Agency Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety, as well as the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, endorsed
by the General Conference of the Agency at its fifty-fifth regular session,
Noting the convening by the Secretary-General of the high-level meeting on nuclear safety and security, in
New York on 22 September 2011,
Noting with satisfaction that the Joint Convention entered into force on 18 June 2001,
Noting that the first Review Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management was convened in Vienna from 3 to
14 November 2003,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, the first special session devoted to disarmament,202
1. Takes note of the part of the report of the Conference on Disarmament relating to radiological
weapons;203
2. Also takes note of the Declaration of the International Atomic Energy Agency Ministerial Conference on
Nuclear Safety, the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety and the high-level meeting on nuclear safety and security
convened by the Secretary-General;
3. Expresses grave concern regarding any use of nuclear wastes that would constitute radiological warfare
and have grave implications for the national security of all States;
4. Calls upon all States to take appropriate measures with a view to preventing any dumping of nuclear or
radioactive wastes that would infringe upon the sovereignty of States;
5. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to take into account, in the negotiations for a convention on
the prohibition of radiological weapons, radioactive wastes as part of the scope of such a convention;
6. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to intensify efforts towards an early conclusion of such a
convention and to include in its report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session the progress recorded in the
negotiations on this subject;
7. Takes note of resolution CM/Res.1356 (LIV) of 1991, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity,204 on the Bamako Convention on the Ban on the Import of Hazardous Wastes into
Africa and on the Control of Their Transboundary Movements within Africa;
8. Expresses the hope that the effective implementation of the International Atomic Energy Agency Code
of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste will enhance the protection of all
States from the dumping of radioactive wastes on their territories;
9. Appeals to all Member States that have not yet taken the steps necessary to become party to the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management201 to do
so as soon as possible;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes”.
_______________
201

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2153, No. 37605.
Resolution S-10/2.
203
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/68/27), sect. III.E.
204
See A/46/390, annex I.
202

221

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/54
A/RES/68/54

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)205

68/54.

Regional disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/58 P of 4 December 1990, 46/36 I of 6 December 1991, 47/52 J of 9 December
1992, 48/75 I of 16 December 1993, 49/75 N of 15 December 1994, 50/70 K of 12 December 1995, 51/45 K of
10 December 1996, 52/38 P of 9 December 1997, 53/77 O of 4 December 1998, 54/54 N of 1 December 1999,
55/33 O of 20 November 2000, 56/24 H of 29 November 2001, 57/76 of 22 November 2002, 58/38 of 8 December
2003, 59/89 of 3 December 2004, 60/63 of 8 December 2005, 61/80 of 6 December 2006, 62/38 of 5 December
2007, 63/43 of 2 December 2008, 64/41 of 2 December 2009, 65/45 of 8 December 2010, 66/36 of 2 December
2011 and 67/57 of 3 December 2012 on regional disarmament,
Believing that the efforts of the international community to move towards the ideal of general and complete
disarmament are guided by the inherent human desire for genuine peace and security, the elimination of the danger
of war and the release of economic, intellectual and other resources for peaceful pursuits,
Affirming the abiding commitment of all States to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations in the conduct of their international relations,
Noting that essential guidelines for progress towards general and complete disarmament were adopted at the
tenth special session of the General Assembly,206
Taking note of the guidelines and recommendations for regional approaches to disarmament within the context
of global security adopted by the Disarmament Commission at its 1993 substantive session,207
Welcoming the prospects of genuine progress in the field of disarmament engendered in recent years as a result
of negotiations between the two super-Powers,
Taking note of the recent proposals for disarmament at the regional and subregional levels,
Recognizing the importance of confidence-building measures for regional and international peace and security,
Convinced that endeavours by countries to promote regional disarmament, taking into account the specific
characteristics of each region and in accordance with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of
armaments, would enhance the security of all States and would thus contribute to international peace and security by
reducing the risk of regional conflicts,
1. Stresses that sustained efforts are needed, within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament and
under the umbrella of the United Nations, to make progress on the entire range of disarmament issues;
2. Affirms that global and regional approaches to disarmament complement each other and should therefore
be pursued simultaneously to promote regional and international peace and security;
3. Calls upon States to conclude agreements, wherever possible, for nuclear non-proliferation,
disarmament and confidence-building measures at the regional and subregional levels;
4. Welcomes the initiatives towards disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and security undertaken by
some countries at the regional and subregional levels;
_______________
205

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Jordan, Kuwait,
Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Sudan and Turkey.
206
Resolution S-10/2.
207
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II.

222

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Supports and encourages efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building measures at the regional and
subregional levels to ease regional tensions and to further disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation measures at
the regional and subregional levels;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Regional disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 68/55
A/RES/68/55

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/411, para. 70)208

68/55.

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 58/43 of 8 December 2003, 59/87 of 3 December 2004, 60/64 of 8 December 2005,
61/81 of 6 December 2006, 62/45 of 5 December 2007, 63/45 of 2 December 2008, 64/43 of 2 December 2009,
65/47 of 8 December 2010, 66/38 of 2 December 2011 and 67/61 of 3 December 2012 on confidence-building
measures in the regional and subregional context,
Recalling also its resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003 on the prevention of armed conflict, in which the General
Assembly calls upon Member States to settle their disputes by peaceful means, as set out in Chapter VI of the
Charter, inter alia, by any procedures adopted by the parties,
Recalling further the resolutions and guidelines adopted by consensus by the General Assembly and the
Disarmament Commission relating to confidence-building measures and their implementation at the global,
regional and subregional levels,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures taken at the initiative and with
the agreement of all States concerned, and taking into account the specific characteristics of each region, since such
measures can contribute to regional stability,
Convinced that resources released by disarmament, including regional disarmament, can be devoted to
economic and social development and to the protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in
particular those of the developing countries,
Recognizing the need for meaningful dialogue among States concerned to avert conflict,
Welcoming the peace processes already initiated by States concerned to resolve their disputes through peaceful
means bilaterally or through mediation, inter alia, by third parties, regional organizations or the United Nations,
Recognizing that States in some regions have already taken steps towards confidence-building measures at the
bilateral, subregional and regional levels in the political and military fields, including arms control and disarmament,
and noting that such confidence-building measures have improved peace and security in those regions and
contributed to progress in the socioeconomic conditions of their people,
Concerned that the continuation of disputes among States, particularly in the absence of an effective mechanism
to resolve them through peaceful means, may contribute to the arms race and endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security and the efforts of the international community to promote arms control and disarmament,
1. Calls upon Member States to refrain from the use or threat of use of force in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms its commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter, in
particular Article 33, which provides for a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements or other peaceful means chosen by the parties;
_______________
208

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bangladesh, Ecuador, Egypt, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Sierra Leone, Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine and Uruguay.

223

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Reaffirms the ways and means regarding confidence- and security-building measures set out in the report
of the Disarmament Commission on its 1993 session;209
4. Calls upon Member States to pursue these ways and means through sustained consultations and
dialogue, while at the same time avoiding actions that may hinder or impair such a dialogue;
5. Urges States to comply strictly with all bilateral, regional and international agreements, including arms
control and disarmament agreements, to which they are party;
6. Emphasizes that the objective of confidence-building measures should be to help to strengthen international
peace and security and to be consistent with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of armaments;
7. Encourages the promotion of bilateral and regional confidence-building measures, with the consent and
participation of the parties concerned, to avoid conflict and prevent the unintended and accidental outbreak of
hostilities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session
containing the views of Member States on confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General and
complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context”.
RESOLUTION 68/56
A/RES/68/56

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/411,
para. 70),210 by a recorded vote of 182 to 1, with 2 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: India
Abstaining: Bhutan, Russian Federation

68/56.

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 J of 16 December 1993, 49/75 O of 15 December 1994, 50/70 L of
12 December 1995, 51/45 Q of 10 December 1996, 52/38 Q of 9 December 1997, 53/77 P of 4 December 1998,
54/54 M of 1 December 1999, 55/33 P of 20 November 2000, 56/24 I of 29 November 2001, 57/77 of
_______________
209

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II, sect. III.A.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bangladesh, Egypt, Italy, Malaysia, Pakistan,
Syrian Arab Republic and Ukraine.

210

224

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

22 November 2002, 58/39 of 8 December 2003, 59/88 of 3 December 2004, 60/75 of 8 December 2005, 61/82 of
6 December 2006, 62/44 of 5 December 2007, 63/44 of 2 December 2008, 64/42 of 2 December 2009, 65/46 of
8 December 2010, 66/37 of 2 December 2011 and 67/62 of 3 December 2012,
Recognizing the crucial role of conventional arms control in promoting regional and international peace and
security,
Convinced that conventional arms control needs to be pursued primarily in the regional and subregional
contexts since most threats to peace and security in the post-cold-war era arise mainly among States located in the
same region or subregion,
Aware that the preservation of a balance in the defence capabilities of States at the lowest level of armaments
would contribute to peace and stability and should be a prime objective of conventional arms control,
Desirous of promoting agreements to strengthen regional peace and security at the lowest possible level of
armaments and military forces,
Noting with particular interest the initiatives taken in this regard in different regions of the world, in particular
the commencement of consultations among a number of Latin American countries and the proposals for
conventional arms control made in the context of South Asia, and recognizing, in the context of this subject, the
relevance and value of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe,211 which is a cornerstone of European
security,
Believing that militarily significant States and States with larger military capabilities have a special
responsibility in promoting such agreements for regional security,
Believing also that an important objective of conventional arms control in regions of tension should be to
prevent the possibility of military attack launched by surprise and to avoid aggression,
1. Decides to give urgent consideration to the issues involved in conventional arms control at the regional
and subregional levels;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to consider the formulation of principles that can serve as a
framework for regional agreements on conventional arms control, and looks forward to a report of the Conference
on this subject;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in the meantime, to seek the views of Member States on the subject and
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional
levels”.
RESOLUTION 68/57
A/RES/68/57

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/412, para. 22)212

68/57.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/83 of 8 December 2005, 61/90 of 6 December 2006, 62/50 of 5 December
2007, 63/76 of 2 December 2008, 64/58 of 2 December 2009, 65/78 of 8 December 2010, 66/53 of
_______________
211

See CD/1064.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries) and New Zealand.

212

225

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2 December 2011 and 67/63 of 3 December 2012 regarding the maintenance and revitalization of the three
United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament,
Recalling also the reports of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, 213 the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the
Pacific214 and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean,215
Reaffirming its decision, taken in 1982 at its twelfth special session, to establish the United Nations
Disarmament Information Programme, the purpose of which is to inform, educate and generate public
understanding and support for the objectives of the United Nations in the field of arms control and
disarmament,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 J of 3 December 1986, 42/39 D of
30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of 15 December 1989 on the regional centres for peace and disarmament in Nepal,
Peru and Togo,
Recognizing that the changes that have taken place in the world have created new opportunities and posed
new challenges for the pursuit of disarmament, and bearing in mind in this regard that the regional centres for peace
and disarmament can contribute substantially to understanding and cooperation among States in each particular
region in the areas of peace, disarmament and development,
Noting that, in paragraph 178 of the Final Document of the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran on 30 and 31 August 2012, 216 the Heads of State or
Government emphasized the importance of United Nations activities at the regional level to increase the stability
and security of its Member States, which could be promoted in a substantive manner by the maintenance and
revitalization of the three regional centres for peace and disarmament,
1. Reiterates the importance of United Nations activities at the regional level to advance disarmament and
to increase the stability and security of its Member States, which could be promoted in a substantive manner by the
maintenance and revitalization of the three regional centres for peace and disarmament;
2. Reaffirms that, in order to achieve positive results, it is useful for the three regional centres to carry out
dissemination and educational programmes that promote regional peace and security and that are aimed at changing
basic attitudes with respect to peace and security and disarmament so as to support the achievement of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations;
3. Appeals to Member States in each region that are able to do so, as well as to international governmental
and non-governmental organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions to the regional centres in
their respective regions in order to strengthen their activities and initiatives;
4. Emphasizes the importance of the activities of the Regional Disarmament Branch of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all support necessary, within existing resources, to the
regional centres in carrying out their programmes of activities;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament”.

_______________
213

A/68/114.
A/68/112.
215
A/68/134.
216
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.
214

226

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/58
A/RES/68/58

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/412,
para. 22),217 by a recorded vote of 126 to 49, with 9 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Japan, Malawi, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Serbia, Uzbekistan

68/58.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to the survival of mankind,
Bearing in mind the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 8 July 1996 on the legality of the
threat or use of nuclear weapons,218
Convinced that a multilateral, universal and binding agreement prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons would contribute to the elimination of the nuclear threat and to the climate for negotiations leading to the
ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons, thereby strengthening international peace and security,
Conscious that some steps taken by the Russian Federation and the United States of America towards a
reduction of their nuclear weapons and the improvement in the international climate can contribute towards the goal
of the complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Recalling that in paragraph 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly219
it is stated that all States should actively participate in efforts to bring about conditions in international relations
among States in which a code of peaceful conduct of nations in international affairs could be agreed upon and which
would preclude the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that any use of nuclear weapons would be a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and a
crime against humanity, as declared in its resolutions 1653 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 33/71 B of 14 December
1978, 34/83 G of 11 December 1979, 35/152 D of 12 December 1980 and 36/92 I of 9 December 1981,
Determined to achieve an international convention prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and
use of nuclear weapons, leading to their ultimate destruction,
_______________
217

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Cambodia, Chile, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritius, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zambia.
218
A/51/218, annex.
219
Resolution S-10/2.

227

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Stressing that an international convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would be an
important step in a phased programme towards the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, with a specified
framework of time,
Noting with regret that the Conference on Disarmament, during its 2013 session, was unable to undertake
negotiations on this subject as called for in General Assembly resolution 67/64 of 3 December 2012,
1. Reiterates its request to the Conference on Disarmament to commence negotiations in order to reach
agreement on an international convention prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any
circumstances;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report to the General Assembly on the results of those
negotiations.
RESOLUTION 68/59
A/RES/68/59

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/412, para. 22)220

68/59.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 42/39 D of 30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of 15 December 1989, by which it
established the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and renamed it the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, with headquarters in Kathmandu and
with the mandate of providing, on request, substantive support for the initiatives and other activities mutually agreed
upon by the Member States of the Asia-Pacific region for the implementation of measures for peace and
disarmament, through appropriate utilization of available resources,
Welcoming the physical operation of the Regional Centre from Kathmandu in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 62/52 of 5 December 2007,
Recalling the mandate of the Regional Centre to provide, on request, substantive support for the initiatives and
other activities mutually agreed upon by the Member States of the Asia-Pacific region for the implementation of
measures for peace and disarmament,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,221 and expressing its appreciation to the Regional Centre
for its important work in promoting confidence-building measures through the organization of meetings,
conferences and workshops in the region, including the eleventh United Nations-Republic of Korea Joint
Conference on Disarmament and Non-proliferation Issues, held on Jeju Island, Republic of Korea, on 3 and
4 December 2012; the national capacity-building workshop on the implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in
Bangkok from 11 to 13 December 2012; the Asia Regional Meeting to Facilitate Dialogue on the Arms Trade
Treaty, held in Kuala Lumpur on 26 and 27 February 2013; and the twenty-fourth United Nations Conference on
Disarmament Issues, on the theme “Creating a peaceful and safe future: pressing issues and potential solutions”,
held in Shizuoka, Japan, from 30 January to 1 February 2013,
Appreciating the timely execution by Nepal of its financial commitments for the physical operation of the
Regional Centre,
1. Expresses its satisfaction at the activities carried out in the past year by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, and invites all States of the region to continue to support
_______________
220

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Maldives, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Myanmar,
Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste and Viet Nam.
221
A/68/112.

228

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

the activities of the Regional Centre, including by continuing to take part in them, where possible, and by proposing
items for inclusion in the programme of activities of the Centre, in order to contribute to the implementation of
measures for peace and disarmament;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Nepal for its cooperation and financial support, which has
enabled the Regional Centre to operate from Kathmandu;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat for providing necessary support with a view to ensuring the smooth operation of the Regional Centre
from Kathmandu and to enabling the Centre to function effectively;
4. Appeals to Member States, in particular those within the Asia-Pacific region, as well as to
international governmental and non-governmental organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions,
the only resources of the Regional Centre, to strengthen its programme of activities and the implementation
thereof;
5. Reaffirms its strong support for the role of the Regional Centre in the promotion of activities of the
United Nations at the regional level to strengthen peace, stability and security among its Member States;
6. Underlines the importance of the Kathmandu process for the development of the practice of region-wide
security and disarmament dialogues;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific”.
RESOLUTION 68/60
A/RES/68/60

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/412, para. 22)222

68/60.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 41/60 J of 3 December 1986, 42/39 K of 30 November 1987 and 43/76 H of
7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin
America and the Caribbean, with headquarters in Lima,
Recalling also its resolution 67/66 of 3 December 2012, as well as all previous resolutions entitled “United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean”,
Recognizing that the Regional Centre has continued to provide substantive support for the implementation of
regional and subregional initiatives and has intensified its contribution to the coordination of United Nations efforts
towards peace and disarmament and for the promotion of economic and social development,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Regional Centre to provide, on request, substantive support for the initiatives
and other activities of the Member States of the region for the implementation of measures for peace and
disarmament and for the promotion of economic and social development,
_______________
222

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).

229

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 223 and expressing its appreciation for the important
assistance provided, upon request, by the Regional Centre to several countries in the region, including through
capacity-building and technical assistance programmes, as well as outreach activities, to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, ammunition and explosives, for the development of plans
to reduce and prevent armed violence from an arms control perspective, for promoting and supporting the
implementation of relevant agreements and treaties and for capacity-building initiatives aimed at bolstering the
efforts of the law enforcement community to combat the illicit trade in firearms,
Welcoming the support provided by the Regional Centre to Member States in the implementation of
disarmament and non-proliferation instruments,
Emphasizing the need for the Regional Centre to develop and strengthen its activities and programmes in a
comprehensive and balanced manner, in accordance with its mandate and in line with the requests for assistance by
Member States,
Welcoming the ongoing support provided by the Regional Centre to Member States in the implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects,224
Welcoming also the assistance provided by the Regional Centre to some States, upon request, in the
management and securing of national weapons stockpiles and in the identification and destruction of surplus,
obsolete or seized weapons and ammunition, as declared by competent national authorities,
Welcoming further the initiative of the Regional Centre to continue to conduct activities in line with efforts to
promote the equitable representation of women in all decision-making processes with regard to matters related to
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control, as encouraged in resolutions 65/69 of 8 December 2010 and 67/48
of 3 December 2012,
Recalling the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the relationship between disarmament and
development,225 referred to in General Assembly resolution 59/78 of 3 December 2004, which is of utmost interest
with regard to the role that the Regional Centre plays in promoting the issue in the region in pursuit of its mandate to
promote economic and social development related to peace and disarmament,
Noting that security, disarmament and development issues have always been recognized as significant topics
in Latin America and the Caribbean, the first inhabited region in the world to be declared a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Emphasizing the importance of maintaining the support provided by the Regional Centre for strengthening the
nuclear-weapon-free zone established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco),226 as well as its efforts in promoting peace and disarmament education,
Bearing in mind the important role of the Regional Centre in promoting confidence-building measures, arms
control and limitation, disarmament and development at the regional level,
Bearing in mind also the importance of information, research, education and training for peace, disarmament
and development in order to achieve understanding and cooperation among States,
1. Reiterates its strong support for the role of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean in the promotion of activities of the United Nations at the
regional and subregional levels to strengthen peace, disarmament, stability, security and development among its
Member States;
_______________
223

A/68/134.
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
225
See A/59/119.
226
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
224

230

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Expresses its satisfaction at the activities carried out in the past year by the Regional Centre, and requests
the Centre to continue to take into account the proposals to be submitted by the countries of the region for the
implementation of the mandate of the Centre in the areas of peace, disarmament and development and for the
promotion of, inter alia, nuclear disarmament, the prevention, combating and eradication of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, ammunition and explosives, confidence-building measures, arms control and limitation,
transparency, and the reduction and prevention of armed violence at the regional and subregional levels;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the political support provided by Member States, as well as for the
financial contributions made by Member States, international governmental and non-governmental organizations
and foundations, to strengthen the Regional Centre, its programme of activities and the implementation thereof, and
encourages them to continue to make and to increase voluntary contributions;
4. Invites all States of the region to continue to take part in the activities of the Regional Centre, proposing
items for inclusion in its programme of activities and making greater and better use of the potential of the Centre to
meet the current challenges facing the international community with a view to fulfilling the aims of the Charter of
the United Nations in the areas of peace, disarmament and development;
5. Recognizes that the Regional Centre has an important role in the promotion and development of regional
and subregional initiatives agreed upon by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean in the field of weapons
of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and conventional arms, including small arms and light weapons,
in the relationship between disarmament and development, in the promotion of the participation of women in this
field and in strengthening voluntary confidence-building measures among the countries of the region;
6. Encourages the Regional Centre to further develop activities in all countries of the region in the
important areas of peace, disarmament and development and to provide, upon request and in accordance with its
mandate, support to Member States of the region in the national implementation of relevant instruments, inter alia,
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects224 and the Arms Trade Treaty;227
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean”.
RESOLUTION 68/61
A/RES/68/61

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/412, para. 22)228

68/61.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the provisions of Article 11, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations, in which it is
stipulated that a function of the General Assembly is to consider the general principles of cooperation in the
maintenance of international peace and security, including the principles governing disarmament and arms
limitation,
Recalling its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 D of 3 December 1986, 42/39 J of
30 November 1987 and 43/76 D of 7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa and its resolutions 46/36 F of 6 December 1991 and 47/52 G of 9 December 1992 on
regional disarmament, including confidence-building measures,
_______________
227

See resolution 67/234 B.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, New Zealand, Nigeria (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.

228

231

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the Regional Centre, the most recent of which is resolution 67/69
of 3 December 2012,
Recalling further its resolution 67/48 of 3 December 2012, in which the General Assembly recognized the role
of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control,
Reaffirming the role of the Regional Centre in promoting disarmament, peace and security at the regional
level,
Welcoming the continuing and deepening cooperation between the Regional Centre, the African Union and
African subregional organizations, in particular their institutions in the fields of disarmament, peace and security, as
well as between the Centre and relevant United Nations bodies and programmes in Africa, and considering the
communiqué adopted by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at its 200th meeting, held in Addis
Ababa on 21 August 2009,
Recalling the decision taken by the Executive Council of the African Union at its eighth ordinary session, held
in Khartoum from 16 to 21 January 2006,229 in which the Council called upon member States to make voluntary
contributions to the Regional Centre to maintain its operations,
Recalling also the call by the Secretary-General for continued financial and in-kind support from Member
States, which would enable the Regional Centre to discharge its mandate in full and to respond more effectively to
requests for assistance from African States,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;230

2. Welcomes the continental dimension of the activities of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace
and Disarmament in Africa in response to the evolving needs of African Member States and the region’s new and
emerging challenges in the areas of disarmament, peace and security, including maritime security;
3. Also welcomes the undertaking by the Regional Centre to provide capacity-building, technical assistance
programmes and advisory services to the African Union Commission, subregional organizations and African
Member States on the control of small arms and light weapons, including on stockpile management and destruction,
the negotiations on the Arms Trade Treaty231 and issues related to weapons of mass destruction, as detailed in the
report of the Secretary-General;
4. Further welcomes the contribution of the Regional Centre to continental disarmament, peace and
security, in particular its assistance to the African Union Commission in the elaboration of the African Union
Strategy on the Control of Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons and
the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Strategy and in the elaboration of the African Union Common
Position on an Arms Trade Treaty, as well as its assistance to the African Commission on Nuclear Energy in its
implementation of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba);232
5. Welcomes efforts by the Regional Centre to promote the role and representation of women in
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control activities;
6. Notes with appreciation the tangible achievements of the Regional Centre and the impact of the
assistance that it provided to Central African States in the elaboration and implementation of the Central African
Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components
That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly (Kinshasa Convention),233 to Central and West
African States in the elaboration of their respective common positions on the Arms Trade Treaty, to West Africa on
the implementation of the Economic Community of West African States Convention on Small Arms and Light
_______________
229

A/60/693, annex II, decision EX.CL/Dec.263 (VIII).
A/68/114.
231
See resolution 67/234 B.
232
A/50/426, annex.
233
See A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.
230

232

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials and on security sector reform initiatives and to East
Africa on programmes to control brokering of small arms and light weapons, as well as the substantive support
provided by the Centre to the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa;
7. Commends the Regional Centre for the support and assistance that it provided to African States in the
preparation for the United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, including through the organization of
subregional and regional seminars and conferences, and calls upon the Centre to provide, upon request, substantive
support to Member States of the region in implementing the Arms Trade Treaty;
8. Urges all States, as well as international governmental and non-governmental organizations and
foundations, to make voluntary contributions to enable the Regional Centre to carry out its programmes and
activities and meet the needs of the African States;
9. Urges, in particular, States members of the African Union to make voluntary contributions to the Trust
Fund for the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa in conformity with the decision
taken by the Executive Council of the African Union in Khartoum in January 2006;229
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to facilitate close cooperation between the Regional Centre
and the African Union, in particular in the areas of disarmament, peace and security;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Regional Centre with the support
necessary for greater achievements and results;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa”.
RESOLUTION 68/62
A/RES/68/62

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/412, para. 22)234

68/62.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 67/70 of 3 December 2012,
Recalling also the guidelines for general and complete disarmament adopted at its tenth special session, the
first special session devoted to disarmament,
Bearing in mind the establishment by the Secretary-General on 28 May 1992 of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, the purpose of which is to encourage arms limitation,
disarmament, non-proliferation and development in the Central Africa subregion,
Reaffirming that the purpose of the Standing Advisory Committee is to conduct reconstruction and
confidence-building activities in Central Africa among its member States, including through confidence-building
and arms limitation measures, and welcoming the twentieth anniversary celebrations of the Committee, which took
place on 7 December 2012 in Brazzaville under the chairmanship of the President of the Congo,

_______________
234

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Rwanda.

233

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling the Sao Tome Declaration on a Central African Common Position on the Arms Trade Treaty,
adopted by the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee on 16 March 2011 at their thirty-second
ministerial meeting, held in Sao Tome from 12 to 16 March 2011,235
Noting the outcome of the United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, held in New York from 2 to
27 July 2012, and noting also the second United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York from 27 August to 7 September 2012,
Convinced that the resources released by disarmament, including regional disarmament, can be devoted to
economic and social development and to the protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries,
Welcoming the declaration on a road map for counter-terrorism and non-proliferation of arms in Central
Africa, adopted by the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee on 8 December 2011 at their thirtythird ministerial meeting, held in Bangui from 5 to 9 December 2011, 236 and the progress made towards its
implementation,
Bearing in mind that the implementation of the road map should be compliant with relevant legal and
administrative obligations, as set out in Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001,
1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005 and 1963 (2010) of 20 December 2010, as well as with the four pillars of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,237
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures taken on the initiative and
with the participation of all States concerned and taking into account the specific characteristics of each region, since
such measures can contribute to regional stability and to international peace and security,
Convinced that development can be achieved only in a climate of peace, security and mutual confidence both
within and among States,
Recalling the Brazzaville Declaration on Cooperation for Peace and Security in Central Africa,238 the Bata
Declaration for the Promotion of Lasting Democracy, Peace and Development in Central Africa239 and the Yaoundé
Declaration on Peace, Security and Stability in Central Africa,240
Bearing in mind resolutions 1196 (1998) and 1197 (1998), adopted by the Security Council on 16 and
18 September 1998, respectively, following its consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,241
Welcoming the successful conclusion of the Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety
and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé on 24 and 25 June 2013,
Welcoming also the outcome of the high-level meeting on poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking, held on
26 September 2013 on the margins of the high-level segment of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly
and hosted by Gabon and Germany,242
Emphasizing the need to strengthen the capacity for conflict prevention and peacekeeping in Africa, and
noting in this regard the concrete conflict prevention initiatives facilitated by the Department of Political Affairs of
the Secretariat,
_______________
235

See A/66/72-S/2011/225, annex.
A/67/72-S/2012/159, annex, attachment I.
237
Resolution 60/288.
238
A/50/474, annex I.
239
A/53/258-S/1998/763, annex II, appendix I.
240
A/53/868-S/1999/303, annex II.
241
A/52/871-S/1998/318.
242
A/68/553, annex.
236

234

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the close cooperation established between the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the Economic Community of Central African States, as well as the signing of a framework of cooperation
agreement between the two entities on 3 May 2012,
Bearing in mind the increased focus of the Standing Advisory Committee on human security questions, such
as trafficking in persons, especially women and children, as an important consideration for subregional peace,
stability and conflict prevention,
Expressing concern about the situation in the Central African Republic, and welcoming the efforts of the
African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States, the adoption of the Kigali Declaration243 by
the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee on 23 August 2013 at their thirty-sixth ministerial meeting,
held in Kigali from 20 to 23 August 2013, and the adoption of resolution 2121 (2013) of 10 October 2013 by the
Security Council,
Expressing concern also about the increasing impact of cross-border criminality, in particular the activities of
armed groups, such as the Lord’s Resistance Army, and incidents of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, on peace, security
and development in Central Africa,
Considering the urgent need to prevent the possible movement of illicit weapons, mercenaries and combatants
involved in conflicts in the Sahel and in neighbouring countries in the Central African subregion,
1. Reaffirms its support for efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building measures at the regional and
subregional levels in order to ease tensions and conflicts in Central Africa and to further sustainable peace, stability
and development in the subregion;
2. Reaffirms the importance of disarmament and arms limitation programmes in Central Africa carried out
by the States of the subregion with the support of the United Nations, the African Union and other international
partners;
3. Welcomes the steps taken by States members of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa to facilitate the early entry into force of the Central African Convention for the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used
for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly (Kinshasa Convention),244 and encourages States members of the
Standing Advisory Committee and other interested States to provide financial support for the implementation of the
Convention;
4. Encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to implement the declaration on a
road map for counter-terrorism and non-proliferation of arms in Central Africa,236 and requests the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the
international community to support those measures;
5. Also encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to carry out the programmes
of activities adopted at their ministerial meetings;
6. Appeals to the international community to support the efforts undertaken by the States concerned to
implement disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes;
7. Welcomes the adoption, during the Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety and
Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé on 24 and 25 June 2013, of the Code of Conduct concerning the
Prevention and Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illegal Maritime Activity in West and
Central Africa, which defines the regional maritime security strategy and paves the way for a legally binding
instrument, and the decision to establish, in Cameroon, an interregional coordination centre responsible for
coordinating the implementation of the regional strategy, and requests the Secretary-General to support the
implementation of the outcomes of the Summit, including through the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa;
_______________
243
244

A/68/384, annex.
See A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.

235

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8. Expresses concern over the negative impact that poaching and illegal wildlife trafficking have on the
ecosystem, human development and regional security, and decides to take steps to develop a regional approach to
counter this phenomenon;
9. Expresses its full support for the efforts of the Economic Community of Central African States, the
African Union and the United Nations in the Central African Republic, and calls upon the international community
to support these efforts;
10. Encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to pursue their discussions on
concrete conflict prevention initiatives, and requests the assistance of the Secretary-General in this regard;
11. Requests the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, in collaboration with the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, to facilitate the efforts undertaken by the States members of
the Standing Advisory Committee, in particular for their execution of the Implementation Plan for the Kinshasa
Convention, as adopted on 19 November 2010 at their thirty-first ministerial meeting, held in Brazzaville from 15 to
19 November 2010;245
12. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to continue to assist the countries of Central Africa in tackling the problems of refugees and displaced persons in
their territories;
13. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to provide their full assistance for the proper functioning of the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and
Democracy in Central Africa;
14. Reminds the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee of the commitments they undertook
on the adoption of the Declaration on the Trust Fund of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa (Libreville Declaration)246 on 8 May 2009, and invites those States members of
the Committee that have not already done so to contribute to the Trust Fund;
15. Urges other Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support the
activities of the Standing Advisory Committee effectively through voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund;
16. Urges the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, to strengthen the gender component of the various meetings of the
Committee relating to disarmament and international security;
17. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support to the Standing Advisory Committee,
welcomes the role played by the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa since its opening, and strongly
encourages the States members of the Committee and international partners to support the work of the Office;
18. Welcomes the efforts of the Standing Advisory Committee towards addressing cross-border security threats
in Central Africa, including activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army, and acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea, as well as the fallout from the situation in Libya and the crisis in Mali, and also welcomes the role of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in coordinating those efforts, working closely with the Economic
Community of Central African States, the African Union and all relevant regional and international partners;
19. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support for the revitalization of the activities of
the Standing Advisory Committee, and requests him to continue to provide the assistance needed to ensure the
success of its regular biannual meetings;
20. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa”.
_______________
245
246

236

See A/65/717-S/2011/53, annex.
See A/64/85-S/2009/288, annex.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/63
A/RES/68/63

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/413, para. 10)247

68/63.

Report of the Disarmament Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament Commission,248
Recalling its resolutions 47/54 A of 9 December 1992, 47/54 G of 8 April 1993, 48/77 A of 16 December
1993, 49/77 A of 15 December 1994, 50/72 D of 12 December 1995, 51/47 B of 10 December 1996, 52/40 B of
9 December 1997, 53/79 A of 4 December 1998, 54/56 A of 1 December 1999, 55/35 C of 20 November 2000,
56/26 A of 29 November 2001, 57/95 of 22 November 2002, 58/67 of 8 December 2003, 59/105 of 3 December
2004, 60/91 of 8 December 2005, 61/98 of 6 December 2006, 62/54 of 5 December 2007, 63/83 of 2 December 2008,
64/65 of 2 December 2009, 65/86 of 8 December 2010, 66/60 of 2 December 2011 and 67/71 of 3 December 2012,
Considering the role that the Disarmament Commission has been called upon to play and the contribution that
it should make in examining and submitting recommendations on various problems in the field of disarmament and
in promoting the implementation of the relevant decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special
session,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Disarmament Commission;248

2. Reaffirms the validity of its decision 52/492 of 8 September 1998 concerning the efficient functioning of
the Disarmament Commission;
3. Recalls that, in its resolution 61/98, the General Assembly adopted additional measures for improving
the effectiveness of the methods of work of the Disarmament Commission;
4. Reaffirms the mandate of the Disarmament Commission as the specialized, deliberative body within the
United Nations multilateral disarmament machinery that allows for in-depth deliberations on specific disarmament
issues, leading to the submission of concrete recommendations on those issues;
5. Also reaffirms the importance of further enhancing the dialogue and cooperation among the First
Committee, the Disarmament Commission and the Conference on Disarmament;
6. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance with its mandate, as set forth
in paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 249 and with
paragraph 3 of Assembly resolution 37/78 H of 9 December 1982 and to that end to make every effort to achieve
specific recommendations on the items on its agenda, taking into account the adopted “Ways and means to enhance
the functioning of the Disarmament Commission”;250
7. Recommends that the Disarmament Commission continue the consideration of the following items at its
substantive session of 2014:
(a) Recommendations for achieving the objective of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons;
(b)

Practical confidence-building measures in the field of conventional weapons;

8. Requests the Disarmament Commission to meet for a period not exceeding three weeks during 2014,
namely from 7 to 25 April, and to submit a substantive report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
_______________
247

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Malta (on behalf of the members of the Bureau of
the Disarmament Commission).
248
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/68/42).
249
Resolution S-10/2.
250
A/CN.10/137.

237

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Disarmament Commission the annual report of the
Conference on Disarmament,251 together with all the official records of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that the Commission may require for
implementing the present resolution;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure full provision to the Disarmament Commission and its
subsidiary bodies of interpretation and translation facilities in the official languages and to assign, as a matter of
priority, all the resources and services necessary, including verbatim records, to that end;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Review
of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special
session”, the sub-item entitled “Report of the Disarmament Commission”.
RESOLUTION 68/64
A/RES/68/64

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/413, para. 10)252

68/64.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament,253
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the sole multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the
international community, has the primary role in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament,
Recognizing the message of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as well as the addresses of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and other high-level officials in the Conference on Disarmament, as expressions of support and
concern for the endeavours of the Conference and as calls for the Conference to immediately commence
negotiations to advance disarmament goals through the adoption of a balanced and comprehensive programme
of work,
Recognizing also the need to conduct multilateral negotiations with the aim of reaching agreement on concrete
issues, and considering that the present international climate should give additional impetus to multilateral
negotiations,
Noting with renewed concern that, despite the intensive efforts by States members and successive Presidents
of the Conference on Disarmament in the 2013 session to reach consensus on a programme of work on the basis of
relevant proposals and suggestions, including the revised draft decision of 11 February 2013 submitted for adoption
and the draft decisions circulated on 21 June and 13 August 2013, the Conference did not succeed in commencing
its substantive work, including negotiations, as called for by the General Assembly in its resolution 67/72 of
3 December 2012, or in agreeing on and implementing a programme of work,
Recalling, in this respect, that the Conference on Disarmament has a number of urgent and important issues
for negotiation to achieve disarmament goals,
Welcoming the overwhelming call for greater flexibility with respect to commencing the substantive work of
the Conference on Disarmament without further delay, on the basis of a balanced and comprehensive programme
of work,
Appreciating the continued cooperation among the States members of the Conference on Disarmament as well
as the six successive Presidents of the Conference at its 2013 session,
_______________
251

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/68/27).
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Ireland.
253
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/68/27).
252

238

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting with appreciation the significant contributions made during the 2013 session to promote substantive
discussions on issues on the agenda and, in addition, on the revitalization of the Conference on Disarmament, as
well as the discussions held on other issues that could also be relevant to the current international security
environment,
Emphasizing the importance of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, as a stand-alone,
autonomous institution, and the contribution that its research makes,
Recognizing the importance of engagement between civil society and the Conference on Disarmament
according to decisions taken by the Conference,
Stressing the urgent need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence its substantive work at the
beginning of its 2014 session,
1. Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the sole multilateral disarmament negotiating
forum of the international community;
2. Appreciates the strong support expressed for the Conference on Disarmament during its 2013 session by
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other high-level officials, while also acknowledging their concern about its
ongoing impasse, and takes into account their calls for greater flexibility with respect to commencing the substantive
work of the Conference without further delay;
3. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to further intensify consultations and to explore possibilities
for overcoming its ongoing deadlock of well over a decade by adopting and implementing a balanced and
comprehensive programme of work at the earliest possible date during its 2014 session, bearing in mind the
decision on the programme of work adopted by the Conference on 29 May 2009,254 as well as other relevant
present, past and future proposals;
4. Welcomes the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to establish an informal working group
with a mandate to produce a programme of work robust in substance and progressive over time in
implementation,255 appreciates the efforts that led to its submission and adoption, and takes note of the provisions
of that decision;
5. Also welcomes the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to request the current President and the
incoming President of the Conference to conduct consultations during the intersessional period and, if possible, to
make recommendations, taking into account all relevant proposals, past, present and future, including those
submitted as documents of the Conference, views presented and discussions held, and to endeavour to keep the
membership of the Conference informed, as appropriate, of their consultations;
6. Requests all States members of the Conference on Disarmament to cooperate with the current President
and successive Presidents in their efforts to guide the Conference to the early commencement of its substantive
work, including negotiations, in its 2014 session;
7. Recognizes the importance of continuing consultations on the question of the expansion of the
membership of the Conference on Disarmament;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure and to strengthen, if needed, the provision to the
Conference on Disarmament of all necessary administrative, substantive and conference support services;
9. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a
report on its work;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Review
of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special
session”, the sub-item entitled “Report of the Conference on Disarmament”.
_______________
254
255

Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/64/27), para. 18.
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/68/27), para. 18.

239

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/65
A/RES/68/65

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/414,
para. 7),256 by a recorded vote of 169 to 5, with 6 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, India, Panama

68/65.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the latest of which is resolution GC(57)/RES/15, adopted on 20 September 2013,
Cognizant that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the region of the Middle East would pose a serious
threat to international peace and security,
Mindful of the immediate need for placing all nuclear facilities in the region of the Middle East under fullscope safeguards of the Agency,
Recalling the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament adopted by
the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons on 11 May 1995,257 in which the Conference urged universal adherence to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons258 as an urgent priority and called upon all States not yet parties to the Treaty to
accede to it at the earliest date, particularly those States that operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities,
Recognizing with satisfaction that, in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 259 the Conference undertook to make determined
efforts towards the achievement of the goal of universality of the Treaty, called upon those remaining States not
parties to the Treaty to accede to it, thereby accepting an international legally binding commitment not to acquire
_______________
256

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Egypt (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the League of Arab States) and the State of Palestine.
257
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
258
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
259
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).

240

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices and to accept Agency safeguards on all their nuclear activities, and
underlined the necessity of universal adherence to the Treaty and of strict compliance by all parties with their
obligations under the Treaty,
Recalling the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference on
11 May 1995,257 in which the Conference noted with concern the continued existence in the Middle East of
unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, reaffirmed the importance of the early realization of universal adherence to the
Treaty and called upon all States in the Middle East that had not yet done so, without exception, to accede to the
Treaty as soon as possible and to place all their nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards,
Noting with satisfaction that, in the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,260 the Conference emphasized the importance of a process
leading to full implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East and decided, inter alia, that the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the co-sponsors of the 1995 resolution, in consultation with the
States of the region, would convene a conference in 2012, to be attended by all States of the Middle East, on the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction, on the
basis of arrangements freely arrived at by the States of the region and with the full support and engagement of the
nuclear-weapon States,
Expressing regret that the conference was not convened in 2012 as mandated, and urging that it be convened
without further delay,
Recalling that Israel remains the only State in the Middle East that has not yet become a party to the Treaty,
Concerned about the threats posed by the proliferation of nuclear weapons to the security and stability of the
Middle East region,
Stressing the importance of taking confidence-building measures, in particular the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East, in order to enhance peace and security in the region and to consolidate the
global non-proliferation regime,
Emphasizing the need for all parties directly concerned to seriously consider taking the practical and urgent
steps required for the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and, as a means of promoting this
objective, inviting the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty and, pending the establishment of the zone, to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under Agency safeguards,
Noting that 183 States have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,261 including a number of
States in the region,
1. Welcomes the conclusions on the Middle East of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,262 and calls for the speedy and full implementation of the
commitments contained therein;
2. Reaffirms the importance of Israel’s accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons258 and placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards, in realizing the goal of universal adherence to the Treaty in the Middle East;
3. Calls upon that State to accede to the Treaty without further delay, not to develop, produce, test or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons, to renounce possession of nuclear weapons and to place all its unsafeguarded
nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards as an important confidence-building measure among all States
of the region and as a step towards enhancing peace and security;
_______________
260

2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
261
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
262
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions, sect. IV.

241

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “The risk of
nuclear proliferation in the Middle East”.
RESOLUTION 68/66
A/RES/68/66

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/415, para. 8)263

68/66.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/74 of 3 December 2012,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and entry into force of the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects264 and its amended article 1,265 the Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I),264 the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II)264 and its
amended version,266 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol III),264
the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV) 267 and the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War
(Protocol V),268
Noting the results of the 2012 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, held in Geneva on
15 and 16 November 2012,
Welcoming the results of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended
Protocol II, held in Geneva on 14 November 2012,
Welcoming also the results of the Sixth Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V, held in
Geneva on 12 and 13 November 2012,
Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in the elaboration of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the particular efforts of various international, nongovernmental and other organizations in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of explosive remnants
of war,
1. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to become parties, as soon as
possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects264 and the Protocols thereto, as
amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these instruments at an early date and so as to
ultimately achieve their universality;
2. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to express their consent to be
bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto to include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
_______________
263

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the Philippines.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
265
Ibid., vol. 2260, No. 22495.
266
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
267
Ibid., vol. 2024, No. 22495.
268
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
264

242

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Emphasizes the importance of the universalization of the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War
(Protocol V);268
4. Welcomes the additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions to the Convention, as well as the
consents to be bound by the Protocols thereto;
5. Acknowledges the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, as depositary of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto, the Chair of the Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, the President of the
Sixth Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V and the President of the Fourteenth Annual
Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, on behalf of the High Contracting Parties, to
achieve the goal of universality;
6. Recalls the following decisions by the Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention:
(a) The adoption of an accelerated plan of action to promote universality of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto;
(b) The adoption of actions to enhance the implementation of the compliance mechanism for the
Convention and the Protocols thereto;
(c)

The continuation of the Sponsorship Programme within the framework of the Convention;

and, with recognition of the value and importance of the Sponsorship Programme, encourages States to contribute
to it;
7. Notes that, in its final report, the Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention held in
Geneva on 15 and 16 November 2012 did not make any recommendation or decision regarding the continuation of
discussions on mines other than anti-personnel mines;
8. Welcomes the commitment by States parties to continue to contribute to the further development of
international humanitarian law and in this context to keep under review both the development of new weapons and
uses of weapons, which may have indiscriminate effects or cause unnecessary suffering;
9. Also welcomes the commitment of States parties to Protocol V to the effective and efficient
implementation of the Protocol and the implementation of the decisions of the First and Second Conferences of the
High Contracting Parties to the Protocol establishing a comprehensive framework for the exchange of information
and cooperation;
10. Notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences may be convened to
examine amendments to the Convention or to any of the Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols
concerning other categories of conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope
and application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any proposed amendments or
additional protocols;
11. Acknowledges the work of the Implementation Support Unit within the Geneva Branch of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, which was established following a decision by the 2009 Meeting of the
High Contracting Parties to the Convention;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to render the assistance necessary and to provide such services as may
be required for annual conferences and expert meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention and of the
High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V, as well as for any continuation of the work after
the meetings;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the Convention and the Protocols
thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and
acceptances of and accessions to the Convention, its amended article 1 and the Protocols;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
243

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/67
A/RES/68/67

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/416, para. 7)269

68/67.

Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution 67/75 of 3 December 2012,
Reaffirming the primary role of the Mediterranean countries in strengthening and promoting peace, security
and cooperation in the Mediterranean region,
Welcoming the efforts deployed by the Euro-Mediterranean countries to strengthen their cooperation in
combating terrorism, in particular through the adoption of the Euro-Mediterranean Code of Conduct on Countering
Terrorism by the Euro-Mediterranean Summit, held in Barcelona, Spain, on 27 and 28 November 2005,
Bearing in mind all the previous declarations and commitments, as well as all the initiatives taken by the
riparian countries at the recent summits, ministerial meetings and various forums concerning the question of the
Mediterranean region,
Recalling, in this regard, the adoption on 13 July 2008 of the Joint Declaration of the Paris Summit for the
Mediterranean, which launched a reinforced partnership, named the “Barcelona Process: Union for the
Mediterranean”, and the common political will to revive efforts to transform the Mediterranean into an area of
peace, democracy, cooperation and prosperity,
Welcoming the entry into force of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba)270 as a
contribution to the strengthening of peace and security both regionally and internationally,
Recognizing the indivisible character of security in the Mediterranean and that the enhancement of
cooperation among Mediterranean countries with a view to promoting the economic and social development of all
peoples of the region will contribute significantly to stability, peace and security in the region,
Recognizing also the efforts made so far and the determination of the Mediterranean countries to intensify the
process of dialogue and consultations with a view to resolving the problems existing in the Mediterranean region
and to eliminating the causes of tension and the consequent threat to peace and security, as well as their growing
awareness of the need for further joint efforts to strengthen economic, social, cultural and environmental
cooperation in the region,
Recognizing further that prospects for closer Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in all spheres can be enhanced
by positive developments worldwide, in particular in Europe, in the Maghreb and in the Middle East,
Reaffirming the responsibility of all States to contribute to the stability and prosperity of the Mediterranean
region and their commitment to respecting the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well
as the provisions of the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,271

_______________
269

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
270
A/50/426, annex.
271
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

244

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the peace negotiations in the Middle East, which should be of a comprehensive nature and represent an
appropriate framework for the peaceful settlement of contentious issues in the region,
Expressing concern at the persistent tension and continuing military activities in parts of the Mediterranean
that hinder efforts to strengthen security and cooperation in the region,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,272
1. Reaffirms that security in the Mediterranean is closely linked to European security as well as to
international peace and security;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the continuing efforts by Mediterranean countries to contribute actively to
the elimination of all causes of tension in the region and to the promotion of just and lasting solutions to the
persistent problems of the region through peaceful means, thus ensuring the withdrawal of foreign forces of
occupation and respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all countries of the
Mediterranean and the right of peoples to self-determination, and therefore calls for full adherence to the
principles of non-interference, non-intervention, non-use of force or threat of use of force and the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force, in accordance with the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations;
3. Commends the Mediterranean countries for their efforts in meeting common challenges through
coordinated overall responses, based on a spirit of multilateral partnership, towards the general objective of turning
the Mediterranean basin into an area of dialogue, exchanges and cooperation, guaranteeing peace, stability and
prosperity, encourages them to strengthen such efforts through, inter alia, a lasting multilateral and action-oriented
cooperative dialogue among States of the region, and recognizes the role of the United Nations in promoting
regional and international peace and security;
4. Recognizes that the elimination of the economic and social disparities in levels of development and other
obstacles, as well as respect and greater understanding among cultures in the Mediterranean area, will contribute to
enhancing peace, security and cooperation among Mediterranean countries through the existing forums;
5. Calls upon all States of the Mediterranean region that have not yet done so to adhere to all the
multilaterally negotiated legal instruments related to the field of disarmament and non-proliferation, thus creating
the conditions necessary for strengthening peace and cooperation in the region;
6. Encourages all States of the region to favour the conditions necessary for strengthening the confidencebuilding measures among them by promoting genuine openness and transparency on all military matters, by
participating, inter alia, in the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures and by providing accurate data and
information to the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms;
7. Encourages the Mediterranean countries to strengthen further their cooperation in combating
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including the possible resort by terrorists to weapons of mass
destruction, taking into account the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and in combating international
crime and illicit arms transfers and illicit drug production, consumption and trafficking, which pose a serious
threat to peace, security and stability in the region and therefore to the improvement of the current political,
economic and social situation and which jeopardize friendly relations among States, hinder the development of
international cooperation and result in the destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the democratic
basis of pluralistic society;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on means to strengthen security and cooperation in the
Mediterranean region;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Strengthening of
security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region”.
_______________
272

A/68/132.

245

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/68
A/RES/68/68

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/417,
para. 9),273 by a recorded vote of 181 to 1, with 3 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Abstaining: India, Mauritius, Syrian Arab Republic

68/68.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the cessation of nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions constitutes an
effective nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation measure, and convinced that this is a meaningful step in the
realization of a systematic process for achieving nuclear disarmament,
Recalling that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, adopted by the General Assembly by its
resolution 50/245 of 10 September 1996, was opened for signature on 24 September 1996,
Stressing that a universal and effectively verifiable Treaty constitutes a fundamental instrument in the field of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and that, after more than 15 years, its entry into force is more urgent than
ever before,
Encouraged by the signing of the Treaty by 183 States, including 41 of the 44 whose ratification is needed for
its entry into force, and welcoming the ratification of the Treaty by 161 States, including 36 of the 44 whose
ratification is needed for its entry into force, among which there are 3 nuclear-weapon States,
Recalling its resolution 67/76 of 3 December 2012,
Welcoming the adoption by consensus of the conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions of the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,274 in which the
_______________
273

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Uruguay.
274
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.

246

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Conference, inter alia, reaffirmed the vital importance of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty as a core element of the international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime and included
specific actions to be taken in support of the entry into force of the Treaty,
Welcoming also the Final Declaration adopted by the eighth Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, held in New York on 27 September 2013, convened pursuant to
article XIV of the Treaty, and recalling the Joint Ministerial Statement on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, adopted at the ministerial meeting held in New York on 27 September 2012,275
Noting the establishment of a group of eminent persons to complement efforts to secure ratifications from the
remaining Annex 2 countries and to support the article XIV process,
Gravely concerned that, since its previous resolution on the subject, a nuclear test has been carried out,
1. Stresses the vital importance and urgency of signature and ratification, without delay and without
conditions, in order to achieve the earliest entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;276
2. Welcomes the contributions by the signatory States to the work of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, in particular its efforts to ensure that the verification regime
of the Treaty will be capable of meeting the verification requirements of the Treaty upon its entry into force, in
accordance with article IV of the Treaty;
3.
regime;

Underlines the need to maintain momentum towards completion of all elements of the verification

4. Urges all States not to carry out nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions, to
maintain their moratoriums in this regard and to refrain from acts that would defeat the object and purpose of the
Treaty, while stressing that these measures do not have the same permanent and legally binding effect as the entry
into force of the Treaty;
5. Shares the grave concern of the Security Council about the nuclear test conducted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on 12 February 2013, expressed in Council resolution 2094 (2013) of 7 March 2013,
recalls Council resolutions 1718 (2006) of 14 October 2006 and 1874 (2009) of 12 June 2009, calls for full
compliance with the obligations under the relevant resolutions, and reaffirms its support for the Six-Party Talks;
6. Urges all States that have not yet signed the Treaty, in particular those whose ratification is needed for its
entry into force, to sign and ratify it as soon as possible;
7. Urges all States that have signed but not yet ratified the Treaty, in particular those whose ratification is
needed for its entry into force, to accelerate their ratification processes with a view to ensuring their earliest
successful conclusion;
8. Welcomes, since its previous resolution on the subject, the ratification of the Treaty by Brunei
Darussalam, Chad, Guinea-Bissau and Iraq as significant steps towards the early entry into force of the Treaty;
9. Also welcomes the recent expressions from among the remaining States whose ratification is needed for
the Treaty to enter into force of their intention to pursue and complete the ratification process;
10. Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political level and, where in a position to do
so, to promote adherence to the Treaty through bilateral and joint outreach, seminars and other means;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, to prepare a report on the efforts of States that have ratified
the Treaty towards its universalization and on possibilities for providing assistance on ratification procedures to
States that so request it and to submit such a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty”.
_______________
275
276

A/67/515, annex.
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.

247

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/69
A/RES/68/69

Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/418, para. 8)277

68/69.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective prohibition of bacteriological
(biological) and toxin weapons and to their destruction,
Noting with appreciation that, with four additional States 278 having acceded to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction 279 in 2013, there are 170 States parties to the Convention, including all the permanent
members of the Security Council,
Reaffirming its call upon all signatory States that have not yet ratified the Convention to do so without delay,
and calling upon those States that have not signed the Convention to become parties thereto at the earliest possible
date, thus contributing to the achievement of universal adherence to the Convention,
Bearing in mind its call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate in the implementation of the
recommendations of the review conferences of the parties to the Convention, including the exchange of information
and data agreed to in the Final Declaration of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction, later amended by the Final Declaration of the Seventh Review Conference, and to provide
such information and data in conformity with the standardized procedure to the Implementation Support Unit within
the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat on an annual basis and no later than 15 April,
Welcoming the reaffirmation made in the Final Declarations of the Fourth, Sixth and Seventh Review
Conferences that under all circumstances the use of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and their
development, production and stockpiling are effectively prohibited under article I of the Convention,
Recognizing the importance of ongoing efforts by States parties to enhance international cooperation,
assistance and the fullest possible exchange in biological sciences and technology for peaceful purposes,
recognizing also that there still remain challenges and obstacles to be overcome in order to enhance international
cooperation, and recognizing further the value of building capacity through international cooperation, in line with
the Final Document of the Seventh Review Conference,
Reaffirming the importance of national measures, in accordance with constitutional processes, in strengthening
the implementation of the Convention by States parties, in line with the Final Document of the Seventh Review
Conference,
Reaffirming also the importance of the review of developments in the field of science and technology related
to the Convention,
Noting the decision of the Seventh Review Conference to retain the previous structures from the 2003–2010
intersessional process, consisting of annual meetings of States parties preceded by annual meetings of experts, and
to continue to allocate five days to each meeting of States parties and each meeting of experts during the 2012–2015
intersessional process,
Recalling the decision of the Seventh Review Conference that the Eighth Review Conference shall be held in
Geneva not later than 2016,
_______________
277

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Hungary.
Cameroon, on 18 January 2013; Nauru, on 5 March 2013; Guyana, on 26 March 2013; and Malawi, on 2 April 2013.
279
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
278

248

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1. Notes with satisfaction the successful outcome of and the decisions on all provisions of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction279 reached at the Seventh Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention, and calls upon States parties to the Convention to participate and actively engage in their
implementation;
2. Notes with appreciation the decision of the Seventh Review Conference that the standing agenda items
entitled “Cooperation and assistance, with a particular focus on strengthening cooperation and assistance under
Article X”, “Review of developments in the field of science and technology related to the Convention” and
“Strengthening national implementation” shall be addressed at both the meeting of experts and the meeting of States
parties, every year from 2012 to 2015;
3. Also notes with appreciation that the Seventh Review Conference decided that the questions of (a) how
to enable fuller participation in the confidence-building measures, and (b) how to strengthen implementation of
article VII, including consideration of detailed procedures and mechanisms for the provision of assistance and
cooperation by States parties, shall be discussed in 2012 and 2013 and 2014 and 2015, respectively, during the
2012–2015 intersessional process;
4. Notes with satisfaction that the meeting of States parties and the meeting of experts, held in Geneva from
10 to 14 December 2012 and from 12 to 16 August 2013, respectively, successfully addressed the three standing
agenda items and the biennial item on the agenda;
5. Appreciates the information and data on confidence-building measures provided to date, notes with
satisfaction the adoption of the revised reporting forms for confidence-building measures agreed upon at the
Seventh Review Conference, and reiterates its call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate in the
exchange of information and data agreed upon at the Third Review Conference;
6. Notes with appreciation the decision of the Seventh Review Conference on the establishment of a
database to facilitate requests for and offers of exchange of assistance and cooperation, and urges States parties to
submit to the Implementation Support Unit, on a voluntary basis, requests for and offers of cooperation and
assistance, including in terms of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information regarding the use
of biological and toxin agents for peaceful purposes;
7. Encourages States parties to provide, at least biannually, appropriate information on their
implementation of article X of the Convention and to collaborate to offer assistance or training, upon request, in
support of the legislative and other implementation measures of States parties needed to ensure their compliance
with the Convention;
8. Notes with satisfaction the decision of the Seventh Review Conference on the establishment of a
sponsorship programme in order to support and increase the participation of developing States parties in the
meetings of the intersessional programme, and calls upon States parties in a position to do so to offer voluntary
contributions for the programme;
9. Notes with appreciation the work of the Implementation Support Unit during the 2007–2010
intersessional process and the Seventh Review Conference, and welcomes the decision of the Seventh Review
Conference to renew its mandate and request the Unit to perform, in addition to the tasks mandated by the
Sixth Review Conference, two tasks for the period from 2012 to 2016, in order to support, as appropriate, the
implementation by the States parties of the decisions and recommendations of the Seventh Review
Conference;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render the necessary assistance to the depositary
Governments of the Convention, to provide such services as may be required for the implementation of the
decisions and recommendations of the review conferences and to render the necessary assistance and to provide such
services as may be required for the meetings of experts and the meetings of States parties during the 2012–2015
intersessional process;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons
and on Their Destruction”.
249

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 68/243
A/RES/68/243

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/406, para. 8)280

68/243. Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international
security
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/70 of 4 December 1998, 54/49 of 1 December 1999, 55/28 of 20 November 2000,
56/19 of 29 November 2001, 57/53 of 22 November 2002, 58/32 of 8 December 2003, 59/61 of 3 December 2004,
60/45 of 8 December 2005, 61/54 of 6 December 2006, 62/17 of 5 December 2007, 63/37 of 2 December 2008,
64/25 of 2 December 2009, 65/41 of 8 December 2010, 66/24 of 2 December 2011 and 67/27 of 3 December 2012,
Recalling also its resolutions on the role of science and technology in the context of international security, in
which, inter alia, it recognized that scientific and technological developments could have both civilian and military
applications and that progress in science and technology for civilian applications needed to be maintained and
encouraged,
Noting that considerable progress has been achieved in developing and applying the latest information
technologies and means of telecommunication,
Affirming that it sees in this process the broadest positive opportunities for the further development of
civilization, the expansion of opportunities for cooperation for the common good of all States, the enhancement of
the creative potential of humankind and additional improvements in the circulation of information in the global
community,
Recalling, in this connection, the approaches and principles outlined at the Information Society and
Development Conference, held in Midrand, South Africa, from 13 to 15 May 1996,
Bearing in mind the results of the Ministerial Conference on Terrorism, held in Paris on 30 July 1996, and the
recommendations that were made,281
Bearing in mind also the results of the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to
12 December 2003 (first phase) and in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005 (second phase),282
Noting that the dissemination and use of information technologies and means affect the interests of the entire
international community and that optimum effectiveness is enhanced by broad international cooperation,
Expressing concern that these technologies and means can potentially be used for purposes that are
inconsistent with the objectives of maintaining international stability and security and may adversely affect the
integrity of the infrastructure of States to the detriment of their security in both civil and military fields,
Considering that it is necessary to prevent the use of information resources or technologies for criminal or
terrorist purposes,
Noting the importance of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the use of information and
communications technologies,
Noting also the contribution of those Member States that have submitted their assessments on issues of
information security to the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraphs 1 to 3 of resolutions 53/70, 54/49, 55/28,
56/19, 57/53, 58/32, 59/61, 60/45, 61/54, 62/17, 63/37, 64/25, 65/41, 66/24 and 67/27,
_______________
280

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Brazil,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
281
See A/51/261, annex.
282
See A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.

250

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General containing those assessments,283
Welcoming the initiative taken by the Secretariat and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research in
convening international meetings of experts in Geneva in August 1999 and April 2008 on developments in the field of
information and telecommunications in the context of international security, as well as the results of those meetings,
Considering that the assessments of Member States contained in the reports of the Secretary-General and the
international meetings of experts have contributed to a better understanding of the substance of issues of
international information security and related notions,
Bearing in mind that the Secretary-General, in fulfilment of resolution 66/24, established in 2012, on the basis
of equitable geographical distribution, a group of governmental experts, which, in accordance with its mandate,
considered existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security and possible cooperative measures to
address them, including norms, rules or principles of responsible behaviour of States and confidence-building
measures in information space, and conducted a study on relevant international concepts aimed at strengthening the
security of global information and telecommunications systems,
Welcoming the effective work of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security and the relevant outcome report
transmitted by the Secretary-General,284
Taking note of the assessments and recommendations contained in the report of the Group of Governmental
Experts,
1. Calls upon Member States to promote further at multilateral levels the consideration of existing and
potential threats in the field of information security, as well as possible strategies to address the threats emerging in
this field, consistent with the need to preserve the free flow of information;
2. Considers that the purpose of such strategies could be served through further examination of relevant
international concepts aimed at strengthening the security of global information and telecommunications systems;
3. Invites all Member States, taking into account the assessments and recommendations contained in the
report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International Security,284 to continue to inform the Secretary-General of their
views and assessments on the following questions:
(a)

General appreciation of the issues of information security;

(b) Efforts taken at the national level to strengthen information security and to promote international
cooperation in this field;
(c)

The content of the concepts mentioned in paragraph 2 above;

(d) Possible measures that could be taken by the international community to strengthen information security
at the global level;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a group of governmental experts, to be
established in 2014 on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, taking into account the assessments and
recommendations contained in the above-mentioned report, to continue to study, with a view to promoting common
understandings, existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security and possible cooperative
measures to address them, including norms, rules or principles of responsible behaviour of States and confidencebuilding measures, the issues of the use of information and communications technologies in conflicts and how
international law applies to the use of information and communications technologies by States, as well as the
concepts referred to in paragraph 2 above, and to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report
on the results of the study;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Developments in
the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security”.
_______________
283

A/54/213, A/55/140 and Corr.1 and Add.1, A/56/164 and Add.1, A/57/166 and Add.1, A/58/373, A/59/116 and Add.1, A/60/95 and
Add.1, A/61/161 and Add.1, A/62/98 and Add.1, A/64/129 and Add.1, A/65/154, A/66/152 and Add.1, A/67/167 and A/68/156 and Add.1.
284
A/68/98.

251

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/72.

Assistance in mine action ...................................................................................................................................... 255

68/73.

Effects of atomic radiation..................................................................................................................................... 258

68/74.

Recommendations on national legislation relevant to the peaceful exploration and use of outer space ........................ 260

68/75.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.................................................................................... 262

68/76.

Assistance to Palestine refugees............................................................................................................................. 266

68/77.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities .................................................................. 267

68/78.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ......................... 269

68/79.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues..................................................................................................... 273

68/80.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories................................................................................................ 275

68/81.

Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the other occupied
Arab territories ..................................................................................................................................................... 278

68/82.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied
Syrian Golan ........................................................................................................................................................ 279

68/83.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem....................................................................................................................................... 282

68/84.

The occupied Syrian Golan ................................................................................................................................... 286

68/85.

Comprehensive review of special political missions................................................................................................ 288

68/86.

Questions relating to information........................................................................................................................... 289
A.

Information in the service of humanity .......................................................................................................... 289

B.

United Nations public information policies and activities................................................................................ 290

68/87.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations ..................................................................................................................................................... 301

68/88.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories............ 302

68/89.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations.......................................... 304

68/90.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories................ 308

68/91.

Question of Western Sahara .................................................................................................................................. 309

68/92.

Question of New Caledonia................................................................................................................................... 310

68/93.

Question of French Polynesia ................................................................................................................................ 313

68/94.

Question of Tokelau ............................................................................................................................................. 314

68/95.

Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands ....................... 316
A.

General........................................................................................................................................................ 316

B.

Individual Territories.................................................................................................................................... 320
253

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/96.

Dissemination of information on decolonization..................................................................................................... 329

68/97.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples .................... 331

254

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/72
A/RES/68/72

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/421, para. 10)1

68/72.

Assistance in mine action

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/69 of 9 December 2011 and all its previous resolutions on assistance in mine
clearance and on assistance in mine action, all adopted without a vote,
Recalling also all relevant treaties and conventions2 and their review processes,
Noting with appreciation the extent to which the International Day for Mine Awareness and Assistance in
Mine Action has been commemorated worldwide,
Reaffirming its deep concern at the tremendous humanitarian and development problems caused by the
presence of mines and explosive remnants of war, 3 which have serious and lasting social and economic
consequences for the populations of countries affected by them,
Bearing in mind the serious threat that mines and explosive remnants of war, including cluster munitions, pose
to the safety, health and lives of local civilian populations, as well as of personnel participating in humanitarian,
peacekeeping, rehabilitation and mine clearance programmes and operations,
Deeply alarmed by the number of mines that continue to be laid each year as well as the presence of a
decreasing but still very large number of, and area of square kilometres contaminated by, mines and explosive
remnants of war as a result of armed conflicts, and therefore remaining convinced of the necessity and urgency of
strengthening mine-action efforts by the international community with a view to eliminating the threat and the
humanitarian impact of landmines and explosive remnants of war to civilians as soon as possible,
Recognizing that, in addition to the primary role of States, the United Nations has a significant role to play in
the field of assistance in mine action through the members of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine
Action, 4 including the United Nations Mine Action Service, considering mine action to be an important and
integrated component of United Nations humanitarian assistance and development activities, and noting the
integration of mine action in numerous United Nations peacekeeping operations,

_______________
1
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
2
These include the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction, 1997; the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices, as amended in 1996
(Protocol II to the 1980 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects); the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War, 2003 (Protocol V to the 1980
Convention); the Convention on Cluster Munitions, 2008; the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and
relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, 1977 (Protocol I); and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, 2006.
3
As defined by Protocol V to the 1980 Convention.
4
Consisting of the United Nations Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United
Nations Office for Project Services, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research and the
World Bank.

255

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting with appreciation the enhanced cooperation and coordination of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
on Mine Action with non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders through meetings of the Committee on
Mine Action,5 and its active involvement in the humanitarian coordination mechanism,
Recognizing the importance of the full and effective participation of both women and men in mine action
programmes,
Recognizing also the valuable mine-action efforts of national, regional and international mine-action
practitioners, including United Nations personnel and peacekeepers, enabling local communities and mine survivors
to resume normal lives and reclaim their livelihoods by regaining access to previously contaminated lands,
Stressing the pressing need to urge non-State actors to halt immediately and unconditionally new deployments
of mines, improvised explosive devices and other associated explosive devices,
Taking note of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the evaluation of the scope, organization, effectiveness
and approach of the work of the United Nations in mine action6 and the related note by the Secretary-General,7
Taking note also of the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular with regard to the
elaboration of the Strategy of the United Nations on Mine Action 2013–2018, and encouraging the members of the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action to continue their work and further improve the efforts of the
United Nations in the field of mine action,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;8

2. Calls, in particular, for the continuation of the efforts of States, with the assistance of the United Nations
and relevant organizations involved in mine action, as appropriate, to foster the establishment and development of
national mine-action capacities in countries in which mines and explosive remnants of war constitute a serious threat
to the safety, health and lives of the local civilian population or an impediment to social and economic development
efforts at the national and local levels;
3. Urges all States, in particular those that have the capacity to do so, as well as the United Nations system
and other relevant organizations and institutions involved in mine action, to support mine-affected States, as
appropriate, by providing:
(a) Assistance to countries affected by mines and explosive remnants of war for the establishment and
development of national mine-action capacities, including, where appropriate, in the fulfilment of the relevant
international obligations of those countries;
(b) Support for national programmes, where appropriate, in cooperation with the relevant bodies of the
United Nations system and relevant regional, governmental and non-governmental organizations, to reduce the risks
posed by landmines and explosive remnants of war, taking into consideration the different needs of women, girls,
boys and men;
(c) Reliable, predictable, timely and, where possible, multi-annual contributions for mine-action activities,
including through national mine-action efforts and mine-action programmes of the United Nations and nongovernmental organizations, including those relating to rapid response, victim assistance and mine risk education,
especially at the local level, as well as through relevant national, regional and global trust funds, including the
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Action;
(d) Necessary information and technical, financial and material assistance to locate, remove, destroy and
otherwise render ineffective minefields, mines, booby traps, other devices and explosive remnants of war, in
accordance with international law, as soon as possible;

_______________
5

The Committee on Mine Action is an informal information-sharing forum. The members are the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on
Mine Action, non-governmental organizations involved in mine action, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining and academic institutions.
6
A/68/63.
7
A/68/63/Add.1.
8
A/68/305.

256

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

(e) Technological assistance (i) to countries affected by mines and explosive remnants of war; and (ii) to
promote user-oriented scientific research on and development of mine-action techniques and technology that are
effective, sustainable, appropriate and environmentally sound;
4. Encourages efforts to conduct all mine-action activities in accordance with the International Mine
Action Standards or national standards compliant with those Standards, and emphasizes the importance of ensuring
the accuracy and objectivity of reporting information as well as of using state-of-the-art technologies and an
information management system, such as the Information Management System for Mine Action, to help facilitate
mine-action activities;
5. Urges all mine-affected States, pursuant to applicable international law, to identify all areas, as
appropriate, under their jurisdiction or control containing mines and other explosive remnants of war in the most
efficient manner possible and to employ land release techniques, including non-technical survey, technical survey
and clearance when appropriate;
6. Encourages mine-affected States, with support from relevant development partners as appropriate, to
proactively mainstream mine action and victim assistance requirements and their linkage with health care and
disabilities agendas into development plans and processes to ensure that development priorities include mine action
and that mine action and victim assistance requirements are predictably funded;
7. Encourages all relevant multilateral, regional and national programmes and bodies to include activities
related to mine action, including clearance, in their peacebuilding, humanitarian, rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development assistance activities, where appropriate, bearing in mind the need to ensure national and local
ownership, sustainability and capacity-building, as well as to include a gender and age-appropriate perspective in all
aspects of such activities;
8. Encourages Member States, as appropriate, and relevant organizations involved in mine action to
continue efforts to ensure that mine-action programmes take into account the needs of persons with disabilities and
are gender- and age-sensitive, so that women, girls, boys and men can benefit equally from them, and encourages
the participation of all stakeholders, as well as the further participation of women, in the programming of mine
action;
9. Encourages Member States to support victims’ access to appropriate medical care, physical and sensory
rehabilitation, psychosocial support, education and skills training and income-earning opportunities and to provide
those services to all, regardless of gender, age or socioeconomic status;
10. Encourages the provision of capacity-building assistance to affected countries in order to integrate
assistance for victims into their national policy frameworks on health care, social services and disability-inclusive
development by relevant civil society organizations and other relevant entities with expertise in those matters,
including the United Nations;
11. Stresses the importance of cooperation and coordination in mine action, emphasizes the primary
responsibility of national authorities in that regard, and also stresses the supporting role of the United Nations and
other relevant organizations in that regard;
12. Recognizes the importance of explicitly incorporating references to mine action, when appropriate, in
ceasefire and peace agreements in the light of the potential that mine action can have as a peace and confidencebuilding measure in post-conflict situations among the parties concerned;
13. Encourages the United Nations to continue to take measures to improve coordination, efficiency,
transparency and accountability, in particular by implementing the Strategy of the United Nations on Mine Action
2013–2018;
14. Encourages those States and organizations in a position to do so to support measures by all relevant
actors aimed at improving rapid response capacity as well as transparency and accountability;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and on follow-up to previous resolutions on assistance in mine
clearance and on assistance in mine action;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session the item entitled “Assistance in
mine action”.

257

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/73
A/RES/68/73

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/422, para. 9)9

68/73.

Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it established the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its subsequent resolutions on the subject, in which, inter alia, it
requested the Scientific Committee to continue its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future generations resulting from the levels of
radiation to which mankind and the environment are exposed,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information about atomic and ionizing radiation
and to analyse its effects on mankind and the environment, and conscious also of the increased volume, complexity
and diversity of that information,
Acknowledging the concerns about the radiological consequences of an accident which were raised by the
accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station following the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami in
Japan,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work, and welcoming the increased
commitment of States members of the Scientific Committee,
Emphasizing the vital need for sufficient, assured and predictable funding, as well as efficient management, of
the work of the secretariat of the Scientific Committee to arrange the annual sessions and coordinate the
development of documents based on scientific reviews of the sources of ionizing radiation and its effects on human
health and the environment,
Recognizing the increasing importance of the scientific work of the Scientific Committee and the need to carry
out unforeseen additional work in cases such as the nuclear accident in Japan,
Recognizing also the importance of voluntary contributions to the general trust fund established by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to support the work of the Scientific Committee,
Considering that the high quality of the work of the Scientific Committee needs to be maintained in the future,
Recognizing the importance of disseminating results from the work of the Scientific Committee and widely
publicizing scientific knowledge about atomic radiation, and recalling, in that context, principle 10 of the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development,10
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for the valuable
contribution it has been making since its inception to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects and
risks of ionizing radiation and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific authority and independence of
judgement;
2.

Reaffirms the decision to maintain the present functions and independent role of the Scientific Committee;

3. Notes with appreciation the work of the Scientific Committee, and takes note of the report on its sixtieth
session;11
_______________
9
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Belgium, Canada, China, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States
of America.
10
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 46 (A/68/46).

258

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

4. Appreciates the scientific report on the levels and effects of radiation exposure due to the nuclear
accident after the 2011 great east-Japan earthquake and tsunami, and looks forward to the publication of the
supporting scientific annex thereto;
5.

Welcomes with appreciation the report on the effects of radiation exposure on children;

6. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including its important activities to increase
knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing radiation from all sources, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
7. Endorses the intentions and plans of the Scientific Committee for conducting its programme of work of
scientific review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly, in particular its strategic plan for the period
2014–2019, its next Global Survey of Medical Radiation Usage and Exposures, to be conducted in close
cooperation with other relevant organizations, and its assessments of levels of ionizing radiation exposure from
electrical energy production, and requests the Scientific Committee to submit plans for its ongoing and future
programme of work to the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
8. Calls upon the Secretariat to facilitate the timely publication of the reports of the Scientific Committee,
inter alia, by continuing to streamline internal procedures as necessary, and to strive to publish the reports within the
same calendar year as their approval;
9. Re-emphasizes the need for the Scientific Committee to hold regular sessions on an annual basis so that
its report can reflect the latest developments and findings in the field of ionizing radiation and thereby provide
updated information for dissemination among all States;
10. Invites the Scientific Committee to continue its consultations with scientists and experts from interested
Member States in the process of preparing its future scientific reports, and requests the Secretariat to facilitate such
consultations;
11. Welcomes, in this context, the readiness of Member States to provide the Scientific Committee with
relevant information on the levels and effects of ionizing radiation, and invites the Scientific Committee to analyse
and give due consideration to such information, particularly in the light of its own findings;
12. Also welcomes the strategy of the Scientific Committee to improve data collection, encourages in this
regard Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations
concerned to provide further relevant data about doses, effects and risks from various sources of radiation, including
exposure to naturally occurring radioactive materials, which would greatly help in the preparation of future reports
of the Scientific Committee to the General Assembly, and further encourages the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the World Health Organization and other relevant organizations to establish and coordinate with the
Secretariat the arrangements for periodic exchange of data on radiation exposures of workers, the general public
and, in particular, medical patients;
13. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue and strengthen, as appropriate,
support for the effective conduct of the work of the Scientific Committee and for the dissemination of its findings to
the General Assembly, the scientific community and the public;
14. Encourages the United Nations Environment Programme to continue to strengthen the funding of the
Scientific Committee, pursuant to paragraph 13 of General Assembly resolution 67/112 of 18 December 2012;
15. Encourages Member States to make voluntary contributions to the general trust fund established by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, and also to make contributions in kind in order
to support the work of the Scientific Committee;
16. Recalls paragraph 19 of General Assembly resolution 66/70 of 9 December 2011, notes the expression
of interest by Member States in membership in the Scientific Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide the Assembly at its seventy-second session with a list of the Member States that have expressed their
particular interest in membership in the Scientific Committee between the sixty-sixth and seventy-second sessions,
for consideration pursuant to the above-mentioned paragraph.

259

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/74
A/RES/68/74

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/423, para. 12)12

68/74.

Recommendations on national legislation relevant to the peaceful exploration and use of outer space

The General Assembly,
Emphasizing the importance of appropriate means of ensuring that outer space is used for peaceful purposes
and that the obligations under international law and those specifically contained in the United Nations treaties on
outer space13 are implemented,
Recalling its resolutions 59/115 of 10 December 2004 on the application of the concept of the “launching
State” and 62/101 of 17 December 2007 on recommendations on enhancing the practice of States and international
intergovernmental organizations in registering space objects,
Taking note of the work of the Legal Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
and the report of its Working Group on National Legislation Relevant to the Peaceful Exploration and Use of Outer
Space on the work conducted under its multi-year workplan,14
Noting that nothing in the conclusions of the Working Group or in the present recommendations constitutes an
authoritative interpretation or a proposed amendment to the United Nations treaties on outer space,
Observing that, in view of the increasing participation of non-governmental entities in space activities,
appropriate action at the national level is needed, in particular with respect to the authorization and supervision of
non-governmental space activities,
Noting the need to maintain the sustainable use of outer space, in particular by mitigating space debris, and to
ensure the safety of space activities and minimize the potential harm to the environment,
Recalling the provisions contained in the United Nations treaties on outer space with respect to providing
information, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable, on the activities carried out in outer space, in particular
through registration of objects launched into outer space,
Noting the need for consistency and predictability with regard to the authorization and supervision of space
activities and the need for a practical regulatory system for the involvement of non-governmental entities to provide
further incentives for enacting regulatory frameworks at the national level, and noting that some States also include
national space activities of a governmental character within that framework,
Recognizing the different approaches taken by States in dealing with various aspects of national space
activities, namely by means of unified acts or a combination of national legal instruments, and noting that States
have adapted their national legal frameworks according to their specific needs and practical considerations and that
national legal requirements depend to a high degree on the range of space activities conducted and the level of
involvement of non-governmental entities,

_______________
12
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Japan (on behalf of the
Working Group of the Whole on International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space).
13
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and
the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International
Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on Registration of
Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020); and Agreement Governing the Activities of
States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
14
A/AC.105/C.2/101.

260

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recommends the following elements for consideration, as appropriate, by States when enacting regulatory
frameworks for national space activities, in accordance with their national law, taking into account their specific
needs and requirements:
1. The scope of space activities targeted by national regulatory frameworks may include, as appropriate,
the launch of objects into and their return from outer space, the operation of a launch or re-entry site and the
operation and control of space objects in orbit; other issues for consideration may include the design and
manufacture of spacecraft, the application of space science and technology, and exploration activities and research;
2. The State, taking into account its obligations as a launching State and as a State responsible for national
activities in outer space under the United Nations treaties on outer space, should ascertain national jurisdiction
over space activities carried out from territory under its jurisdiction and/or control; likewise, it should issue
authorizations for and ensure supervision over space activities carried out elsewhere by its citizens and/or legal
persons established, registered or seated in territory under its jurisdiction and/or control, provided, however,
that if another State is exercising jurisdiction with respect to such activities, the State should consider
forbearing from duplicative requirements and avoid unnecessary burdens;
3. Space activities should require authorization by a competent national authority; such authority or
authorities, as well as the conditions and procedures for granting, modifying, suspending and revoking the
authorization, should be set out clearly within the regulatory framework; States might employ specific
procedures for the licensing and/or for the authorization of different kinds of space activities;
4. The conditions for authorization should be consistent with the international obligations of States, in
particular under the United Nations treaties on outer space, and with other relevant instruments, and may
reflect the national security and foreign policy interests of States; the conditions for authorization should help
to ascertain that space activities are carried out in a safe manner and to minimize risks to persons, the
environment or property and that those activities do not lead to harmful interference with other space
activities; such conditions could also relate to the experience, expertise and technical qualifications of the
applicant and could include safety and technical standards that are in line, in particular, with the Space Debris
Mitigation Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;15
5. Appropriate procedures should ensure continuing supervision and monitoring of authorized space
activities by applying, for example, a system of on-site inspections or a more general reporting requirement;
enforcement mechanisms could include administrative measures, such as the suspension or revocation of the
authorization, and/or penalties, as appropriate;
6. A national registry of objects launched into outer space should be maintained by an appropriate national
authority; operators or owners of space objects for which the State is considered to be the launching State or
the State responsible for national activities in outer space under the United Nations treaties on outer space
should be requested to submit information to the authority to enable the State on whose registry such objects
are carried to submit the relevant information to the Secretary-General of the United Nations in accordance
with applicable international instruments, including the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into
Outer Space,16 and in consideration of General Assembly resolutions 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961 and
62/101 of 17 December 2007; the State may also request information on any change in the main
characteristics of space objects, in particular when they have become non-functional;
7. States could consider ways of seeking recourse from operators or owners of space objects if their
liability for damage under the United Nations treaties on outer space has become engaged; in order to ensure
appropriate coverage for damage claims, States could introduce insurance requirements and indemnification
procedures, as appropriate;
8. Continuing supervision of the space activities of non-governmental entities should be ensured in the
event of the transfer of ownership or control of a space object in orbit; national regulations may provide for
authorization requirements with regard to the transfer of ownership or obligations for the submission of
information on the change in status of the operation of a space object in orbit.
_______________
15
16

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020.

261

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/75
A/RES/68/75

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/423, para. 12)17

68/75.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December 1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004,
61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of 17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of
10 December 2010, 65/271 of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011 and 67/113 of 18 December 2012,
Recognizing the extraordinary achievements made over the past 50 years in human space flight and space
exploration for peaceful purposes, and noting the unique platform at the global level for international cooperation in
space activities represented by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and expanding the exploration and
use of outer space, as the province of all humankind, for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all
States the benefits derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this field, for which
the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule of law, including the relevant
norms of space law and their important role in international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote the peaceful uses of
outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges, especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and bearing in mind the importance
of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,18
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, should contribute actively to the
goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of
international cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the challenges to the long-term
sustainability of outer space activities, in particular the impact of space debris which is an issue of concern to all
nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space exploration and applications as
well as in various national and cooperative space projects, which contributes to international cooperation, and the
importance of further developing the legal framework to strengthen international cooperation in this field,
Convinced of the need to promote the use of space technology towards implementing the United Nations
Millennium Declaration19 and contributing to the post-2015 development agenda process,
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters,20
Desirous of enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster management
and emergency response through greater access to and use of space-based services for all countries and facilitating
capacity-building and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in developing countries,
_______________
17

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Japan (on behalf of the
Working Group of the Whole on International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space).
18
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
19
Resolution 55/2.
20
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.

262

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Deeply convinced that the use of space science and technology and their applications and geospatial
information in areas such as tele-health, tele-education, disaster management, environmental protection and other
Earth observation applications contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations
that address various aspects of economic, social and cultural development, particularly poverty eradication,
Welcoming, in that regard, the fact that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, recognized the important role that space science and technology
play in promoting sustainable development,21
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its fiftysixth session,22
1. Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its fifty-sixth
session;22
2. Agrees that the Committee, at its fifty-seventh session, should consider the substantive items
recommended at its fifty-sixth session,23 taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of
developing countries;
3. Notes that, at its fifty-second session, the Legal Subcommittee of the Committee continued its work,24 as
mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 67/113;
4. Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fifty-third session, should consider the substantive items and
reconvene the working groups recommended by the Committee,25 taking into account the concerns of all countries,
in particular those of developing countries;
5. Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties governing the uses of outer
space26 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those treaties in accordance with their national law, as well
as incorporating them into their national legislation;
6. Notes that, at its fiftieth session, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the Committee continued
its work,27 as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 67/113;
7. Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fifty-first session, should consider the
substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by the Committee,28 taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
8. Welcomes with satisfaction the recommendations for an international response to the near-Earth object
impact threat, endorsed by the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its fiftieth session and by the Committee at
its fifty-sixth session;29
9. Notes with appreciation that some States are already implementing space debris mitigation measures on
a voluntary basis, through national mechanisms and consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
_______________
21

Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20).
23
Ibid., para. 352.
24
Ibid., chap. II.C; and A/AC.105/1045.
25
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), paras. 251–255.
26
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and
the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International
Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on Registration of
Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020); and Agreement Governing the Activities of
States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
27
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), chap. II.B; and A/AC.105/1038.
28
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), paras. 181–183.
29
Ibid., para. 144; and A/AC.105/1038, para. 198, and annex III.
22

263

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,30 endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/217;
10. Invites other States to implement, through relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris Mitigation
Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
11. Considers that it is essential that States pay more attention to the problem of collisions of space objects,
including those with nuclear power sources, with space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the
continuation of national research on this question, for the development of improved technology for the monitoring
of space debris and for the compilation and dissemination of data on space debris, also considers that, to the extent
possible, information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that
international cooperation is needed to expand appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space
debris on future space missions;
12. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to contribute actively to the goal of
preventing an arms race in outer space as an essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
13. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2014, as proposed to the Committee
by the Expert on Space Applications and endorsed by the Committee;31
14. Urges all Member States to continue to contribute to the Trust Fund in Support of the United Nations
Programme on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in order to enhance the capacity of the Office for Outer Space
Affairs of the Secretariat to provide technical and legal advisory services in its priority thematic areas;
15. Notes with satisfaction the progress made within the framework of the United Nations Platform for
Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER), and encourages
Member States, on a voluntary basis, to provide the programme with the additional resources necessary to ensure
that greater support may be provided to Member States by UN-SPIDER and its regional support offices;
16. Also notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the International Committee on Global
Navigation Satellite Systems towards achieving compatibility and interoperability among global and regional spacebased positioning, navigation and timing systems and in the promotion of the use of global navigation satellite
systems and their integration into national infrastructure, particularly in developing countries, and notes with
appreciation that the International Committee held its eighth meeting in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, from 10 to
14 November 2013;
17. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and technology education, affiliated
to the United Nations, namely, the African regional centres for space science and technology education in the French
and English languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Centre for Space Science and Technology
Education in Asia and the Pacific, located in India, the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology
Education for Latin America and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexico, and the Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education for Western Asia, located in Jordan, have continued their education
programmes in 2013, encourages the regional centres to continue to promote greater participation of women in their
education programmes, and agrees that the regional centres should continue to report to the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on their activities;
18. Notes with satisfaction the progress on the establishment of a new regional centre for space science and
technology education in Asia and the Pacific located at Beihang University in Beijing, as proposed by the
Government of China, in particular the positive conclusion of an evaluation mission to Beihang University
facilitated by the Office for Outer Space Affairs in September 2013;
19. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of space activities is essential to
strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute

_______________
30
31

264

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), annex.
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), para. 66; and A/AC.105/1031.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

to the achievement of the goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration,19 to that end requests relevant
regional organizations to offer the assistance necessary so that countries can carry out the recommendations of
regional conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of women in all fields of
science and technology;
20. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by conferences and other mechanisms in
strengthening regional and international cooperation among States, such as the African Leadership Conference on
Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the Asia-Pacific Regional Space Agency Forum, the
Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization and the Space Conference of the Americas;
21. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority, ways and means of maintaining
outer space for peaceful purposes and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, and agrees
that during its consideration of the matter the Committee could continue to consider ways to promote regional and
interregional cooperation and the role that space technology could play in the implementation of recommendations
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development;
22. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its applications and to contribute to
an orderly growth of space activities favourable to sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all
countries, including building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular in developing
countries;
23. Reiterates that the benefits of space technology and its applications should continue to be brought to the
attention, in particular, of the major United Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and cultural
development and related fields and that the use of space technology should be promoted in efforts towards
achieving the objectives of those conferences and summits, including implementing the Millennium Declaration
and contributing to the post-2015 development agenda process;
24. Welcomes the increased efforts to strengthen further the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space
Activities, and recommends that the abbreviation “UN-Space” be used to refer to the Inter-Agency Meeting to
increase its visibility and to further strengthen the role of that inter-agency mechanism, as agreed by the
Committee;32
25. Urges entities of the United Nations system, particularly those participating in the Inter-Agency
Meeting, to continue to examine, in cooperation with the Committee, how space science and technology and their
applications could contribute to implementing the Millennium Declaration and to the post-2015 development
agenda process;
26. Requests the entities of the United Nations system, other international organizations and the SecretaryGeneral to continue and, where appropriate, to enhance their cooperation with the Committee and to provide it with
reports on the issues dealt with in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
27. Endorses the composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its subcommittees for the period
2014–2015, and reiterates that the Committee and its subcommittees, at their respective sessions in 2014, should
elect their officers nominated for that period;33
28. Decides that Belarus and Ghana shall become members of the Committee;34
29. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant permanent observer status to the Inter-Islamic Network
on Space Sciences and Technology;35
30. Encourages the regional groups to promote participation in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary
bodies by the States members of the Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.

_______________
32

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), para. 317.
Resolution 67/113, paras. 27–29; and Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20),
paras. 336–339.
34
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), paras. 340 and 341.
35
Ibid., para. 344.
33

265

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/76
A/RES/68/76

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/424,
para. 17),36 by a recorded vote of 173 to 1, with 8 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel
Abstaining: Cameroon, Canada, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, Paraguay, South Sudan,
United States of America

68/76.

Assistance to Palestine refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948 and all its subsequent resolutions on the question,
including resolution 67/114 of 18 December 2012,
Recalling also its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, by which, inter alia, it established the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
Recalling further the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Aware of the fact that, for more than six decades, the Palestine refugees have suffered from the loss of their
homes, lands and means of livelihood,
Affirming the imperative of resolving the problem of the Palestine refugees for the achievement of justice and
for the achievement of lasting peace in the region,
Acknowledging the essential role that the Agency has played for over 60 years since its establishment in
ameliorating the plight of the Palestine refugees through the provision of education, health, relief and social services
and ongoing work in the areas of camp infrastructure, microfinance, protection and emergency assistance,
Taking note of the report of the Commissioner-General of the Agency covering the period from 1 January to
31 December 2012,37
_______________
36
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Comoros,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
37
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/68/13); and ibid., Supplement No. 13A
(A/68/13/Add.1).

266

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees throughout all the fields of operation, namely, Jordan,
Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Expressing grave concern at the especially difficult situation of the Palestine refugees under occupation,
including with regard to their safety, well-being and socioeconomic living conditions,
Expressing grave concern in particular at the critical humanitarian situation and socioeconomic conditions of
the Palestine refugees in the Gaza Strip, and underlining the importance of emergency and humanitarian assistance
and urgent reconstruction efforts,
Noting the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements on
13 September 199338 by the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization and the subsequent
implementation agreements,
1. Notes with regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees, as provided for in paragraph 11 of
General Assembly resolution 194 (III), has not yet been effected, and that, therefore, the situation of the Palestine
refugees continues to be a matter of grave concern and the Palestine refugees continue to require assistance to meet
basic health, education and living needs;
2. Also notes with regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine has been unable to
find a means of achieving progress in the implementation of paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
and reiterates its request to the Conciliation Commission to continue exerting efforts towards the implementation of
that paragraph and to report to the Assembly on the efforts being exerted in this regard as appropriate, but no later
than 1 September 2014;
3. Affirms the necessity for the continuation of the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the importance of its unimpeded operation and its provision of services
for the well-being, protection and human development of the Palestine refugees and for the stability of the region,
pending the just resolution of the question of the Palestine refugees;
4. Calls upon all donors to continue to strengthen their efforts to meet the anticipated needs of the Agency,
including with regard to increased expenditures arising from the serious socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
and instability in the region, particularly in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, and those needs mentioned in recent
emergency appeals and in the regional crisis response plans to address the situation of Palestine refugees in the
Syrian Arab Republic and those Palestine refugees who have fled to countries in the region;
5. Commends the Agency for its provision of vital assistance to the Palestine refugees and its role as a
stabilizing factor in the region and the tireless efforts of the staff of the Agency in carrying out its mandate;
6. Decides to extend the mandate of the Agency until 30 June 2017, without prejudice to the provisions of
paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
RESOLUTION 68/77
A/RES/68/77

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/424,
para. 17),39 by a recorded vote of 170 to 6, with 6 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,

_______________
38

A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
39

267

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Kiribati, Panama, Paraguay, South Sudan, Vanuatu

68/77.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967, 2341 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and all subsequent
related resolutions,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967 and 259 (1968) of 27 September 1968,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of its resolution 67/115 of
18 December 2012,40
Taking note also of the report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 January to 31 December 2012,41
Concerned about the continuing human suffering resulting from the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities,
Taking note of the relevant provisions of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements of 13 September 199342 with regard to the modalities for the admission of persons displaced in 1967,
and concerned that the process agreed upon has not yet been effected,
Taking note also of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
1. Reaffirms the right of all persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities to
return to their homes or former places of residence in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
2. Stresses the necessity for an accelerated return of displaced persons, and calls for compliance with the
mechanism agreed upon by the parties in article XII of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements of 13 September 199342 on the return of displaced persons;
3. Endorses, in the meantime, the efforts of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to continue to provide humanitarian assistance, as far as
practicable, on an emergency basis, and as a temporary measure, to persons in the area who are currently displaced
and in serious need of continued assistance as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities;
4. Strongly appeals to all Governments and to organizations and individuals to contribute generously to the
Agency and to the other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned for the abovementioned purposes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, after consulting with the Commissioner-General, to report to the
General Assembly before its sixty-ninth session on the progress made with regard to the implementation of the
present resolution.
_______________
40

A/68/347.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/68/13); and ibid., Supplement No. 13A
(A/68/13/Add.1).
42
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
41

268

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/78
A/RES/68/78

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/424,
para. 17),43 by a recorded vote of 170 to 6, with 6 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Kiribati, Malawi, Paraguay, South Sudan, Vanuatu

68/78.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 212 (III) of 19 November 1948, 302 (IV) of
8 December 1949 and all subsequent related resolutions, including its resolution 67/116 of 18 December 2012,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 January to 31 December 2012,44
Taking note of the letter dated 17 June 2013 from the Chair of the Advisory Commission of the Agency to the
Commissioner-General,45
Deeply concerned about the extremely critical financial situation of the Agency, caused in part by the
structural underfunding of the Agency, as well as its rising expenditures resulting from the deterioration of the
socioeconomic and humanitarian conditions and the rising instability in the region and their significant negative
impact on the provision of necessary Agency services to the Palestine refugees, including its emergency-related and
development programmes in all fields of operation,
Recalling Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations,46
Recalling also the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,47
_______________
43

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
44
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/68/13); and ibid., Supplement No. 13A
(A/68/13/Add.1).
45
Ibid., Supplement No. 13 (A/68/13), pp. vi–viii.
46
Resolution 22 A (I).
47
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

269

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Affirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,48 to the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation, namely, Jordan, Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Gravely concerned about the extremely difficult socioeconomic conditions being faced by the Palestine
refugees in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly in the refugee camps in the
Gaza Strip, as a result of the continuing prolonged Israeli closures, the construction of settlements and the wall, and
the severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade, which, despite measures taken
by Israel in 2012 and 2013, have deepened unemployment and poverty rates among the refugees, with potentially
lasting, long-term negative effects,
Gravely concerned also about the continuing negative repercussions of the military operations in the Gaza
Strip between December 2008 and January 2009, which caused extensive loss of life and injury, particularly among
Palestinian civilians, including children and women; widespread destruction and damage to Palestinian homes,
properties, vital infrastructure and public institutions, including hospitals, schools and United Nations facilities; and
internal displacement of civilians, including refugees,
Deploring the loss of civilian lives, including women and children, as a result of the hostilities that affected the
Gaza Strip and Israel in November 2012,
Commending the extraordinary efforts by the Agency to provide emergency relief, medical, food, shelter and
other humanitarian assistance to needy and displaced families in the Gaza Strip,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009 and Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
Expressing regret over the continued restrictions that impede the Agency’s efforts to repair and rebuild
thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee shelters, and calling upon Israel to ensure the unimpeded import of
essential construction materials into the Gaza Strip and to reduce the burdensome cost of importation of Agency
supplies, while taking note of recent developments regarding the situation of access there,
Expressing concern about the severe classroom shortage in the Gaza Strip and the consequent negative impact
on the right to education of refugee children as a result of the constraints on the ability of the Agency to construct
new schools due to Israel’s ongoing restrictions impeding the entry of necessary construction materials into the Gaza
Strip,
Stressing the urgent need for the advancement of reconstruction in the Gaza Strip, including by ensuring the
timely facilitation of construction projects and by sustaining the swift entry of construction materials needed for
projects managed by the Agency, and the need for the accelerated implementation of other urgent United Nationsled civilian reconstruction activities,
Urging the timely disbursement of remaining pledges made at the International Conference in Support of the
Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009, to
accelerate the reconstruction process,
Noting with appreciation the completion of the first phase and near-completion of the second phase of the
project to rebuild the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp, commending the Government of Lebanon, donors, the Agency
and other concerned parties for the important progress made and for the continuing efforts to assist affected and
displaced refugees, and emphasizing the need for additional funding to complete the reconstruction of the camp and
end the displacement of its 27,000 residents without delay,
Expressing deep concern at the critical situation of Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic and at the
impact of the crisis on the Agency’s ability to deliver its services, and regretting profoundly the loss of life among
refugees and the killing of eight staff members of the Agency during the crisis since 2012,
_______________
48

270

Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Emphasizing the need for increased assistance to Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic as well as
those who have fled to neighbouring countries, and emphasizing the necessity of ensuring open borders for
Palestine refugees fleeing the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic, consistent with the principles of non-discrimination
and non-refoulement under international law,
Aware of the valuable work done by the Agency in providing protection to the Palestinian people, in particular
Palestine refugees, and recalling the need for the protection of all civilians in situations of armed conflict,
Deploring the endangerment of the safety of the Agency’s staff and the damage and destruction caused to the
facilities and properties of the Agency during the period covered by the report of the Commissioner-General, and
stressing the need to maintain the neutrality of and safeguard the inviolability of United Nations premises,
installations and equipment,
Deploring also the extensive damage and destruction of Agency facilities in the Gaza Strip caused during the
military operations between December 2008 and January 2009, including schools where civilians were sheltered
and the Agency’s main compound and warehouse, as reported in the summary by the Secretary-General of the
report of the Board of Inquiry49 and in the report of the United Nations Fact-finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,50
Deploring further, in this regard, the breaches of the inviolability of United Nations premises, the failure to
accord the property and assets of the Organization immunity from any form of interference and the failure to protect
United Nations personnel, premises and property,
Deploring the killing and injury of Agency staff members by the Israeli occupying forces in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory since September 2000,
Deploring also the killing and wounding of refugee children in the Agency schools by the Israeli occupying
forces during the military operations between December 2008 and January 2009,
Deeply concerned about the continuing imposition of restrictions on the freedom of movement and access of
the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, and the injury, harassment and intimidation of the Agency’s staff, which
undermine and obstruct the work of the Agency, including its ability to provide essential basic and emergency
services,
Aware of the agreement between the Agency and the Government of Israel,
Taking note of the agreement reached on 24 June 1994, embodied in an exchange of letters between the
Agency and the Palestine Liberation Organization,51
1. Reaffirms that the effective functioning of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East remains essential in all fields of operation;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the Agency, as well as to all the staff of the
Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable work, particularly in the light of the difficult conditions, instability and
crises faced during the past year;
3. Expresses special commendation to the Agency for the essential role that it has played for over 60 years
since its establishment in providing vital services for the well-being, human development and protection of the
Palestine refugees and the amelioration of their plight;
4. Expresses its appreciation for the important support and cooperation provided by the host Governments
to the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
5. Also expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the Agency, and requests it to continue
its efforts and to keep the General Assembly informed of its activities;

_______________
49

See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
A/HRC/12/48.
51
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/49/13), annex I.
50

271

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

6. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the Financing of the Agency52 and
the efforts to assist in ensuring the financial security of the Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide
the necessary services and assistance to the Working Group for the conduct of its work;
7. Commends the Agency’s six-year Medium-Term Strategy, which commenced in January 2010, and the
continuing efforts of the Commissioner-General to increase the budgetary transparency and efficiency of the
Agency, as reflected in the Agency’s programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;53
8. Also commends the Agency for sustaining its reform efforts, despite difficult operational circumstances,
and urges it to continue to apply maximum efficiency procedures to reduce operational and administrative costs and
to maximize the use of resources;
9. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the
management capacity of the Agency,54 and urges all Member States to carefully consider the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein, including the continued provision of financial resources from the regular
budget of the United Nations;
10. Endorses the efforts of the Commissioner-General to continue to provide humanitarian assistance, as far
as practicable, on an emergency basis, and as a temporary measure, to persons in the area who are internally
displaced and in serious need of continued assistance as a result of recent crises in the Agency’s fields of operation;
11. Encourages the Agency to provide increased assistance, in accordance with its mandate, to affected
Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic as well as those who have fled to neighbouring countries, as detailed
in the Syria regional crisis response plans, and calls upon donors to urgently ensure sustained support to the Agency
in this regard;
12. Welcomes the progress made thus far by the Agency in rebuilding the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in
northern Lebanon, and calls for the expeditious completion of its reconstruction, for the continued provision of relief
assistance to those displaced following its destruction in 2007 and for the alleviation of their ongoing suffering
through the timely fulfilment of pledges made at the International Donor Conference for the Recovery and
Reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared Palestine Refugee Camp and Conflict-affected Areas of Northern Lebanon,
held in Vienna on 23 June 2008;
13. Encourages the Agency, in close cooperation with other relevant United Nations entities, to continue
making progress in addressing the needs and rights of children, women and persons with disabilities in its
operations in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child,55 the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women 56 and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 57
respectively;
14. Commends, in this regard, the Agency’s initiatives that provide recreational, cultural and educational
activities for children during the summer, including in the Gaza Strip, and, recognizing their positive contribution,
calls for full support of such initiatives, expressing regret that financial constraints led to the cancellation of the
Summer Games in 2012;
15. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply fully with the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;48
16. Also calls upon Israel to abide by Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations46 in order to ensure the safety of the personnel
of the Agency, the protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
_______________
52

A/68/388.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 13A (A/68/13/Add.1).
54
A/65/705.
55
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
56
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
57
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
53

272

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

17. Urges the Government of Israel to expeditiously reimburse the Agency for all transit charges incurred
and other financial losses sustained as a result of delays and restrictions on movement and access imposed by Israel;
18. Calls upon Israel particularly to cease obstructing the movement and access of the staff, vehicles and
supplies of the Agency and to cease the levying of taxes, extra fees and charges, which affect the Agency’s
operations detrimentally;
19. Reiterates its call upon Israel to fully lift the restrictions impeding or delaying the import of necessary
construction materials and supplies for the reconstruction and repair of thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee
shelters, and for the implementation of suspended civilian infrastructure projects in refugee camps in the Gaza Strip,
while noting the commencement of several projects in this regard;
20. Requests the Commissioner-General to proceed with the issuance of identification cards for Palestine
refugees and their descendants in the Occupied Palestinian Territory;
21. Notes with appreciation the completion of the Palestine Refugee Records Project and its contribution to
the modernization of the Agency’s archives;
22. Also notes with appreciation the success of the Agency’s microfinance programme, and calls upon the
Agency, in close cooperation with the relevant agencies, to continue to contribute to the development of the
economic and social stability of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation;
23. Reiterates its appeals to all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to
continue and to augment the special allocations for grants and scholarships for higher education to Palestine
refugees in addition to their contributions to the regular budget of the Agency and to contribute to the establishment
of vocational training centres for Palestine refugees, and requests the Agency to act as the recipient and trustee for
the special allocations for grants and scholarships;
24. Welcomes the conclusions endorsed by the special meeting of a group of supporters of the Agency, held
on 26 September 2013 on the margins of the general debate of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, and
calls for serious follow-up efforts by the Agency and the donor community to meet the goals set forth therein;
25. Urges all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to urgently increase their
contributions to the Agency in order to address the persistent, growing and serious financial constraints and
underfunding, especially with respect to the Agency’s regular budget deficit, noting that financial shortfalls have
been exacerbated by the current humanitarian situation and instability on the ground that have resulted in rising
expenditures, in particular with regard to emergency services, and to support the Agency’s valuable and necessary
work in assisting the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation.
RESOLUTION 68/79
A/RES/68/79

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/424,
para. 17),58 by a recorded vote of 172 to 6, with 5 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,

_______________
58
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Comoros,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.

273

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Kiribati, Paraguay, South Sudan, Vanuatu

68/79.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948 and 36/146 C of 16 December 1981 and all its
subsequent resolutions on the question,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to its resolution 67/117 of 18 December
2012, 59 as well as that of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine for the period from
1 September 2012 to 31 August 2013,60
Recalling that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights61 and the principles of international law uphold the
principle that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his or her property,
Recalling in particular its resolution 394 (V) of 14 December 1950, in which it directed the Conciliation
Commission, in consultation with the parties concerned, to prescribe measures for the protection of the rights,
property and interests of the Palestine refugees,
Noting the completion of the programme of identification and evaluation of Arab property, as announced by
the Conciliation Commission in its twenty-second progress report,62 and the fact that the Land Office had a schedule
of Arab owners and a file of documents defining the location, area and other particulars of Arab property,
Expressing its appreciation for the preservation and modernization of the existing records, including the land
records, of the Conciliation Commission, and stressing the importance of such records for a just resolution of the
plight of the Palestine refugees in conformity with resolution 194 (III),
Recalling that, in the framework of the Middle East peace process, the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Government of Israel agreed, in the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of
13 September 1993,63 to commence negotiations on permanent status issues, including the important issue of the
refugees,
1. Reaffirms that the Palestine refugees are entitled to their property and to the income derived therefrom,
in conformity with the principles of equity and justice;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropriate steps, in consultation with the United Nations
Conciliation Commission for Palestine, for the protection of Arab property, assets and property rights in Israel;
3. Calls once again upon Israel to render all facilities and assistance to the Secretary-General in the
implementation of the present resolution;

_______________
59

A/68/343.
A/68/335, annex.
61
Resolution 217 A (III).
62
Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session, Annexes, Annex No. 11, document A/5700.
63
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
60

274

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

4. Calls upon all the parties concerned to provide the Secretary-General with any pertinent information in
their possession concerning Arab property, assets and property rights in Israel that would assist him in the
implementation of the present resolution;
5. Urges the Palestinian and Israeli sides, as agreed between them, to deal with the important issue of
Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues within the framework of the final status negotiations of the Middle
East peace process;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/80
A/RES/68/80

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/425,
para. 20),64 by a recorded vote of 95 to 8, with 75 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, Panama, United States
of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu

68/80.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Guided also by international humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,65 as well as international standards of human rights, in
particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights66 and the International Covenants on Human Rights,67
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 2443 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and 67/118 of
18 December 2012, and the relevant resolutions of the Human Rights Council, including resolution S-12/1, adopted
by the Council at its twelfth special session on 16 October 2009,68
_______________
64

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and
State of Palestine.
65
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
66
Resolution 217 A (III).
67
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
68
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/64/53/Add.1), chap. I.

275

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Taking into account the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,69 and recalling in this regard
its resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Taking note of the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the implications
of the Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people
throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,70
Convinced that occupation itself represents a gross and grave violation of human rights,
Gravely concerned about the continuing detrimental impact of ongoing unlawful Israeli practices and
measures in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, including the excessive use of force by the
Israeli occupying forces against Palestinian civilians, resulting in the death and injury of civilians, the widespread
destruction of property and vital infrastructure, ongoing settlement activities and construction of the wall, the
internal forced displacement of civilians, the imposition of collective punishment measures, particularly against the
civilian population in the Gaza Strip, where continuing severe restrictions on movement amount to a blockade, and
the detention and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians,
Gravely concerned also about all acts of violence, intimidation and provocation by Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians and properties, including homes, mosques, churches and agricultural lands,
Gravely concerned in particular by reports regarding serious human rights violations and grave breaches of
international humanitarian law committed during the military operations in the Gaza Strip between December 2008
and January 2009, including the findings in the summary by the Secretary-General of the report of the Board of
Inquiry71 and in the report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,72 and reiterating the
necessity for serious follow-up by all parties to the recommendations addressed to them towards ensuring
accountability and justice,
Gravely concerned about the loss of life and injury among civilians, including women and children, during the
military operations in the Gaza Strip between 14 and 22 November 2012,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories73 and the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General,74
Recalling the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of 13 September 199375
and the subsequent implementation agreements between the Palestinian and Israeli sides,
Stressing the urgency of bringing a complete end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and thus an end
to the violation of the human rights of the Palestinian people, and of allowing for the realization of their inalienable
human rights, including their right to self-determination and their independent State,
Taking note of the application of Palestine for admission to membership in the United Nations, submitted on
23 September 2011,76
Recalling its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, by which, inter alia, Palestine was accorded non-member
observer State status in the United Nations, and taking note of the follow-up report of the Secretary-General,77
_______________
69

See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
A/HRC/22/63.
71
See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
72
A/HRC/12/48.
73
A/68/379.
74
A/68/313, A/68/355, A/68/378, A/68/502 and A/68/513.
75
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
76
A/66/371-S/2011/592.
77
A/67/738.
70

276

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Taking note of the resumption, on 29 July 2013, of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, aimed at resolving all core
final status issues, and expressing the hope for their success in the conclusion of a final, just and comprehensive
peace agreement within the agreed nine-month time frame,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it
by the General Assembly and for its impartiality;
2. Reiterates its demand that Israel, the occupying Power, cooperate, in accordance with its obligations as a
State Member of the United Nations, with the Special Committee in implementing its mandate;
3. Deplores those policies and practices of Israel that violate the human rights of the Palestinian people and
other Arabs of the occupied territories, as reflected in the report of the Special Committee covering the reporting
period;73
4. Expresses grave concern about the critical situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, particularly in the Gaza Strip, as a result of unlawful Israeli practices and measures, and especially
condemns and calls for the immediate cessation of all illegal Israeli settlement activities and the construction of the
wall, as well as the excessive and indiscriminate use of force against the civilian population, settler violence, the
destruction and confiscation of properties, the forced displacement of civilians, all measures of collective
punishment, and the detention and imprisonment of thousands of civilians;
5. Requests the Special Committee, pending complete termination of the Israeli occupation, to continue to
investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, especially Israeli violations of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,65 and to consult, as appropriate, with the
International Committee of the Red Cross according to its regulations in order to ensure that the welfare and human
rights of the peoples of the occupied territories are safeguarded and to report to the Secretary-General as soon as
possible and whenever the need arises thereafter;
6. Also requests the Special Committee to submit regularly to the Secretary-General periodic reports on the
current situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
7. Further requests the Special Committee to continue to investigate the treatment and status of the
thousands of prisoners and detainees, including children and women, in Israeli prisons and detention centres in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
and expresses grave concern about harsh conditions and ill-treatment of prisoners and recent hunger strikes, while
taking note of the agreement reached in May 2012 concerning conditions of detention in Israeli prisons and calling
for its full and immediate implementation;
8.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To provide the Special Committee with all necessary facilities, including those required for its visits to
the occupied territories, so that it may investigate the Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to make available such staff as may be necessary to assist the Special Committee in the
performance of its tasks;
(c)

To circulate regularly to Member States the periodic reports mentioned in paragraph 6 above;

(d) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports of the Special Committee and of information regarding its
activities and findings, by all means available, through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and,
where necessary, to reprint those reports of the Special Committee that are no longer available;
(e) To report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the tasks entrusted to him in the present
resolution;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Report of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other
Arabs of the Occupied Territories”.
277

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/81
A/RES/68/81

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/425,
para. 20),78 by a recorded vote of 169 to 6, with 7 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Kiribati, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Vanuatu

68/81.

Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the
other occupied Arab territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolution 67/119 of 18 December 2012,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Recalling the Regulations annexed to the Hague Convention IV of 1907, the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,79 and relevant provisions of customary law,
including those codified in Additional Protocol I80 to the four Geneva Conventions,81
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories82 and the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General,83
Considering that the promotion of respect for the obligations arising from the Charter of the United Nations
and other instruments and rules of international law is among the basic purposes and principles of the United
Nations,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice,84 and also
recalling General Assembly resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,
_______________
78

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
79
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
80
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
81
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
82
A/68/379.
83
A/68/313, A/68/355, A/68/378, A/68/502 and A/68/513.
84
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.

278

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting in particular the Court’s reply, including that the Fourth Geneva Convention79 is applicable in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and that Israel is in breach of several of the provisions of
the Convention,
Recalling the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention on measures to
enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, held on 15 July 1999, as
well as the Declaration adopted by the reconvened Conference on 5 December 2001 and the need for the parties to
follow up the implementation of the Declaration,
Welcoming and encouraging the initiatives by States parties to the Convention, both individually and
collectively, according to article 1 common to the four Geneva Conventions, aimed at ensuring respect for the
Convention, as well as the continuing efforts of the depositary State of the Geneva Conventions in this regard,
Stressing that Israel, the occupying Power, should comply strictly with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law,
1. Reaffirms that the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,79 is applicable to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
2. Demands that Israel accept the de jure applicability of the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, and that it comply
scrupulously with the provisions of the Convention;
3. Calls upon all High Contracting Parties to the Convention, in accordance with article 1 common to the
four Geneva Conventions81 and as mentioned in the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 9 July
2004,84 to continue to exert all efforts to ensure respect for its provisions by Israel, the occupying Power, in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
4. Reiterates the need for speedy implementation of the relevant recommendations contained in the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, including at its tenth emergency special session and including resolution
ES-10/15, with regard to ensuring respect by Israel, the occupying Power, for the provisions of the Convention;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/82
A/RES/68/82

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/425,
para. 20),85 by a recorded vote of 167 to 6, with 9 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former

_______________
85
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.

279

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Honduras, Kiribati, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Vanuatu

68/82.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied
Syrian Golan

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and affirming the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolution 67/120 of 18 December 2012, as well as those
resolutions adopted at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including resolutions 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967, 446 (1979) of 22 March 1979, 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980, 476 (1980) of 30 June 1980,
478 (1980) of 20 August 1980, 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981 and 904 (1994) of 18 March 1994,
Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949,86 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and to the occupied
Syrian Golan,
Affirming that the transfer by the occupying Power of parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies constitutes a breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention86 and relevant provisions of customary law,
including those codified in Additional Protocol I87 to the four Geneva Conventions,88
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,89 and recalling also General
Assembly resolutions ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Noting that the International Court of Justice concluded that “the Israeli settlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory (including East Jerusalem) have been established in breach of international law”,90
Taking note of the recent reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,91
Taking note also of the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the
implications of the Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian
people throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,92
Recalling the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of 13 September 199393
and the subsequent implementation agreements between the Palestinian and Israeli sides,
Recalling also the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,94 and
emphasizing specifically its call for a freeze on all settlement activity, including so-called natural growth, and the
dismantlement of all settlement outposts erected since March 2001, and the need for Israel to uphold its obligations
and commitments in this regard,
_______________
86

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
88
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
89
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
90
Ibid., advisory opinion, para. 120.
91
A/HRC/20/32; see also A/68/376 and Corr.1.
92
A/HRC/22/63.
93
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
94
S/2003/529, annex.
87

280

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Aware that Israeli settlement activities involve, inter alia, the transfer of nationals of the occupying Power into
the occupied territories, the confiscation of land, the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, including Bedouin
families, the exploitation of natural resources and other actions against the Palestinian civilian population and the
civilian population in the occupied Syrian Golan that are contrary to international law,
Bearing in mind the extremely detrimental impact of Israeli settlement policies, decisions and activities on the
efforts to resume and advance the peace process, on the credibility of the peace process and on the prospects for the
achievement of peace in the Middle East in accordance with the two-State solution of Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security within recognized borders, on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
Expressing grave concern about the continuation by Israel, the occupying Power, of settlement activities in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, in violation of international humanitarian law, relevant
United Nations resolutions, the agreements reached between the parties and obligations under the Quartet road map,
and in defiance of the calls by the international community to cease all settlement activities,
Expressing grave concern in particular about Israel’s construction and expansion of settlements in and around
occupied East Jerusalem, including its so-called E-1 plan that aims to connect its illegal settlements around and
further isolate occupied East Jerusalem, the continuing demolition of Palestinian homes and eviction of Palestinian
families from the city, the revocation of Palestinian residency rights in the city, and ongoing settlement activities in
the Jordan Valley,
Expressing grave concern about the continuing unlawful construction by Israel of the wall inside the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and expressing its concern in particular
about the route of the wall in departure from the Armistice Line of 1949, which is causing humanitarian hardship
and a serious decline of socioeconomic conditions for the Palestinian people, is fragmenting the territorial contiguity
of the Territory and undermining its viability, and could prejudge future negotiations and make the two-State
solution physically impossible to implement,
Deeply concerned that the wall’s route has been traced in such a way as to include the great majority of the
Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Deploring settlement activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the
occupied Syrian Golan and any activities involving the confiscation of land, the disruption of the livelihood of
protected persons, the forced displacement of civilians and the de facto annexation of land,
Recalling the need to end all acts of violence, including acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction,
Gravely concerned about the rising incidents of violence, destruction, harassment, provocation and incitement
by extremist Israeli settlers in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, against Palestinian
civilians, including children, and their properties, including historic and religious sites, and agricultural lands,
Taking note of the relevant reports of the Secretary-General,95
Noting the special meeting of the Security Council convened on 26 September 2008, as well as the meeting of
the Council of 18 February 2011,
1. Reaffirms that the Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and
in the occupied Syrian Golan are illegal and an obstacle to peace and economic and social development;
2. Calls upon Israel to accept the de jure applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,86 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and to the occupied Syrian Golan and to abide scrupulously by the provisions of the Convention, in
particular article 49, and to comply with all of its obligations under international law and cease immediately all
actions causing the alteration of the character, status and demographic composition of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the occupied Syrian Golan;
_______________
95

A/68/313, A/68/355, A/68/378, A/68/502 and A/68/513.

281

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

3. Reiterates its demand for the immediate and complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in all
of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan, and calls in this
regard for the full implementation of all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including, inter alia,
resolutions 446 (1979), 452 (1979) of 20 July 1979, 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal obligations, as mentioned in the
advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice;89
5. Reiterates its call for the prevention of all acts of violence, destruction, harassment and provocation by
Israeli settlers, especially against Palestinian civilians and their properties, including historic and religious sites, and
agricultural lands;
6. Calls for accountability for the illegal actions perpetrated by Israeli settlers in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, and stresses in this regard the need for the implementation of Security Council resolution 904 (1994), in
which the Council called upon Israel, the occupying Power, to continue to take and implement measures, including
confiscation of arms, aimed at preventing illegal acts of violence by Israeli settlers, and called for measures to be
taken to guarantee the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilians in the occupied territory;
7. Encourages all States and international organizations to continue to actively pursue policies that ensure
respect for their obligations under international law with regard to all illegal Israeli practices and measures in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly Israeli settlements;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/83
A/RES/68/83

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/425,
para. 20),96 by a recorded vote of 165 to 8, with 8 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, Panama, United States
of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Honduras, Kiribati, Malawi, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Vanuatu

_______________
96
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.

282

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

68/83.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,97
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,98 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights98 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,99 and affirming that these
human rights instruments must be respected in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Reaffirming its relevant resolutions, including resolution 67/121 of 18 December 2012 as well as those
adopted at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Human Rights Council,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and stressing the need for their
implementation,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories100 and the report of the Secretary-General
on the work of the Special Committee,101
Taking note of the recent reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,102 as well as of other relevant recent reports of the
Human Rights Council,
Aware of the responsibility of the international community to promote human rights and ensure respect for
international law, and recalling in this regard its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice,103 and recalling
also General Assembly resolutions ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Noting in particular the Court’s reply, including that the construction of the wall being built by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and its associated
regime are contrary to international law,
Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Reaffirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
Reaffirming also the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,104 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
Reaffirming further the obligation of the States parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention104 under articles 146,
147 and 148 with regard to penal sanctions, grave breaches and responsibilities of the High Contracting Parties,
Reaffirming that all States have the right and the duty to take actions in conformity with international law and
international humanitarian law to counter deadly acts of violence against their civilian population in order to protect
the lives of their citizens,
_______________
97

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
99
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
100
A/68/379.
101
A/68/355.
102
A/HRC/20/32; see also A/68/376 and Corr.1.
103
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
104
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
98

283

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Stressing the need for full compliance with the Israeli-Palestinian agreements reached within the context of the
Middle East peace process, including the Sharm el-Sheikh understandings, and the implementation of the Quartet
road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,105
Stressing also the need for the full implementation of the Agreement on Movement and Access and the
Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, both of 15 November 2005, to allow for the freedom of movement of the
Palestinian civilian population within and into and out of the Gaza Strip,
Expressing grave concern about the continuing systematic violation of the human rights of the Palestinian
people by Israel, the occupying Power, including that arising from the excessive use of force and military operations
causing death and injury to Palestinian civilians, including children, women and non-violent, peaceful
demonstrators; the arbitrary imprisonment and detention of Palestinians, some of whom have been imprisoned for
decades; the use of collective punishment; the closure of areas; the confiscation of land; the establishment and
expansion of settlements; the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory in departure from the
Armistice Line of 1949; the destruction of property and infrastructure; the forced displacement of civilians; and all
other actions by it designed to change the legal status, geographical nature and demographic composition of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Gravely concerned in particular about the critical humanitarian, socioeconomic and security situation in the
Gaza Strip, including that resulting from the prolonged closures and severe economic and movement restrictions
that in effect amount to a blockade and from the continuing negative repercussions of the military operations
between December 2008 and January 2009, which caused extensive loss of life and injury, particularly among
Palestinian civilians, including children and women, widespread destruction and damage to Palestinian homes,
properties, vital infrastructure and public institutions, including hospitals, schools and United Nations facilities, and
the internal displacement of civilians, as well as about the firing of rockets into Israel,
Stressing the need for the full implementation by all parties of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of
8 January 2009 and General Assembly resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009,
Gravely concerned by reports regarding serious human rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law committed during the military operations in the Gaza Strip between December 2008 and January
2009, including the findings in the summary by the Secretary-General of the report of the Board of Inquiry106 and in
the report of the United Nations Fact-finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,107 and reiterating the necessity for
serious follow-up by all parties of the recommendations addressed to them towards ensuring accountability and
justice,
Deploring the loss of civilian lives, including women and children, as a result of the hostilities that had been
affecting the Gaza Strip and Israel in November 2012,
Expressing deep concern about the short- and long-term detrimental impact of such widespread destruction
and the continued impeding of the reconstruction process by Israel, the occupying Power, on the human rights
situation and on the socioeconomic and humanitarian conditions of the Palestinian civilian population,
Expressing deep concern also about the Israeli policy of closures and the imposition of severe restrictions,
including through hundreds of obstacles to movement, checkpoints and a permit regime, all of which obstruct the
freedom of movement of persons and goods, including medical and humanitarian goods, throughout the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and impair the Territory’s contiguity, consequently violating the
human rights of the Palestinian people and negatively impacting their socioeconomic situation and the efforts aimed
at rehabilitating and developing the Palestinian economy, which remains that of a critical humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip, while taking note of recent developments with regard to the situation of access there,
Expressing grave concern that thousands of Palestinians, including many children and women, continue to be
held in Israeli prisons or detention centres under harsh conditions, including, inter alia, unhygienic conditions,
solitary confinement, the extensive use of administrative detention of excessive duration without charge and denial
_______________
105

S/2003/529, annex.
See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
107
A/HRC/12/48.
106

284

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

of due process, lack of proper medical care, denial of family visits and denial of due process, that impair their wellbeing, and expressing grave concern also about the ill-treatment and harassment of any Palestinian prisoners and all
reports of torture,
Expressing deep concern about the recent hunger strikes by numerous Palestinian prisoners in protest of the
harsh conditions of their imprisonment and detention by the occupying Power, while taking note of the agreement
reached in May 2012 on conditions of detention in Israeli prisons and calling for its full and immediate
implementation,
Expressing concern about the possible consequences of the enactment by Israel, the occupying Power, of
military orders regarding the detention, imprisonment and deportation of Palestinian civilians from the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and recalling in this regard the prohibition under international
humanitarian law of the deportation of civilians from occupied territories,
Stressing the need for the prevention of all acts of violence, harassment, provocation and incitement by
extremist Israeli settlers, especially against Palestinian civilians, including children, and their properties, including
homes, agricultural lands and historic and religious sites, and expressing deep concern about the violation of the
human rights of Palestinians in this regard,
Convinced of the need for an international presence to monitor the situation, to contribute to ending the
violence and protecting the Palestinian civilian population and to help the parties to implement the agreements
reached, and in this regard recalling the positive contribution of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron,
Taking note of the continued efforts and tangible progress made in the Palestinian security sector, calling upon
the parties to continue cooperation that benefits both Palestinians and Israelis, in particular by promoting security
and building confidence, and expressing the hope that such progress will be extended to all major population
centres,
Urging the parties to observe calm and restraint and to refrain from provocative actions, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric, especially in areas of religious and cultural sensitivity, including in East Jerusalem, and to
take every possible step to promote conditions conducive to the success of the resumed peace negotiations,
Emphasizing the right of all people in the region to the enjoyment of human rights as enshrined in the
international human rights covenants,
1. Reiterates that all measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, in violation of the relevant provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,104 and contrary to the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, are illegal and have no validity;
2. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease all practices and actions that violate the human rights
of the Palestinian people, including the killing and injury of civilians, the arbitrary detention and imprisonment of
civilians, the forced displacement of civilians, and the destruction and confiscation of civilian property, and that it
fully respect human rights law and comply with its legal obligations in this regard, including in accordance with
relevant United Nations resolutions;
3. Also demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply fully with the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949104 and cease immediately all measures and actions taken in violation and in breach of the
Convention;
4. Calls upon Israel to resume full cooperation with the Human Rights Council and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
5. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease all of its settlement activities, the construction of the
wall and any other measures aimed at altering the character, status and demographic composition of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, all of which, inter alia, gravely and detrimentally
impact the human rights of the Palestinian people and the prospects for a peaceful settlement based on the two-State
solution;
6. Calls for urgent attention to the plight and the rights, in accordance with international law, of Palestinian
prisoners and detainees in Israeli jails, and calls for efforts between the two sides for the further release of prisoners
and detainees;
285

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

7. Condemns all acts of violence, including all acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction,
especially the excessive use of force by the Israeli occupying forces against Palestinian civilians, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, which have caused extensive loss of life and vast numbers of injuries, including among children,
massive damage and destruction to homes, properties, vital infrastructure and public institutions, including hospitals,
schools and United Nations facilities, and agricultural lands, and internal displacement of civilians;
8.
injury;
9.

Expresses grave concern at the firing of rockets against Israeli civilian areas resulting in loss of life and
Reiterates its demand for the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009);

10. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal obligations under international law, as
mentioned in the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice103 and as demanded
in General Assembly resolutions ES-10/15 and ES-10/13 of 21 October 2003, and that it immediately cease the
construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, dismantle
forthwith the structure situated therein, repeal or render ineffective all legislative and regulatory acts relating thereto,
and make reparation for all damage caused by the construction of the wall, which has gravely impacted the human
rights and the socioeconomic living conditions of the Palestinian people;
11. Reiterates the need for respect for the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory and for guarantees of the freedom of movement of persons and goods within the Palestinian
territory, including movement into and from East Jerusalem, into and from the Gaza Strip, between the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip, and to and from the outside world;
12. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its imposition of prolonged closures and economic and
movement restrictions, including those amounting to a blockade on the Gaza Strip, and in this regard to fully
implement the Agreement on Movement and Access and the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, both of
15 November 2005, in order to allow for the sustained and regular movement of persons and goods and for the
acceleration of long overdue reconstruction in the Gaza Strip;
13. Urges Member States to continue to provide emergency assistance to the Palestinian people to alleviate
the financial crisis and the dire socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, particularly in the Gaza Strip;
14. Emphasizes the need to preserve and develop the Palestinian institutions and infrastructure for the
provision of vital public services to the Palestinian civilian population and the promotion of human rights, including
civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights;
15. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system to continue
to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their inalienable human rights, including their
right to self-determination;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/84
A/RES/68/84

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/425,
para. 20),108 by a recorded vote of 169 to 1, with 12 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,

_______________
108
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and
State of Palestine.

286

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Israel
Abstaining: Cameroon, Canada, Honduras, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, Paraguay,
South Sudan, Tonga, United States of America, Vanuatu

68/84.

The occupied Syrian Golan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories,109
Deeply concerned that the Syrian Golan, occupied since 1967, has been under continued Israeli military
occupation,
Recalling Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
Recalling also its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was resolution 67/122 of
18 December 2012,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of resolution 67/122,110
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions in which, inter alia, it called upon Israel to put an end to its
occupation of the Arab territories,
Reaffirming once more the illegality of the decision of 14 December 1981 taken by Israel to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian Golan, which has resulted in the effective annexation of that
territory,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,111 to the occupied Syrian Golan,
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967,
Welcoming the convening at Madrid of the Peace Conference on the Middle East on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973 aimed at the realization
of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, and expressing grave concern about the stalling of the peace process on
all tracks,
1. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with the relevant resolutions on the occupied Syrian
Golan, in particular Security Council resolution 497 (1981), in which the Council, inter alia, decided that the Israeli
decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian Golan was null and void and
without international legal effect and demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, rescind forthwith its decision;

_______________
109

A/68/379.
A/68/378.
111
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
110

287

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

2. Also calls upon Israel to desist from changing the physical character, demographic composition,
institutional structure and legal status of the occupied Syrian Golan and in particular to desist from the establishment
of settlements;
3. Determines that all legislative and administrative measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, that purport to alter the character and legal status of the occupied Syrian Golan are null and void,
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,111 and have no legal effect;
4. Calls upon Israel to desist from imposing Israeli citizenship and Israeli identity cards on the Syrian
citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan and from its repressive measures against the population of the occupied
Syrian Golan;
5. Deplores the violations by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;
6. Calls once again upon Member States not to recognize any of the legislative or administrative measures
and actions referred to above;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/85
A/RES/68/85

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/427, para. 8)112

68/85.

Comprehensive review of special political missions

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 67/123 of 18 December 2012 on the comprehensive review of special political
missions,
Reaffirming its commitment to respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of all
States,
Recalling the primary role of the United Nations and the respective roles and authority of the General
Assembly and the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the
Charter,
Encouraging sustained exchanges of information, in an appropriate manner, among the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, on overall policy matters pertaining to special political missions,
Reaffirming the principles of impartiality, consent of the parties, national ownership and national
responsibility, and stressing the significance of the views of and dialogue with countries hosting special political
missions,
Recalling the relevant reports on the review of arrangements for funding and backstopping special political
missions,113 which addressed the financial and administrative arrangements pertaining to such missions, recognizing
that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities
for administrative and budgetary matters,
_______________
112
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand and Uruguay.
113
A/66/340 and A/66/7/Add.21.

288

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Stressing the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the pacific settlement of
disputes, including mediation, conflict prevention and conflict resolution, for the maintenance of international peace
and security,
Acknowledging the significant increase in the number and complexity of special political missions over the
past several decades,
Recognizing the role of the special political mission as a flexible tool for the maintenance of international
peace and security,
Recognizing also the need for system-wide coherence between special political missions and the United
Nations system, and emphasizing the importance of close cooperation between special political missions and United
Nations country teams for maintaining sustainable peace, conflict prevention and conflict resolution,
Recognizing further the need for special political missions to operate under clear, credible and achievable
mandates, including through the articulation of their goals and purposes, and the need to review their progress as
stipulated in their respective mandates,
Reaffirming the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on overall policy matters pertaining to special political
missions submitted pursuant to resolution 67/123;114
2. Requests the Secretary-General to hold regular, inclusive and interactive dialogue on the overall policy
matters pertaining to special political missions in order to promote closer collaboration with Member States;
3. Respects the purview of the mandate of special political missions, as stipulated in the respective relevant
resolutions, recognizes the specificity of each mandate of such missions, and emphasizes the role of the General
Assembly in discussing the overall policy matters pertaining to special political missions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the overall policy matters pertaining to special political missions, including efforts towards ensuring transparency,
accountability, geographical representation, gender participation, expertise and effectiveness in respect of all special
political missions;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Comprehensive
review of special political missions” and to consider the above-mentioned report of the Secretary-General under that
item.
RESOLUTIONS 68/86 A and B
A/RES/68/86AandB

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/428, para. 9)115

68/86.

Questions relating to information
A
INFORMATION IN THE SERVICE OF HUMANITY

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the comprehensive and important report of the Committee on Information,116
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General,117
_______________
114

A/68/223.
The draft resolutions recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee were submitted by the Committee on Information.
116
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/68/21).
117
A/68/315.
115

289

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Urges all countries, organizations of the United Nations system as a whole and all others concerned,
reaffirming their commitment to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to the principles of freedom
of the press and freedom of information, as well as to those of the independence, pluralism and diversity of the
media, deeply concerned by the disparities existing between developed and developing countries and the
consequences of every kind arising from those disparities that affect the capability of the public, private or other
media and individuals in developing countries to disseminate information and communicate their views and their
cultural and ethical values through endogenous cultural production, as well as to ensure the diversity of sources and
their free access to information, and recognizing the call in this context for what in the United Nations and at various
international forums has been termed “a new world information and communication order, seen as an evolving and
continuous process”:
(a) To cooperate and interact with a view to reducing existing disparities in information flows at all levels by
increasing assistance for the development of communications infrastructures and capabilities in developing
countries, with due regard for their needs and the priorities attached to such areas by those countries, and in order to
enable them and the public, private or other media in developing countries to develop their own information and
communications policies freely and independently and increase the participation of media and individuals in the
communication process, and to ensure a free flow of information at all levels;
(b) To ensure for journalists the free and effective performance of their professional tasks and condemn
resolutely all attacks against them;
(c) To provide support for the continuation and strengthening of practical training programmes for
broadcasters and journalists from public, private and other media in developing countries;
(d) To enhance regional efforts and cooperation among developing countries, as well as cooperation
between developed and developing countries, to strengthen communications capacities and to improve the media
infrastructure and communications technology in the developing countries, especially in the areas of training and
dissemination of information;
(e) To aim at, in addition to bilateral cooperation, providing all possible support and assistance to the
developing countries and their media, public, private or other, with due regard to their interests and needs in the field
of information and to action already adopted within the United Nations system, including:
(i) The development of the human and technical resources that are indispensable for the improvement of
information and communications systems in developing countries and support for the continuation and
strengthening of practical training programmes, such as those already operating under both public and private
auspices throughout the developing world;
(ii) The creation of conditions that will enable developing countries and their media, public, private or other,
to have, by using their national and regional resources, the communications technology suited to their national
needs, as well as the necessary programme material, especially for radio and television broadcasting;
(iii) Assistance in establishing and promoting telecommunication links at the subregional, regional and
interregional levels, especially among developing countries;
(iv) The facilitation, as appropriate, of access by the developing countries to advanced communications
technology available on the open market;
(f) To provide full support for the International Programme for the Development of Communication of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which should support both public and private
media.
B
UNITED NATIONS PUBLIC INFORMATION POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES
The General Assembly,
Emphasizing that the Committee on Information is its main subsidiary body mandated to make recommendations
to it relating to the work of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat,
290

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Reaffirming its resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946, in which the General Assembly established the
Department of Public Information, with a view to promoting to the greatest possible extent an informed
understanding of the work and purposes of the United Nations among the peoples of the world, and all other
relevant resolutions of the Assembly related to the activities of the Department,
Emphasizing that the contents of public information and communications should be placed at the heart of the
strategic management of the United Nations and that a culture of communications and transparency should
permeate all levels of the Organization as a means of fully informing the peoples of the world of the aims and
activities of the United Nations, in accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, in order to create broad-based global support for the United Nations,
Stressing that the primary mission of the Department of Public Information is to provide, through its outreach
activities, accurate, impartial, comprehensive, balanced, timely and relevant information to the public on the tasks
and responsibilities of the United Nations in order to strengthen international support for the activities of the
Organization with the greatest transparency,
Recalling its resolution 67/124 B of 18 December 2012, which provided an opportunity to take due steps to
enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the Department of Public Information and to maximize the use of its
resources,
Expressing its concern that the gap in information and communications technology between the developed
and the developing countries has continued to widen and that vast segments of the population in developing
countries are not benefiting from the information and communications technologies that are currently available, and
in this regard underlining the necessity of rectifying the imbalances in the present development of information and
communications technologies in order to make it more just, equitable and effective,
Recognizing that developments in information and communications technologies open vast new opportunities
for economic growth and social development and can play an important role in the eradication of poverty in
developing countries, and at the same time emphasizing that the development of these technologies poses
challenges and risks and could lead to the further widening of disparities between and within countries,
Recalling its resolution 67/292 of 24 July 2013 on multilingualism, and emphasizing the importance of
making appropriate use of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the activities of the Department of
Public Information, with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other
official languages, as well as the importance of ensuring the full and equitable treatment of all the official languages
of the United Nations in all the activities of the Department,
I
Introduction
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in respect of the public information policies and activities of the United
Nations, to continue to implement fully the recommendations contained in relevant resolutions;
2. Reaffirms that the United Nations remains the indispensable foundation of a peaceful and just world and
that its voice must be heard in a clear and effective manner, and emphasizes the essential role of the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat in this context;
3. Stresses the importance of the provision of clear, timely, accurate and comprehensive information by the
Secretariat to Member States, upon their request, within the framework of existing mandates and procedures;
4. Reaffirms the central role of the Committee on Information in United Nations public information
policies and activities, including the prioritization of those activities, and decides that recommendations relating to
the programme of the Department of Public Information shall originate, to the extent possible, in the Committee and
shall be considered by the Committee;
5. Requests the Department of Public Information, following the priorities laid down by the General
Assembly in its resolution 67/236 of 24 December 2012, and recalling the United Nations Millennium

291

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Declaration 118 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 119 to pay particular attention to peace and security,
development and human rights and to major issues such as the eradication of poverty, including the global food
crisis, conflict prevention, sustainable development, the HIV/AIDS epidemic, combating terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, and the needs of the African continent;
6. Requests the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information centres to
pay particular attention to progress in implementing the internationally agreed development goals, including those
contained in the Millennium Declaration, and the outcomes of the major related United Nations summits and
conferences in carrying out its activities, and calls upon the Department to play an active role in raising public
awareness of the world financial and economic crisis and its impact on development, including the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals, and of the global challenge of climate change, in particular the actions taken in
accordance with the objective, principles and provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change,120 especially in the context of the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, particularly in the
context of the Conference of the Parties and of the Meetings of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol;
II
General activities of the Department of Public Information
7. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Public
Information;121
8. Requests the Department of Public Information to maintain its commitment to a culture of evaluation
and to continue to evaluate its products and activities with the objective of enhancing their effectiveness, and to
continue to cooperate and coordinate with Member States and the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the
Secretariat;
9. Reaffirms the importance of more effective coordination between the Department of Public Information
and the Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
consistency in the messages of the Organization;
10. Notes the efforts of the Department of Public Information to continue to publicize the work and
decisions of the General Assembly, and requests the Department to continue to enhance its working relationship
with the Office of the President of the General Assembly;
11. Encourages continued collaboration between the Department of Public Information and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the promotion of culture and in the fields of education
and communication, bridging the existing gap between the developed and the developing countries;
12. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Department of Public Information to work at the local level
with other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to enhance the coordination of their
communications activities, urges the Department to encourage the United Nations Communications Group to
promote linguistic diversity in its work, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to report to the Committee
on Information at its thirty-sixth session on progress achieved in this regard;
13. Reaffirms that the Department of Public Information must prioritize its work programme, while
respecting existing mandates and in line with regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme
Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of
Evaluation,122 to focus its message and better concentrate its efforts and to match its programmes with the needs of
its target audiences, on the basis of improved feedback and evaluation mechanisms;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to exert all efforts to ensure that publications and other
information services of the Secretariat, including the United Nations website and the United Nations News Service,
_______________
118

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
120
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
121
A/AC.198/2013/2–4.
122
ST/SGB/2000/8.
119

292

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

contain comprehensive, balanced, objective and equitable information in all official languages about the issues
before the Organization and that they maintain editorial independence, impartiality, accuracy and full consistency
with resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly;
15. Underlines the critical need to address violations of the relevant international rules and regulations that
govern the area of broadcasting, including television, radio and satellite broadcasting, in the most appropriate manner;
16. Reiterates its request to the Department of Public Information and content-providing offices of the
Secretariat to ensure that United Nations publications are produced in all official languages, as well as in an
environmentally friendly and cost-neutral manner, and to continue to coordinate closely with all other entities,
including all other departments of the Secretariat and funds and programmes of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates, in order to avoid duplication in the issuance of United Nations publications;
17. Encourages, in this regard, the Department of Public Information and the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat to consult on opportunities for merging their publishing
activities and to develop new collaborative arrangements to enhance multilingualism in other outputs in a costneutral manner, bearing in mind the importance of ensuring the full and equitable treatment of all the official
languages of the United Nations, and to report thereon to the Committee on Information at its thirty-sixth session;
18. Emphasizes that the Department of Public Information should maintain and improve its activities in the
areas of special interest to developing countries and, where appropriate, other countries with special needs, and that
the activities of the Department should contribute to bridging the existing gap between the developing and the
developed countries in the crucial field of public information and communications;
19. Reiterates its concern that the issuance of daily press releases has not been expanded to all official
languages, as requested in previous resolutions and in full respect of the principle of parity of all six official
languages, and reiterates its request to the Department of Public Information to design a strategy, in close
collaboration with other departments, to deliver daily press releases in all six official languages through creative
schemes, in a cost-neutral manner and in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions, and to report
thereon to the Committee on Information at its thirty-sixth session;
Multilingualism and public information
20. Underlines the responsibility of the Secretariat in mainstreaming multilingualism into all its
communication and information activities, within existing resources on an equitable basis;
21. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring equitable treatment of all the official languages of the United
Nations in all the activities of the Department of Public Information, whether based on traditional or new media,
including in presentations to the Committee on Information, with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the
use of English and the five other official languages;
22. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the Department of Public Information has
appropriate staffing capacity in all the official languages of the United Nations to undertake all its activities and to
include this aspect in future programme budget proposals for the Department, bearing in mind the principle of parity
of all six official languages, while respecting the workload in each official language;
23. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Department of Public Information to enhance multilingualism in all
its activities, stresses the importance of ensuring that the texts of all new public United Nations documents in all six
official languages, information materials and all older United Nations documents are made available through the
United Nations website and are accessible to Member States without delay, and further stresses the importance of
fully implementing its resolution 67/292;
Bridging the digital divide
24. Requests the Department of Public Information to contribute to raising the awareness of the international
community of the importance of the implementation of the outcome documents of the World Summit on the
Information Society123 and of the possibilities that the use of the Internet and other information and communications
_______________
123

See A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.

293

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

technologies can bring to societies and economies, as well as of ways to bridge the digital divide, including by
commemorating World Telecommunication and Information Society Day on 17 May;
Network of United Nations information centres
25. Emphasizes the importance of the network of United Nations information centres in enhancing the
public image of the United Nations, in disseminating messages on the United Nations to local populations,
especially in developing countries, bearing in mind that information in local languages has the strongest impact on
local populations, and in mobilizing support for the work of the United Nations at the local level;
26. Welcomes the work done by the network of United Nations information centres in favour of the
publication of United Nations information materials and the translation of important documents into languages other
than the official languages of the United Nations, encourages the network of information centres to continue to
develop web pages in local languages and the Department of Public Information to provide necessary resources and
technical facilities, with a view to reaching the widest possible spectrum of audiences and extending the United
Nations message to all corners of the world, in order to strengthen international support for the activities of the
Organization, and encourages the continuation of efforts in this regard;
27. Stresses the importance of rationalizing the network of United Nations information centres, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to make proposals in this direction, including through the
redeployment of resources where necessary, and to report to the Committee on Information at its successive sessions;
28. Reaffirms that the rationalization of United Nations information centres must be carried out on a caseby-case basis in consultation with all concerned Member States in which existing information centres are located,
the countries served by those information centres and other interested countries in the region, taking into
consideration the distinctive characteristics of each region;
29. Recognizes that the network of United Nations information centres, especially in developing countries,
should continue to enhance its impact and activities, including through strategic communications support, and calls
upon the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of this approach to the Committee on Information at its
successive sessions;
30. Requests the Department of Public Information, through the United Nations information centres, to
strengthen its cooperation with all other United Nations entities at the country level and in the context of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, in order to enhance coherence in communications and to avoid
duplication of work;
31. Stresses the importance of taking into account the special needs and requirements of developing
countries in the field of information and communications technology for the effective flow of information in those
countries;
32. Also stresses the importance of efforts to strengthen the outreach activities of the United Nations to those
Member States remaining outside the network of United Nations information centres, and encourages the SecretaryGeneral, within the context of rationalization, to extend the services of the network of information centres to those
Member States;
33. Further stresses that the Department of Public Information should continue to review the allocation of
both staff and financial resources to the United Nations information centres in developing countries, taking into
account the specific needs of the least developed countries;
34. Welcomes the support of some Member States, including developing countries, in offering, inter alia,
rent-free premises for the United Nations information centres because of lack of funding, bearing in mind that such
support should not be a substitute for the full allocation of financial resources for the information centres in the
context of the programme budget of the United Nations;
35. Notes the strengthening of the United Nations information centres in Cairo, Mexico City and Pretoria,
and encourages the Secretary-General to explore the strengthening of other centres, especially in Africa, in
cooperation with the Member States concerned and in a cost-neutral manner;
36. Recalls its resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009, in which the General Assembly requested the
Secretary-General to establish a United Nations information centre in Luanda as a contribution towards addressing
the needs of Portuguese-speaking African countries, reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in coordination
294

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

with the Government of Angola, to take the measures necessary for the prompt establishment of the information
centre, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-sixth session on the
progress made in this regard;
III
Strategic communications services
37. Reaffirms the role of the strategic communications services in devising and disseminating United
Nations messages by developing communications strategies, in close collaboration with the substantive
departments, United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, in full compliance with their
legislative mandates;
Promotional campaigns
38. Notes with appreciation the work of the Department of Public Information in promoting, through its
campaigns, issues of importance to the international community, such as the United Nations Millennium
Declaration and the progress made in implementing the internationally agreed development goals, United Nations
reform, the eradication of poverty, conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, sustainable development,
disarmament, decolonization, human rights, including the rights of women and children, persons with disabilities
and migrant workers, strategic coordination in humanitarian relief, especially in natural disasters and other crises,
HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, non-communicable diseases and other diseases, the needs of the African
continent, the nature of the critical economic and social situation in Africa and the priorities of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development,124 the special needs of the least developed countries, the establishment of the permanent
memorial to the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, dialogue among civilizations, the culture of peace and tolerance and the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster, as well as prevention of genocide, and requests the Department, in cooperation with the
countries concerned and with the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to continue to
take appropriate measures to enhance world public awareness of all these issues;
39. Requests the Secretariat, especially the Department of Public Information, to contribute to the
observance of International Mother Language Day on 21 February, as proclaimed by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade on 25 March, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
62/122 of 17 December 2007, Nelson Mandela International Day on 18 July, in accordance with Assembly
resolution 64/13 of 10 November 2009, and the International Day of Nowruz on 21 March, in accordance with
Assembly resolution 64/253 of 23 February 2010, and to play a role in raising awareness and promoting these
events in a cost-neutral manner, where appropriate;
40. Requests the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information centres to
widely disseminate the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,125 and follow-up thereto;
41. Also requests the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information
centres to raise awareness of all General Assembly-mandated high-level meetings, including the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed
development goals for persons with disabilities, held on 23 September 2013, and the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on nuclear disarmament, held on 26 September 2013;
42. Further requests the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information
centres to raise awareness of and disseminate information, in a cost-neutral manner, on the Third International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, declared by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/119 of
10 December 2010;
_______________
124
125

A/57/304, annex.
Resolution 66/288, annex.

295

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

43. Encourages the Department of Public Information to develop partnerships with the private sector in a
cost-neutral manner, and in this regard notes the partnership with airlines that provide to their customers in-flight
programmes featuring United Nations activities;
Role of the Department of Public Information in United Nations peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
44. Requests the Secretariat to continue to ensure the involvement of the Department of Public Information
from the planning stage of future peacekeeping operations through interdepartmental consultations and coordination
with other departments of the Secretariat, in particular with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support;
45. Requests the Department of Public Information, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support to continue their cooperation in raising awareness of the new realities, far-reaching
successes and challenges faced by peacekeeping operations, especially multidimensional and complex ones, and the
recent surge in United Nations peacekeeping activities, and welcomes efforts by the three Departments to develop
and implement a comprehensive communications strategy on current challenges facing United Nations
peacekeeping;
46. Stresses the importance of enhancing the public information capacity of the Department of Public
Information in the field of peacekeeping operations and its role, in close cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, in the process of selecting public information staff
for United Nations peacekeeping operations or missions, and in this regard invites the Department of Public
Information to second public information staff who have the skills necessary to fulfil the tasks of the operations or
missions, taking into account the principle of equitable geographical distribution in accordance with Chapter XV,
Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, and to consider views expressed, especially by host
countries, when appropriate, in this regard;
47. Emphasizes the importance of the peacekeeping gateway on the United Nations website, and requests
the Department of Public Information to continue its efforts in supporting the peacekeeping missions to further
develop their websites;
48. Requests the Department of Public Information and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
continue to cooperate in implementing an effective outreach programme to explain the zero-tolerance policy of the
Organization regarding sexual exploitation and abuse and to inform the public of the outcome of all such cases
involving peacekeeping personnel, including cases where allegations are ultimately found to be legally unproven,
and also to inform the public of the adoption by the General Assembly of the United Nations Comprehensive
Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations Staff and
Related Personnel;126
49. Notes the importance of communication and information activities relating to peacebuilding efforts, in
particular those of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office of the Secretariat and the
Peacebuilding Fund, and requests the Department of Public Information to cooperate with these entities in that
regard, with a view to widening outreach of their important work;
Role of the Department of Public Information in strengthening dialogue among civilizations and the culture
of peace as means of enhancing understanding among nations
50. Recalls its resolutions on dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace,127 and requests the
Department of Public Information, while ensuring the pertinence and relevance of subjects for promotional
campaigns on this issue, to continue to provide the support necessary for the dissemination of information pertaining
to dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace, as well as the initiative on the Alliance of Civilizations, and
to take due steps in fostering the culture of dialogue among civilizations and promoting cultural understanding,
tolerance, respect for and freedom of religion or belief and effective enjoyment by all of all human rights and civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development;
_______________
126
127

296

Resolution 62/214, annex.
Resolutions 52/15, 53/22, 53/25, 55/23, 56/6, 59/142 and 60/4.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

51. Invites the United Nations system, especially the Department of Public Information, to continue to
encourage and facilitate dialogue among civilizations and to formulate ways and means to promote dialogue among
civilizations in the activities of the United Nations in various fields, taking into account the Programme of Action of
the Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations,128 and in this regard reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to present to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session the report requested by the Assembly in its
resolution 60/4 of 20 October 2005;
52. Acknowledges the achievements of the Alliance of Civilizations and the efforts made by the High
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Alliance of Civilizations, which it had welcomed in its resolution
64/14 of 10 November 2009, notes the broad range of initiatives and partnerships in the areas of youth, education,
the media and migration launched at the fourth Alliance of Civilizations Forum, held in Doha from 11 to
13 December 2011, and continued at the fifth Alliance of Civilizations Forum, held in Vienna on 27 and
28 February 2013, and welcomes the continuing support of the Department of Public Information for the work of
the Alliance of Civilizations, including its ongoing projects;
IV
News services
53. Stresses that the central objective of the news services implemented by the Department of Public
Information is the timely delivery of accurate, objective and balanced news and information emanating from the
United Nations system in all four mass media, namely, print, radio, television and the Internet, to the media and
other audiences worldwide, with the overall emphasis on multilingualism, and reiterates its request to the
Department to ensure that all breaking news stories and news alerts are accurate, impartial and free of bias;
54. Recognizes the important role of television and video services provided by the Department of Public
Information, and notes the recent efforts in making available online broadcast-quality video that can be streamed or
downloaded by smaller broadcast outlets that do not have access to satellite feeds;
55. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take full advantage of new developments in information
technology in order to improve the expeditious dissemination of information on the United Nations in a cost-neutral
manner, in accordance with the priorities established by the General Assembly in its resolutions and taking into
account the linguistic diversity of the Organization, in this regard recognizes the e-mail news alert service, and
encourages the Department of Public Information to consult with the Office of Information and Communications
Technology of the Secretariat in order to use, as a matter of priority, innovative ways to disseminate information
daily in all six official languages on an equitable basis;
Traditional means of communication
56. Welcomes the sustained efforts of United Nations Radio, which remains one of the most effective and
far-reaching traditional media available to the Department of Public Information and an important instrument in
United Nations activities, to enhance the timeliness, presentation and thematic focus of its multilingual programmes
on United Nations activities and to ensure the widest possible dissemination of its programming to media outlets
using the most suitable platforms and formats, pre-recorded or live, requests the Secretary-General to continue to
make every effort to achieve parity in the six official languages in United Nations Radio productions, reiterates the
important role of the 15-minute daily programmes created pursuant to General Assembly resolution 54/82 B of
6 December 1999, and requests the Department to continue the production and dissemination of the programmes, in
accordance with client needs;
57. Also welcomes resolution 67/124 B, in which the General Assembly endorsed the proclamation of
13 February as World Radio Day;
58. Further welcomes the ongoing efforts being made by the Department of Public Information to
disseminate programmes directly to broadcasting stations all over the world in the six official languages, with the
addition of Portuguese and Kiswahili, as well as in other languages where possible;
_______________
128

Resolution 56/6, sect. B.

297

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

59. Requests the Department of Public Information to continue to build partnerships with local, national and
regional broadcasters to extend the United Nations message to all corners of the world in an accurate and impartial
way, and requests the News and Media Division of the Department to continue to take full advantage of the
technological infrastructure made available in recent years;
United Nations website
60. Reaffirms that the United Nations website is an essential tool for the media, non-governmental
organizations, educational institutions, Member States and the general public, and in this regard reiterates the
continued need for strengthened efforts by the Department of Public Information to maintain and improve it;
61. Recognizes the efforts made by the Department of Public Information to implement the basic
accessibility requirements for persons with disabilities to access the United Nations website, and calls upon the
Department to continue to work towards compliance with accessibility requirements on all new and updated pages
of the website, with the aim of ensuring its accessibility for persons with different kinds of disabilities;
62. Notes that the multilingual development and enrichment of the United Nations website has improved,
and in this regard requests the Department of Public Information, in coordination with and with the support of
content-providing offices of the Secretariat, to further improve the actions taken to achieve full parity among the six
official languages on the United Nations website, and especially reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
ensure the adequate distribution of financial and human resources within the Department allocated to the United
Nations website among all official languages, taking into consideration the specificity of each official language;
63. Recognizes the cooperative arrangements undertaken by the Department of Public Information with
academic institutions to increase the number of web pages available in some official languages, and reiterates its
urgent request to the Secretary-General to extend those arrangements to all the official languages of the United
Nations;
64. Requests the Department of Public Information, as from the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, to provide on the United Nations website, in all the official languages of the United Nations, live
webcasts and video archives of open, formal meetings of the General Assembly and of the Security Council with
interpretation services, with a view to expanding the coverage to all open, formal United Nations meetings with
interpretation services;
65. Reiterates its request that all content-providing offices of the Secretariat translate all English-language
materials and databases posted on the United Nations website into all other official languages and make them
available on the respective language websites in the most practical, efficient and cost-effective manner;
66. Reaffirms the need to enhance the technological infrastructure of the Department of Public Information
on a continuous basis in order to widen the outreach of the Department and to continue to improve the United
Nations website in a cost-neutral manner;
67. Recognizes that some official languages use non-Latin and bidirectional scripts and that technological
infrastructures and supportive applications in the United Nations are based on Latin script, which leads to difficulties
in processing non-Latin and bidirectional scripts, and urges the Office of Information and Communications
Technology to further collaborate with the Department of Public Information and to continue its efforts to ensure
that technological infrastructures and supportive applications in the United Nations fully support Latin, non-Latin
and bidirectional scripts in order to enhance the equality of all official languages on the United Nations website;
68. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-sixth session on
the structure of the Organization’s presence in social networks and its strategy and guidelines for their use;
V
Library services
69. Welcomes the completion of an inventory of 67 years of United Nations audiovisual history, and,
recognizing the importance of the audiovisual archives of the United Nations, stresses the urgency of digitization in
order to prevent further deterioration of these unique historical archives, and encourages the Department of Public
Information to prioritize the development of collaborative arrangements for the digitization of these archives in a
cost-neutral manner and to report thereon to the Committee on Information at its thirty-sixth session;
298

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

70. Requests, in that context, that the Department of Public Information implement the recommendations of
its working group on library improvement;
71. Calls upon the Department of Public Information to continue to lead the Steering Committee for the
Modernization and Integrated Management of United Nations Libraries, and further commends the steps taken by
the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and the other member libraries of the Steering Committee to align their activities,
services and outputs more closely with the goals, objectives and operational priorities of the Organization;
72. Reiterates the need to maintain a multilingual collection of books, periodicals and other materials in hard
copy, accessible to Member States and others, as specified in paragraph 75 of the present resolution, ensuring that
the Dag Hammarskjöld Library continues to be a broadly accessible resource for information about the United
Nations and its activities;
73. Notes the efforts made by the Department of Public Information and other stakeholders to plan, procure,
implement, test and deploy a media assets management system solution for file-based production and for the
management of the United Nations multimedia digital archives, calls upon the Department to explore alternative
and feasible solutions for the digitization, preservation, quality assurance and technical processing of the audiovisual
archive materials based on international standards and best practices, including in the context of the construction
work of the capital master plan within the overall budget of the plan, and encourages the Department to seek the
support of public and private institutions for its work in digitizing, storing and managing these archives and to report
thereon to the Committee on Information at its thirty-sixth session;
74. Also notes the initiative taken by the Dag Hammarskjöld Library, in its capacity as the focal point, to
expand the scope of the regional training and knowledge-sharing workshops organized for the depository libraries in
developing countries to include outreach in their activities;
75. Acknowledges the role of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library in enhancing knowledge-sharing and
networking activities to ensure access to the vast store of United Nations knowledge for delegates, permanent
missions of Member States, the Secretariat, researchers and depository libraries worldwide;
76. Notes the efforts of the iSeek team, through the intranet, to raise awareness among staff members of new
initiatives and developments in different departments of the Secretariat, and requests the Department of Public
Information to work out a strategy for Member States to also benefit from these new developments;
VI
Outreach services
77. Takes note of the letter dated 30 April 2012 from the Senior Public Information and Liaison Officer of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the Chair of the Committee on
Information,129 and encourages the United Nations Academic Impact to take effective steps to facilitate exchanges
between the United Nations and institutions of higher education in all regions to support the common principles and
goals of the United Nations, while recognizing the role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and its constitution;
78. Acknowledges that the outreach services provided by the Department of Public Information continue to
work towards promoting awareness of the role and work of the United Nations;
79. Welcomes the educational outreach activities of the Department of Public Information, through the
Global Teaching and Learning Project, to reach educators and young people worldwide through a range of
multimedia platforms;
80. Notes the importance of the continued implementation by the Department of Public Information of the
ongoing Reham Al-Farra Memorial Journalists’ Fellowship Programme for broadcasters and journalists from
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, as mandated by the General Assembly, and
requests the Department to consider how best to maximize the benefits derived from the Programme by extending,
inter alia, its duration and the number of its participants;
_______________
129

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/67/21), annex.

299

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

81. Welcomes the movement towards educational outreach and the orientation of the UN Chronicle, in both
its print and its online editions, and to this end encourages the UN Chronicle to continue to develop co-publishing
partnerships and collaborative educational activities and events with civil society organizations and institutions of
higher learning;
82. Requests the Department of Public Information to continue the publication of the UN Chronicle with a
view to improving it further in a cost-neutral manner and to report to the Committee on Information at its thirtysixth session on progress in this matter, and reiterates its request to submit options for publishing the UN Chronicle
in all six official languages;
83. Notes the efforts undertaken by the Department of Public Information in organizing exhibitions on
important United Nations-related issues, within existing mandates, at United Nations Headquarters and at other
United Nations offices as a useful tool for reaching out to the general public, reaffirms the important role that guided
tours play as a means of reaching out to the general public, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to ensure that the guided tours provided at United Nations Headquarters and other United Nations duty stations are
consistently available, in accordance with their income-generating nature, in particular in all the United Nations
official languages;
84. Also notes the ongoing efforts of the Department of Public Information to strengthen its role as a focal
point for two-way interaction with civil society relating to the priorities and concerns of the Organization identified
by Member States, and further notes in this regard the increasing involvement of civil society in United Nations
activities, including the outreach activities directed at youth representatives and young journalists;
85. Recalls its resolution 41/68 D of 3 December 1986, commends the World Federation of United Nations
Associations and its more than 100 national United Nations associations for the valuable contributions they have
made during the past 67 years through their global activities in the mobilization of popular support for the United
Nations, and calls for continued collaboration between the World Federation and the Department of Public
Information in support of their complementary objectives;
86. Commends, in a spirit of cooperation, the United Nations Correspondents Association for its ongoing
activities and for its Dag Hammarskjöld Memorial Scholarship Fund, which sponsors journalists from developing
countries to come to United Nations Headquarters and report on the activities during the sessions of the General
Assembly, and further encourages the international community to continue its financial support for the Fund;
87. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts and contribution of United Nations Messengers of Peace,
Goodwill Ambassadors and other advocates to promote the work of the United Nations and to enhance international
public awareness of its priorities and concerns, and calls upon the Department of Public Information to continue to
involve them in its communications and media strategies and outreach activities;
VII
Final remarks
88. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-sixth session and
to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the activities of the Department of Public Information and on
the implementation of all recommendations and requests contained in the present resolution;
89. Also requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure that the level of services provided by
the Department of Public Information is maintained throughout the period of the implementation of the capital
master plan;
90. Notes the initiative taken by the Department of Public Information, in cooperation with the Department
of Safety and Security and the Protocol and Liaison Service of the Secretariat, during the annual general debate of
the General Assembly, to issue special identification stickers to press officers of Member States to enable them to
escort media covering the visits of high-level officials to restricted areas, and strongly urges the Secretary-General to
continue to improve this practice by acceding to the request by Member States to provide the needed number of
additional passes to press officers of Member States to allow their access to all areas that are deemed restricted, in
order to effectively and comprehensively report on high-level meetings that include officials of delegations of
Member States;
300

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

91. Requests the Committee on Information to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
92. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Questions
relating to information”.
RESOLUTION 68/87
A/RES/68/87

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/429,
para. 7),130 by a recorded vote of 179 to none, with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: France, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

68/87.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of
the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with
regard to the implementation of the Declaration, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 67/125 of 18 December 2012, in which it requested the Special Committee to
continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Stressing the importance of timely transmission by the administering Powers of adequate information under
Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers on the
Territories concerned,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General,131
1. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations,
the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with
respect to that Territory;
_______________
130

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
131
A/68/64 and Add.1.

301

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

2. Requests the administering Powers concerned, in accordance with their Charter obligations, to transmit
or continue to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General for information purposes, subject to such limitation as
security and constitutional considerations may require, statistical and other information of a technical nature relating
to economic, social and educational conditions in the Territories for which they are respectively responsible, as well
as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
including the constitution, legislative act or executive order providing for the government of the Territory and the
constitutional relationship of the Territory to the administering Power, within a maximum period of six months
following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate information is drawn from all
available published sources in connection with the preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories
concerned;
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to discharge the functions entrusted
to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures.
RESOLUTION 68/88
A/RES/68/88

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/430,
para. 7),132 by a recorded vote of 180 to 2, with 2 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

68/88.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories”,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2013
relating to the item,133

_______________
132

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
133
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23), chap. V.

302

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well as all other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, including, in particular, resolutions 46/181 of 19 December 1991, 55/146 of 8 December 2000
and 65/119 of 10 December 2010,
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to
promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under their
administration and to protect the human and natural resources of those Territories against abuses,
Reaffirming also that any economic or other activity that has a negative impact on the interests of the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and on the exercise of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
Charter and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) is contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Reaffirming further that the natural resources are the heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, including the indigenous populations,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location, size and economic conditions of each
Territory, and bearing in mind the need to promote the stability, diversification and strengthening of the economy of
each Territory,
Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the small Territories to natural disasters and environmental
degradation,
Conscious also that foreign economic investment, when undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes, could make a valid contribution to the
socioeconomic development of the Territories and also to the exercise of their right to self-determination,
Concerned about any activities aimed at exploiting the natural and human resources of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community,
1. Reaffirms the right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to self-determination in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as well as their right to the
enjoyment of their natural resources and their right to dispose of those resources in their best interest;
2. Affirms the value of foreign economic investment undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes in order to make a valid contribution to the
socioeconomic development of the Territories, especially during times of economic and financial crisis;
3. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter to promote the political,
economic, social and educational advancement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and reaffirms the legitimate
rights of their peoples over their natural resources;
4. Reaffirms its concern about any activities aimed at the exploitation of the natural resources that are the
heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the indigenous populations, in the
Caribbean, the Pacific and other regions, and of their human resources, to the detriment of their interests, and in such
a way as to deprive them of their right to dispose of those resources;
5. Reaffirms the need to avoid any economic and other activities that adversely affect the interests of the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
6. Calls once again upon all Governments that have not yet done so to take, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, legislative, administrative or
other measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate
enterprises in the Non-Self-Governing Territories that are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises;
7. Calls upon the administering Powers to ensure that the exploitation of the marine and other natural
resources in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration is not in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, and does not adversely affect the interests of the peoples of those Territories;
303

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

8. Invites all Governments and organizations of the United Nations system to take all possible measures to
ensure that the permanent sovereignty of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories over their natural
resources is fully respected and safeguarded in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on
decolonization;
9. Urges the administering Powers concerned to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the
inalienable right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources and to establish and
maintain control over the future development of those resources, and requests the administering Powers to take all
steps necessary to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
10. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned to ensure that no discriminatory working conditions
prevail in the Territories under their administration and to promote in each Territory a fair system of wages
applicable to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through all means at his disposal, to inform world public
opinion of any activity that affects the exercise of the right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to
self-determination in conformity with the Charter and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
12. Appeals to trade unions and non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals, to continue their
efforts to promote the economic well-being of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and also appeals
to the media to disseminate information about the developments in this regard;
13. Decides to follow the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories so as to ensure that all economic
activities in those Territories are aimed at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the interest of their
peoples, including the indigenous populations, and at promoting the economic and financial viability of those
Territories;
14. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this question and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/89
A/RES/68/89

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/431,
para. 7),134 by a recorded vote of 128 to none, with 55 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

_______________
134

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

304

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

68/89.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the
United Nations”,
Having also considered the report of the Secretary-General135 and the report of the Economic and Social
Council136 on the item,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2013
relating to the item,137
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and the
resolutions of the Special Committee, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions, including in particular
Economic and Social Council resolutions 2011/40 of 28 July 2011 and 2012/22 of 26 July 2012,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community,
Conscious of the need to facilitate the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting that the large majority of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories are small island Territories,
Welcoming the assistance extended to Non-Self-Governing Territories by certain specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme,
Welcoming also the participation in the capacity of observers of those Non-Self-Governing Territories that are
associate members of regional commissions in the world conferences in the economic and social spheres, subject to
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and in accordance with relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations, including resolutions and decisions of the Assembly and the Special Committee on specific
Territories,
Noting that only some specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system have been
involved in providing assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Stressing that, because the development options of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories are
limited, there are special challenges to planning for and implementing sustainable development and that those
Territories will be constrained in meeting the challenges without the continuing cooperation and assistance of the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system,
Stressing also the importance of securing the resources necessary for funding expanded programmes of
assistance for the peoples concerned and the need to enlist the support of all major funding institutions within the
United Nations system in that regard,
Reaffirming the mandates of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to
take all appropriate measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full implementation of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions,
Expressing its appreciation to the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Caribbean Community and
other regional organizations for the continued cooperation and assistance they have extended to the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in this regard,
_______________
135

A/68/62.
E/2013/55.
137
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23), chap. VI.
136

305

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Expressing its conviction that closer contacts and consultations between and among the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system and regional organizations help to facilitate the effective
formulation of programmes of assistance to the peoples concerned,
Mindful of the imperative need to keep under continuous review the activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system in the implementation of the various resolutions and decisions of
the United Nations relating to decolonization,
Bearing in mind the extremely fragile economies of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories and their
vulnerability to natural disasters, such as hurricanes, cyclones and sea-level rise, and recalling the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/127 of 18 December 2012 on the implementation of the Declaration by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;135

2. Recommends that all States intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system in which they are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV), and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
3. Reaffirms that the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations
system should continue to be guided by the relevant resolutions of the United Nations in their efforts to contribute to
the implementation of the Declaration and all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Also reaffirms that the recognition by the General Assembly, the Security Council and other United
Nations organs of the legitimacy of the aspirations of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to exercise
their right to self-determination entails, as a corollary, the extension of all appropriate assistance to those peoples;
5. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system that have continued to cooperate with the United Nations and the regional and subregional organizations in
the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
and requests all the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to implement the
relevant provisions of those resolutions;
6. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to intensify their
engagement with the work of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples as an important element for the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), including possible participation at the regional
seminars on decolonization, upon the invitation of the Special Committee;
7. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and international
and regional organizations to examine and review conditions in each Territory so as to take appropriate measures to
accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of the Territories;
8. Urges those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system that have not yet
provided assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories to do so as soon as possible;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system
and regional organizations to strengthen existing measures of support and formulate appropriate programmes of
assistance to the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, within the framework of their respective mandates, in
order to accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of those Territories;
10. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system concerned to
provide information on:
(a)

Environmental problems facing the Non-Self-Governing Territories;

(b) The impact of natural disasters, such as hurricanes and volcanic eruptions, and other environmental
problems, such as beach and coastal erosion and droughts, on those Territories;
306

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

(c) Ways and means to assist the Territories to fight drug trafficking, money-laundering and other illegal and
criminal activities;
(d) Illegal exploitation of the marine and other natural resources of the Territories and the need to utilize
those resources for the benefit of the peoples of the Territories;
11. Recommends that the executive heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system formulate, with the active cooperation of the regional organizations concerned, concrete proposals
for the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and submit the proposals to their
governing and legislative organs;
12. Also recommends that the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
continue to review at the regular meetings of their governing bodies the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
13. Recalls the adoption by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean of its
resolution 574 (XXVII) of 16 May 1998, 138 calling for the necessary mechanisms for its associate members,
including Non-Self-Governing Territories, to participate in the special sessions of the General Assembly, subject to
the rules of procedure of the Assembly, to review and assess the implementation of the plans of action of those
United Nations world conferences in which the Territories originally participated in the capacity of observer, and in
the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies;
14. Requests the Chair of the Special Committee to continue to maintain close contact on these matters with
the President of the Economic and Social Council;
15. Recalls the publication by the Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs
of the Secretariat, in consultation with the United Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and
the Special Committee, of an information leaflet on assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, which was updated for the United Nations website on decolonization, and requests its continued
updating and wide dissemination;
16. Welcomes the continuing efforts made by the United Nations Development Programme in maintaining
close liaison among the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, including the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific, and in providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
17. Encourages the Non-Self-Governing Territories to take steps to establish and/or strengthen disaster
preparedness and management institutions and policies, inter alia, with the assistance of the relevant specialized
agencies;
18. Requests the administering Powers concerned to facilitate, when appropriate, the participation of
appointed and elected representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the relevant meetings and conferences of
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with relevant
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations, including resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and
the Special Committee on specific Territories, so that the Territories may benefit from the related activities of those
agencies and organizations;
19. Recommends that all Governments intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system of which they are members to accord priority to the question of
providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies, with the assistance of those agencies and
organizations, a report on the action taken in implementation of the relevant resolutions, including the present
resolution, since the circulation of his previous report;

_______________
138

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 21 (E/1998/41), sect. III.G.

307

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

21. Commends the Economic and Social Council for its debate and resolution on this question, and requests
it to continue to consider, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for the coordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in
implementing the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
22. Requests the specialized agencies to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the present resolution;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the governing bodies of the
appropriate specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations so that those
bodies may take the measures necessary to implement it, and also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
24. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/90
A/RES/68/90

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/432, para. 7)139

68/90.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/128 of 18 December 2012,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 140 prepared pursuant to its resolution 845 (IX) of
22 November 1954,
Conscious of the importance of promoting the educational advancement of the inhabitants of Non-SelfGoverning Territories,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion of offers of scholarships is essential in order to meet
the increasing need of students from Non-Self-Governing Territories for educational and training assistance, and
considering that students in those Territories should be encouraged to avail themselves of such offers,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;140

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained self-government or independence and, wherever possible,
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective measures to ensure the widespread and continuous
dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training
facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such
offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
_______________
139

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Argentina, China, Cuba, Egypt,
El Salvador, Ghana, Singapore, Thailand and United Republic of Tanzania.
140
A/68/66 and Add.1.

308

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/91
A/RES/68/91

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/433, para. 26)141

68/91.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western Sahara,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people concerned and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and other
resolutions of the Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/129 of 18 December 2012,
Recalling also all resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council on the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling further Security Council resolutions 658 (1990) of 27 June 1990, 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991,
1359 (2001) of 29 June 2001, 1429 (2002) of 30 July 2002, 1495 (2003) of 31 July 2003, 1541 (2004) of 29 April
2004, 1570 (2004) of 28 October 2004, 1598 (2005) of 28 April 2005, 1634 (2005) of 28 October 2005, 1675 (2006) of
28 April 2006 and 1720 (2006) of 31 October 2006,
Underlining the adoption of Security Council resolutions 1754 (2007) on 30 April 2007, 1783 (2007) on
31 October 2007, 1813 (2008) on 30 April 2008, 1871 (2009) on 30 April 2009, 1920 (2010) on 30 April 2010,
1979 (2011) on 27 April 2011, 2044 (2012) on 24 April 2012 and 2099 (2013) on 25 April 2013,
Expressing its satisfaction that the parties met on 18 and 19 June 2007, on 10 and 11 August 2007, from 7 to
9 January 2008 and from 16 to 18 March 2008 under the auspices of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara and in the presence of the neighbouring countries and that they have agreed to continue the
negotiations,
Also expressing its satisfaction at the holding of nine informal meetings convened by the Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General on 9 and 10 August 2009 in Dürnstein, Austria, on 10 and 11 February 2010 in Westchester
County, New York, United States of America, from 7 to 10 November 2010, from 16 to 18 December 2010 and
from 21 to 23 January 2011, all on Long Island, New York, from 7 to 9 March 2011 in Mellieha, Malta, from 5 to
7 June 2011 and from 19 to 21 July 2011, both on Long Island, and from 11 to 13 March 2012 in Manhasset,
New York, to prepare for the fifth round of negotiations,
Calling upon all the parties and the States of the region to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General and his
Personal Envoy and with each other,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations towards the people of Western Sahara,
Welcoming, in this regard, the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy in search of a mutually
acceptable political solution to the dispute, which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2013,142
_______________
141
142

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23), chap. VIII.

309

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General,143
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;143

2. Supports the process of negotiations initiated by Security Council resolution 1754 (2007) and further
sustained by Council resolutions 1783 (2007), 1813 (2008), 1871 (2009), 1920 (2010), 1979 (2011), 2044 (2012)
and 2099 (2013), with a view to achieving a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, which will
provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, and commends the efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara in this respect;
3. Welcomes the commitment of the parties to continue to show political will and work in an atmosphere
propitious for dialogue, in order to enter into a more intensive phase of negotiations, in good faith and without
preconditions, noting efforts and developments since 2006, thus ensuring implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1754 (2007), 1783 (2007), 1813 (2008), 1871 (2009), 1920 (2010), 1979 (2011), 2044 (2012) and
2099 (2013) and the success of negotiations;
4. Also welcomes the ongoing negotiations between the parties held on 18 and 19 June 2007, on 10 and
11 August 2007, from 7 to 9 January 2008 and from 16 to 18 March 2008 in the presence of the neighbouring
countries and under the auspices of the United Nations;
5. Calls upon the parties to cooperate with the International Committee of the Red Cross, and calls upon
them to abide by their obligations under international humanitarian law;
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/92
A/RES/68/92

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/433, para. 26)144

68/92.

Question of New Caledonia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2013
relating to New Caledonia,145
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New Caledonia by the French authorities, in
cooperation with all sectors of the population, to promote political, economic and social development in the
Territory, including measures in the area of environmental protection and action with respect to drug abuse and
trafficking, in order to provide a framework for its peaceful progress to self-determination,
_______________
143

A/68/330.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
145
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23), chap. IX.
144

310

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and social development, as well as
continued dialogue among the parties involved in New Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination
of New Caledonia,
Recalling the report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples on the situation of Kanak
people in New Caledonia, submitted to the Human Rights Council at its eighteenth session, held from 12 to
30 September and on 21 October 2011,146 following his visit to the Territory in February 2011,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia and neighbouring countries of
the South Pacific region,
Recalling, in this regard, the conclusions of the eighteenth Melanesian Spearhead Group Leaders Summit,
held in Suva on 31 March 2011, in particular the recommendations for the annual monitoring and assessment of the
Nouméa Accord,147
Welcoming the exchange of letters between the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the
Melanesian Spearhead Group secretariat on the sharing of information on New Caledonia,
1. Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework for the peaceful progress of the
Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all options are open and which would safeguard the rights of
all sectors of the population, according to the letter and the spirit of the Nouméa Accord,147 which is based on the
principle that it is for the populations of New Caledonia to choose how to control their destiny;
2. Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people of New Caledonia, to maintain, within the
framework of the Nouméa Accord, their dialogue in a spirit of harmony, and in this context welcomes again the
unanimous agreement, reached in Paris on 8 December 2008, on the transfer of powers to New Caledonia in 2009;
3. Notes that, at its tenth meeting, held on 6 December 2012, the Committee of Signatories of the Nouméa
Accord approved the programme of work for 2013 of the steering committee on the institutional future of
New Caledonia, which covered sovereign powers and the legal framework for the final phase of the Nouméa
Accord, and requested the mission responsible for considering the institutional future of New Caledonia to create
model simulations of the various major hypotheses for the institutional future of New Caledonia and to map the
exercise of sovereign powers according to the major options that could be envisaged depending on the outcome of
the referendum held pursuant to the Nouméa Accord;
4. Also notes that, at the tenth meeting of the Committee of Signatories of the Nouméa Accord, participants
expressed the view that greater support from the administering Power was needed, especially in areas that were both
essential and highly technical, and that, to that end, an interministerial standing committee was established;
5.

Further notes that, at its tenth meeting, the Committee of Signatories of the Nouméa Accord, inter alia:

(a) Decided to establish a working group within the steering committee to assess progress under the
Nouméa Accord, in order to discuss ways to reconcile realignment among provinces, economic development,
infrastructure levels and geographical distribution of the population, and that the outcome of the deliberations of the
working group would be presented in September 2013;
(b) Welcomed the conclusion of the analysis and discussion relating to the development of a strategic
framework for the nickel industry during the meeting of the industrial strategic committee held on 21 November 2012;
(c) Noted the concern expressed regarding security problems in the Territory, and took note of the pledge
made by the administering Power to focus on ensuring an adequate presence of public security forces, strengthening
the recruitment of New Caledonians and supporting initiatives by the institutions of the Territory relating to crime
prevention and social cohesion;
(d) Urged all stakeholders to implement the recommendations made in the assessment report on the “Cadres
for the Future” programme, with a view to redressing the geographical imbalance and implementing a strategic shift
designed to ensure training to fill the posts created as a result of the transfer of powers, as well as senior posts in the
private sector;
_______________
146
147

A/HRC/18/35/Add.6, annex.
A/AC.109/2114, annex.

311

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

6. Takes note of the decision to present and implement, in 2013, concrete measures to ensure significant
progress in the representation of New Caledonians, especially Kanaks, in the performance of the sovereign
functions of the State civil service;
7. Also takes note of the information presented to the Caribbean regional seminar, held in Quito from 28 to
30 May 2013, to the effect that preparations for the referendum on self-determination to be held between 2014 and
2018, namely, the completion and review of the electoral rolls constituting the special electorates, were currently
under way;
8. Notes, in this regard, the concern expressed by members of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
participating in the 2013 Caribbean regional seminar regarding the problems recently encountered in the electoral
review process;
9. Reaffirms its resolution 67/125 of 18 December 2012, in which, inter alia, the General Assembly
reaffirmed that, in the absence of a decision by the Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained
a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that
Territory;
10. Notes the continuing concerns expressed by the Kanak people regarding their underrepresentation in
governmental and social structures, incessant migratory flows and the impact of mining on the environment;
11. Recalls the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
rights of indigenous peoples on the situation of Kanak people in New Caledonia,146 made in the light of relevant
international standards, to assist with ongoing efforts to advance the rights of the Kanak people in the context of the
implementation of the Nouméa Accord and the United Nations-supported decolonization process;
12. Notes the financial assistance rendered by the Government of France to the Territory in such areas as
health, education, payment of public-service salaries and funding of development schemes;
13. Also notes the positive initiatives aimed at protecting the natural environment of New Caledonia,
including the “Zonéco” operation designed to map and evaluate marine resources within the economic zone of
New Caledonia;
14. Welcomes the cooperation among Australia, France and New Zealand in terms of surveillance of fishing
zones, in accordance with the wishes expressed by France during successive France-Oceania Summits;
15. Recalls the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the effect that New Caledonia may become a
member or associate member of certain international organizations, and notes the continuing strengthening of ties
between New Caledonia and both the European Union and the European Development Fund;
16. Also recalls the second visit to New Caledonia, conducted from 13 to 18 August 2012, by the
Melanesian Spearhead Group high-level ministerial mission;
17. Welcomes the decision of the Melanesian Spearhead Group to appoint the Front de libération nationale
kanak socialiste as its next Chair and the opening, in February 2013, of the Front de libération nationale kanak
socialiste unit at the headquarters of the Group secretariat in Port Vila;
18. Acknowledges the contribution of the Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre to the protection of the
indigenous Kanak culture of New Caledonia;
19. Welcomes the cooperative attitude of other States and Territories in the region towards New Caledonia,
its economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international affairs;
20. Also welcomes the appointment, in April 2012, of the first delegate for New Caledonia at the Embassy of
France in New Zealand, in accordance with the convention, signed on 26 January 2012, relating to the hosting of
New Caledonian delegates in the French diplomatic and consular missions in the Pacific region;
21. Further welcomes the actions taken by the administering Power to continue to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral information as required under Article 73 e of the Charter;
312

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

22. Notes the agreement between the signatories to the Nouméa Accord that the progress made in the
emancipation process shall be brought to the attention of the United Nations;
23. Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New Caledonia as a result of the
signing of the Nouméa Accord;
24. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of the question of the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of New Caledonia and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/93
A/RES/68/93

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/433, para. 26)148

68/93.

Question of French Polynesia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of French Polynesia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2013
relating to French Polynesia,149
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in
accordance with all relevant resolutions, including its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV)
of 15 December 1960,
Recalling its resolution 67/265 of 17 May 2013, entitled “Self-determination of French Polynesia”, in which
the General Assembly affirmed the inalienable right of the people of French Polynesia to self-determination and
independence in accordance with Chapter XI of the Charter and its resolution 1514 (XV), recognized that French
Polynesia remains a Non-Self-Governing Territory within the meaning of the Charter and declared that an
obligation exists under Article 73 e of the Charter on the part of the Government of France, as the administering
Power of the Territory, to transmit information on French Polynesia,
Expressing concern that 53 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,150 there still remain a number of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned, on a case-by-case basis and in conformity
with the clearly defined principles contained in resolutions 1514 (XV), 1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of
the Assembly,
Recognizing also that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the peoples of the Territories require
flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case basis,
Conscious of the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the
Declaration in respect of French Polynesia,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the
peoples of the Territories and to fulfil its mandate effectively, on a case-by-case basis, it is important for it to be
apprised by the administering Powers and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the
representatives of the Territories, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territories,
_______________
148

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
149
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23), chap. IX.
150
Resolution 1514 (XV).

313

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing the significant health and environmental impacts of nuclear testing conducted by the
administering Power in the Territory over a 30-year period, and further recognizing the concerns in the Territory
related to the consequences of those activities on the lives and health of the people, especially children and
vulnerable groups, as well as the environment of the region,
Recognizing also the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the peoples of the Territories in gaining a better
understanding of the options for self-determination,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of French Polynesia to self-determination, in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of French Polynesia to determine freely their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the
territorial Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education
programmes for the Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of French Polynesia of their right to
self-determination in conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined
in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the
Declaration and in order to advise the Special Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b
of the Charter on efforts to promote self-government in French Polynesia, and encourages the administering Power to
facilitate visiting and special missions to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of France to intensify its dialogue with French Polynesia in order to
facilitate rapid progress towards a fair and effective self-determination process, under which the terms and timelines
for an act of self-determination would be agreed;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with relevant specialized agencies of the United Nations,
to compile a report on the environmental, ecological, health and other impacts as a consequence of the 30-year
period of nuclear testing in the Territory;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of French Polynesia and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/94
A/RES/68/94

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/433, para. 26)151

68/94.

Question of Tokelau

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Tokelau,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2013
relating to Tokelau,152
_______________
151

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
152
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23), chap. XI.

314

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Non-Self-Governing Territories, in particular General Assembly resolution 67/131 of 18 December 2012,
Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand as the administering Power
with regard to the work of the Special Committee relating to Tokelau and its readiness to permit access by United
Nations visiting missions to the Territory,
Noting with appreciation also the collaborative contribution to the development of Tokelau by New Zealand
and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme,
Noting that, as a small island Territory, Tokelau exemplifies the situation of most remaining Non-SelfGoverning Territories and that, as a case study pointing to successful cooperation for decolonization, Tokelau has
wider significance for the United Nations as it seeks to complete its work in decolonization,
Noting also the status of Tokelau as an associate member of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations,
Recalling that New Zealand and Tokelau signed on 21 November 2003 a document entitled “Joint statement
of the principles of partnership”, which sets out the rights and responsibilities of the two partners,
Bearing in mind the decision of the General Fono at its meeting in November 2003, following extensive
consultations undertaken in all three villages, to explore formally with New Zealand the option of self-government
in free association and its decision in August 2005 to hold in February 2006 a referendum on self-determination on
the basis of a draft constitution for Tokelau and a draft treaty of free association with New Zealand, and its
subsequent decision to hold a further referendum in October 2007, and that the two referendums did not produce the
two-thirds majority of the valid votes cast required by the General Fono to change the status of Tokelau from that of
a Non-Self-Governing Territory under the administration of New Zealand,
1. Acknowledges the decision of the General Fono in 2008 that consideration of any future act of selfdetermination by Tokelau will be deferred and that New Zealand and Tokelau will devote renewed effort and
attention to ensuring that essential services and infrastructure on the atolls of Tokelau are enhanced and
strengthened, thereby ensuring an enhanced quality of life for the people of Tokelau;
2. Welcomes the progress made towards the devolution of power to the three taupulega (village councils)
since 2004, and notes that further discussion is planned on the recommendations of the report on the devolution
review, compiled in 2012;
3. Notes that Tokelau and New Zealand remain firmly committed to the ongoing development of Tokelau
for the long-term benefit of the people of Tokelau, with particular emphasis on the further development of facilities
on each atoll that meet their current requirements;
4. Acknowledges the adoption by Tokelau of its National Strategic Plan for 2010–2015 and that the Joint
Commitment for Development between Tokelau and New Zealand 2011–2015 will focus on a viable transportation
arrangement, infrastructure development, human resources capacity and the strengthening of governance;
5. Also acknowledges the ongoing and consistent commitment of New Zealand to meeting the social and
economic requirements of the people of Tokelau, including the completion of the Tokelau Renewable Energy
Project and a new shipping charter service, as well as the support and cooperation of the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Health Organization;
6. Further acknowledges Tokelau’s need for continued support from the international community and
Tokelau’s desire to be able to gain access to resources from international organizations, such as the Global Environment
Facility, and for active membership in such organizations as the Alliance of Small Island States and the International
Renewable Energy Agency, in line with General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970;
7. Recalls with satisfaction the establishment and operation of the Tokelau International Trust Fund to
support the ongoing needs of Tokelau, and calls upon Member States and international and regional agencies to
contribute to the Fund and thereby lend practical support to Tokelau in overcoming the problems of smallness,
isolation and lack of resources;
315

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

8. Welcomes the cooperative attitude of the other States and territories in the region towards Tokelau and
their support for its economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international
affairs;
9. Calls upon the administering Power and United Nations agencies to continue to provide assistance to
Tokelau as it further develops;
10. Welcomes the actions taken by the administering Power to transmit to the Secretary-General under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations information regarding the political, economic and social situation
of Tokelau;
11. Also welcomes the commitment of both Tokelau and New Zealand to continue to work together in the
interests of Tokelau and its people;
12. Commends the completion of the first phase of the Tokelau Renewable Energy Project with the support
of the administering Power;
13. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine the question of the NonSelf-Governing Territory of Tokelau and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTIONS 68/95 A and B
A/RES/68/95AandB

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/433, para. 26)153

68/95.

Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands,
Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands
A
GENERAL

The General Assembly,
Having considered the questions of the Non-Self-Governing Territories of American Samoa, Anguilla,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands, hereinafter referred to as “the Territories”,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
for 2013,154
Recalling all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to those Territories, including, in
particular, the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session on the individual Territories
covered by the present resolutions,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
_______________
153

The draft resolutions recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee were submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
154
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23), chap. X.

316

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling its resolution 1541 (XV), containing the principles that should guide Member States in determining
whether or not an obligation exists to transmit the information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Expressing concern that 53 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,155 there still remain a number of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Conscious of the importance of continuing effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second156 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the peoples of the Territories require
flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to
territorial size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Noting the stated position of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the stated position of the Government of the United States of America on the Non-Self-Governing Territories
under their administration,
Noting also the constitutional developments in some Non-Self-Governing Territories affecting the internal
structure of governance about which the Special Committee has received information,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Convinced also that any negotiations to determine the status of a Territory must take place with the active
involvement and participation of the people of that Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-bycase basis, and that the views of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in respect of their right to selfdetermination should be ascertained,
Noting that a number of Non-Self-Governing Territories have expressed concern at the procedure followed by
some administering Powers, contrary to the wishes of the Territories themselves, of amending or enacting legislation
for application to the Territories, either through orders in council, in order to apply to the Territories the international
treaty obligations of the administering Power, or through the unilateral application of laws and regulations,
Aware of the importance of the international financial services and tourism sectors for the economies of some
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that United Nations visiting and special missions provide an effective means of ascertaining the
situation in the Territories, that some Territories have not received a United Nations visiting mission for a long time
and that no visiting missions have been sent to some of the Territories, and considering the possibility of sending
further visiting missions to the Territories at an appropriate time, in consultation with the relevant administering
Powers and in accordance with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations on decolonization,
Mindful also that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the
peoples of the Territories and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the relevant
administering Powers and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the representatives of the
Territories, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories,
Acknowledging the regular transmission by the administering Powers to the Secretary-General of information
called for under Article 73 e of the Charter,
_______________
155
156

Resolution 1514 (XV).
A/56/61, annex.

317

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware of the importance both to the Territories and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected
and appointed representatives of the Territories in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the peoples of the Territories in gaining a better
understanding of the options for self-determination,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate, and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Noting the stated positions of the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories before the Special
Committee and at its regional seminars,
Welcoming the 2013 Caribbean regional seminar held by the Special Committee in Quito from 28 to 30 May
2013, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess the progress made in the
decolonization process and to review the Committee’s existing working methods and renew its momentum in
implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee 157 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including,
especially, the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General
Assembly of the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the Territories to natural disasters and environmental degradation,
and in that connection bearing in mind the applicability to the Territories of the programmes of action or outcome
documents of all United Nations world conferences and special sessions of the General Assembly in the economic
and social spheres,
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme,
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and the Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, the Caribbean
Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the agencies of the
Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Recalling the statement made by the representative of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean at the Caribbean regional seminar held in Kingstown from 31 May to 2 June 2011 that all six Caribbean
Non-Self-Governing Territories are active associate members of the Commission,
Aware that the Human Rights Committee, as part of its mandate under the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,158 reviews the status of the self-determination process, including in small island Territories under
examination by the Special Committee,
Recalling the ongoing efforts of the Special Committee in carrying out a critical review of its work with the
aim of making appropriate and constructive recommendations and decisions to attain its objectives in accordance
with its mandate,
Recognizing that the annual working papers prepared by the Secretariat on developments in each of the small
Territories, 159 as well as the substantive documentation and information furnished by experts, scholars, nongovernmental organizations and other sources, have provided important inputs to update the present resolutions,
_______________
157

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
159
A/AC.109/2013/3-13.
158

318

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on the Second International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism,160
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to selfdetermination, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization, there is no alternative to the principle of selfdetermination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the peoples of the Territories themselves to determine freely
their future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and in that connection reiterates its long-standing call for the administering
Powers, in cooperation with the territorial Governments and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to
develop political education programmes for the Territories in order to foster an awareness among the people of their
right to self-determination in conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly
defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Stresses the importance of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples being apprised of the views and
wishes of the peoples of the Territories and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and
scope of the existing political and constitutional arrangements between the Non-Self-Governing Territories and their
respective administering Powers;
5. Requests the administering Powers to continue to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General
information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter;
6. Calls upon the administering Powers to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Special Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to
promote self-government in the Territories, and encourages the administering Powers to facilitate visiting and
special missions to the Territories;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territories, and, as a priority, to mitigate the effects of
the current global financial crisis where possible, in consultation with the territorial Governments concerned,
towards the strengthening and diversification of their respective economies;
8. Requests the Territories and the administering Powers to take all measures necessary to protect and
conserve the environment of the Territories against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized
agencies concerned to continue to monitor environmental conditions in the Territories and to provide assistance to
those Territories, consistent with their prevailing rules of procedure;
9. Welcomes the participation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in regional activities, including the
work of regional organizations;
10. Stresses the importance of implementing the plans of action for the Second156 and Third International
Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism, in particular by expediting the application of the work programme for
the decolonization of each Non-Self-Governing Territory, on a case-by-case basis, as well as by ensuring that
periodic analyses are undertaken of the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration in each
Territory, and that the working papers prepared by the Secretariat on each Territory should fully reflect
developments in those Territories;
11. Urges Member States to contribute to the efforts of the United Nations to usher in a world free of
colonialism within the context of the International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism, and calls upon them
to continue to give their full support to the Special Committee in its endeavours towards that noble goal;
_______________
160

A/65/330 and Add.1.

319

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

12. Stresses the importance of the various constitutional exercises in the respective Territories administered
by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, and led by the
territorial Governments, designed to address internal constitutional structures within the present territorial
arrangements, and decides to follow closely the developments concerning the future political status of those
Territories;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report to the General Assembly on a regular basis on the
implementation of decolonization resolutions adopted since the declaration of the Third International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism;
14. Reiterates its request that the Human Rights Committee collaborate with the Special Committee, within
the framework of its mandate on the right to self determination as contained in the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights,158 with the aim of exchanging information, given that the Human Rights Committee is
mandated to review the situation, including political and constitutional developments, in many of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories that are within the purview of the Special Committee;
15. Requests the Special Committee to continue to collaborate with the Economic and Social Council and its
relevant subsidiary intergovernmental bodies, within the framework of their respective mandates, with the aim of
exchanging information on developments in those Non-Self-Governing Territories which are reviewed by those
bodies;
16. Also requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session and on the implementation of the
present resolution.
B
INDIVIDUAL TERRITORIES
The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
I
American Samoa
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on American Samoa161 and other relevant
information,
Recalling the statement made by the representative of the Governor of American Samoa at the Pacific regional
seminar held in Quito from 30 May to 1 June 2012 that the Territory’s position that it should be removed from the
United Nations list of the Non-Self-Governing Territories continued to hold, that it was time to make political and
economic progress while respecting the concerns of the administering Power and the United Nations, and that there
was a need for a more structured approach to determine the will of the people with a detailed workplan on how best
to gauge the will of the people on political status,
Aware that, under United States law, the Secretary of the Interior has administrative jurisdiction over American
Samoa,162
Recalling the position of the administering Power and the statements made by representatives of American
Samoa at regional seminars, including at the 2011 Caribbean regional seminar, inviting the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to send a visiting mission to the Territory,
_______________
161

A/AC.109/2013/11.
United States Congress, 1929 (48 U.S.C. Sec. 1661, 45 Stat. 1253), and Secretary’s Order 2657, Department of the Interior, United
States of America, 1951, as amended.

162

320

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware of the work of the Future Political Status Study Commission, completed in 2006, the release of its
report, with recommendations, in January 2007 and the creation of the American Samoa Constitutional Review
Committee in the Territory, as well as the holding in June 2010 of American Samoa’s fourth Constitutional
Convention,
Noting, in that regard, the statement made by the representative of the Governor of American Samoa at the
2012 Pacific regional seminar and previous policy papers presented to the Special Committee stating that, against a
backdrop of a decades-long popular preference for integration with the United States of America, the Territory
wished to move forward on political status, local autonomy and self-governance issues, as well as remarks made by
the Governor and the United States Congressman representing American Samoa, in 2012, on the issue of reviewing
the relationship of the Territory with the United States and looking at options to become more independent,
including a compact of free association agreement,
Noting also the holding of elections in the Territory in November 2012,
Acknowledging the indication by the territorial Government, including at the 2012 Pacific regional seminar,
that the effects of certain federal laws on the economy of the Territory give serious cause for concern,
Aware that in July 2012, the United States passed Public Law 112-149, which includes a provision to delay the
minimum wage increases in American Samoa, as provided by United States Public Law 110-28, until September 2015,
Aware also that American Samoa continues to be the only United States Territory to receive financial
assistance from the administering Power for the operations of the territorial Government,
1. Welcomes the work of the territorial Government with respect to moving forward on political status,
local autonomy and self-governance issues with a view to making political and economic progress;
2. Expresses once again its appreciation for the invitation extended in 2011 by the Governor of American
Samoa to the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to send a visiting mission to the Territory, calls upon
the administering Power to facilitate such a mission if the territorial Government so desires, and requests the Chair
of the Special Committee to take all the steps necessary to that end;
3. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning a public
awareness programme, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter of the United Nations, and in that regard calls
upon the relevant United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
4. Calls upon the administering Power to assist the territorial Government in the diversification and
sustainability of the economy of the Territory and to address employment and cost-of-living issues;
II
Anguilla
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Anguilla163 and other relevant information,
Recalling the holding of the 2003 Caribbean regional seminar in Anguilla, hosted by the territorial
Government and made possible by the administering Power, the first time that the seminar had been held in a NonSelf-Governing Territory,
Recalling also the statement made by the representative of Anguilla at the Pacific regional seminar held in
Quito from 30 May to 1 June 2012 that the people of the Territory are concerned that they are being denied the full
range of decolonization options while the territorial Government seeks a comprehensive overhaul of the current
Constitution, in particular a serious reduction in the powers of the Governor under a drafting exercise that began
in 2011,
Aware of the follow-up meeting, held after the 2012 Pacific regional seminar, between the Chair of the Special
Committee and the Chief Minister of Anguilla, who reiterated the urgent need for a visiting mission,
_______________
163

A/AC.109/2013/5.

321

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting the internal constitutional review process resumed by the territorial Government in 2006, the work of
the Constitutional and Electoral Reform Commission, which prepared its report in August 2006, the holding of
public and other consultative meetings in 2007 on proposed constitutional amendments to be presented to the
administering Power and the decisions taken in 2008 and 2011 to set up a drafting team to prepare a new
constitution and present it for public consultation in the Territory,
Aware of certain difficulties and tensions in the relations between the territorial Government and the
administering Power regarding budgetary and economic matters,
Noting the participation of the Territory as a member in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories
Council and an associate member in the Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean,
Aware of the willingness expressed by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and the Caribbean
Community to assist in the resolution of difficulties being experienced by the territorial Government in respect of its
relations with the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
1. Welcomes the preparations made for a new constitution, and urges that constitutional discussions with
the administering Power, including public consultations, be concluded as soon as possible;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory in its current efforts with regard to advancing the
internal constitutional review exercise, if requested;
3. Notes the expression of grave concern by the Caribbean Community at the tension between the
administering Power and the territorial Government and the deterioration in the Territory’s governance
arrangements;
4. Stresses the importance of the previously expressed desire of the territorial Government for a visiting
mission by the Special Committee, calls upon the administering Power to facilitate such a mission, if the territorial
Government so desires, and requests the Chair of the Special Committee to take all the necessary steps to that end;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
consultative outreach efforts consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to assist the territorial Government in strengthening its
commitments in the economic domain, including budgetary matters, with regional support as needed and
appropriate;
7. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
III
Bermuda
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Bermuda164 and other relevant information,
Aware of the statement made by the representative of Bermuda at the Pacific regional seminar held in Quito
from 30 May to 1 June 2012,
Conscious of the different viewpoints of the political parties on the future status of the Territory, and noting the
results of successive surveys by local media, according to which a majority of respondents did not wish to sever ties
with the United Kingdom, the administering Power, and a minority was in favour of independence,
Recalling the dispatch of the United Nations special mission to Bermuda in 2005, at the request of the
territorial Government and with the concurrence of the administering Power, which provided information to the
people of the Territory on the role of the United Nations in the process of self-determination, on the legitimate

_______________
164

322

A/AC.109/2013/6.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

political status options as clearly defined in General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and on
the experiences of other small States that have achieved a full measure of self-government,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory and of
Bermuda’s associate membership in the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean,
1. Stresses the importance of the 2005 report of the Bermuda Independence Commission, which provides a
thorough examination of the facts surrounding independence, and continues to regret that the plans for public
meetings and the presentation of a Green Paper to the House of Assembly followed by a White Paper outlining the
policy proposals for an independent Bermuda have so far not materialized;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Welcomes the entry of Bermuda as an associate member of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean in 2012;
IV
British Virgin Islands
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the British Virgin Islands165 and other relevant
information,
Noting the statement made by the representative of the British Virgin Islands at the Caribbean regional
seminar held in Quito from 28 to 30 May 2013, that while the Territory’s relationship with the administering Power
was stable and not problematic, it could be enhanced,
Aware of the negative impact of the global economic slowdown on the growth of the financial and tourism
services sectors of the Territory,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory and of the
Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
1. Recalls the 2007 Constitution of the British Virgin Islands, and stresses the importance of continued
discussions on constitutional matters, to accord greater responsibility to the territorial Government for the effective
implementation of the Constitution and increased levels of education relating to constitutional matters;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
4. Recalls the holding, in 2012, of the meeting of the Inter-Virgin Islands Council between the Territory
and the United States Virgin Islands;
V
Cayman Islands
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the Cayman Islands166 and other relevant
information,
Conscious of the statement made by the representative of the territorial Government at the 2010 Pacific
regional seminar held in Nouméa,
_______________
165
166

A/AC.109/2013/9.
A/AC.109/2013/8.

323

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware of the work, in accordance with the 2009 Constitution, of the new Constitutional Commission, which
serves as an advisory body on constitutional matters,
Acknowledging that, in spite of the global economic downturn and unemployment issues, the financial
services and stay-over tourism industries of the Territory reportedly grew in 2012, indicating a mild economic
recovery, and recognizing the establishment of the Territory’s first special economic zone,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory and of the
Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
1. Recalls the 2009 Constitution of the Cayman Islands, and stresses the importance of the work of the
Constitutional Commission, including its work on human rights education;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
awareness outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
4. Also welcomes the efforts made by the territorial Government to implement financial sector
management policies, medical and sports tourism initiatives and unemployment alleviation programmes in various
economic sectors, including through the establishment of special economic zones, economic diversification, and job
and investment opportunities;
VI
Guam
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Guam167 and other relevant information,
Noting the statement made by the representative of the Governor of Guam at the Caribbean regional seminar
held in Quito from 28 to 30 May 2013, presenting an update on Guam’s efforts towards decolonization and on the
engagement of the Guam Commission on Decolonization for the Implementation and Exercise of Chamorro SelfDetermination in reinforcing public awareness in order to address the limited and distorted understanding of
decolonization, finding creative ways to raise funds for the education programme and completing three task force
position papers so that they are easy for voters to compare, contrast and understand,
Cognizant of the efforts made by the Guam Commission on Decolonization to populate the decolonization
registry, as required by public law, and to enhance the ability to expediently register those who have not yet been
registered,
Aware that, under United States law, the relations between the territorial Government and the federal
Government in all matters that are not the programme responsibility of another federal department or agency are
under the general administrative supervision of the Secretary of the Interior,168
Recalling that, in a referendum held in 1987, the registered and eligible voters of Guam endorsed a draft
Guam Commonwealth Act that would establish a new framework for relations between the Territory and the
administering Power, providing for a greater measure of internal self-government for Guam and recognition of the
right of the Chamorro people of Guam to self-determination for the Territory,
Recalling also the requests by the elected representatives and non-governmental organizations of the Territory,
including at the 2012 Pacific regional seminar, that Guam not be removed from the list of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories with which the Special Committee is concerned, pending the self-determination of the Chamorro people
and taking into account their legitimate rights and interests,

_______________
167
168

324

A/AC.109/2013/13.
United States Congress, Organic Act of Guam, 1950, as amended.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware that negotiations between the administering Power and the territorial Government on the draft Guam
Commonwealth Act ended in 1997 and that Guam has subsequently established a non-binding plebiscite process for
a self-determination vote by the eligible Chamorro voters,
Cognizant of the importance of the administering Power continuing to implement its programme of
transferring surplus federal land to the Government of Guam,
Noting that the people of the Territory have called for reform in the programme of the administering Power
with respect to the thorough, unconditional and expeditious transfer of land property to the people of Guam,
Aware of the deep concern expressed by civil society and other parties regarding the potential social, cultural,
economic and environmental impacts of the planned transfer of additional military personnel of the administering
Power to the Territory and that the public assessment for the supplemental environmental impact statement was
completed in 2012,
Conscious that immigration into Guam has resulted in the indigenous Chamorros becoming a minority in their
homeland,
1. Welcomes the convening of the Guam Commission on Decolonization for the Implementation and
Exercise of Chamorro Self-Determination and its work on a self-determination vote, as well as its public education
efforts;
2. Calls once again upon the administering Power to take into consideration the expressed will of the
Chamorro people as supported by Guam voters in the referendum of 1987 and as subsequently provided for in
Guam law regarding Chamorro self-determination efforts, encourages the administering Power and the territorial
Government to enter into negotiations on the matter, and stresses the need for continued close monitoring of the
overall situation in the Territory;
3. Requests the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to transfer
land to the original landowners of the Territory, to continue to recognize and to respect the political rights and the
cultural and ethnic identity of the Chamorro people of Guam and to take all measures necessary to address the
concerns of the territorial Government with regard to the question of immigration;
4. Also requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating public outreach efforts,
including through the funding of the public education campaign, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in
that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested,
and welcomes the recent outreach work by the territorial Government;
5. Further requests the administering Power to cooperate in establishing programmes for the sustainable
development of the economic activities and enterprises of the Territory, noting the special role of the Chamorro
people in the development of Guam;
VII
Montserrat
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Montserrat169 and other relevant information,
Recalling the statement made by the Premier of Montserrat at the 2012 Pacific regional seminar held in Quito
that the current relationship with the administering Power was one made by free choice and that the Territory should
be removed from the list of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Recalling also the statements made by the members of the Special Committee present at the 2012 Pacific
regional seminar and the clarification made by the Secretariat regarding United Nations procedures in that regard,
Taking note of the communication addressed to the Chair of the Special Committee by the opposition leader of
Montserrat expressing concern that the Premier had no prior discussion with the legislature of Montserrat over the
content of his statement before requesting the Special Committee to remove the Territory from the list of the NonSelf-Governing Territories,

_______________
169

A/AC.109/2013/4.

325

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the approval of a new Constitution in 2010 and the work of the territorial Government to update the
relevant parts of the legislation of the Territory so that the Constitution could enter into force in 2011,
Aware that Montserrat continues to receive budgetary aid from the administering Power for the operation of
the territorial Government,
Recalling the statements made by participants at the 2012 Pacific regional seminar encouraging the
administering Power to commit sufficient resources to meet the special needs of the Territory,
Noting with concern the continuing consequences of the 1995 volcanic eruption, which led to the evacuation
of three quarters of the population of the Territory to safe areas of the island and to areas outside the Territory, which
continues to have enduring consequences for the economy of the island,
Acknowledging the continuing assistance provided to the Territory by States members of the Caribbean
Community, in particular Antigua and Barbuda, which has offered safe refuge and access to educational and health
facilities, as well as employment for thousands who have left the Territory,
Noting the continuing efforts of the administering Power and the territorial Government to deal with the
consequences of the volcanic eruption,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory and of the
Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
1. Recalls the 2011 Constitution of Montserrat and the work of the territorial Government with respect to
moving forward to consolidate the gains provided for in the Constitution;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Welcomes the Territory’s participation in the 2012 inauguration of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean
States Assembly, its steps towards accession to the economic union treaty of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean
States and its active participation in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean;
4. Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as regional and other organizations, to continue to provide assistance to the Territory in
alleviating the consequences of the volcanic eruption;
VIII
Pitcairn
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Pitcairn170 and other relevant information,
Taking into account the unique character of Pitcairn in terms of population, area and access,
Aware that the administering Power and the territorial Government have implemented a new governance
structure to strengthen administrative capacity in the Territory, based on consultations with the people of the
Territory, and that Pitcairn continues to receive budgetary aid from the administering Power for the operation of the
territorial Government,
Recalling that the administering Power and the Pitcairn Government are currently working on a five-year
strategic development plan for the island,
1. Welcomes all efforts by the administering Power and the territorial Government that would further
devolve operational responsibilities to the Territory, with a view to gradually expanding self-government, including
through training of local personnel;

_______________
170

326

A/AC.109/2013/3.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Also requests the administering Power to continue its assistance for the improvement of the economic,
social, educational and other conditions of the population of the Territory and to continue its discussions with the
territorial Government on how best to support socioeconomic and environmental security in Pitcairn;
4.
island;

Welcomes the work carried out on the preparation of a five-year strategic development plan for the

IX
Saint Helena
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Saint Helena 171 and other relevant
information,
Recalling the statement made by the representative of Saint Helena at the Caribbean regional seminar held in
Frigate Bay, Saint Kitts and Nevis, from 12 to 14 May 2009,
Taking into account the unique character of Saint Helena in terms of its population, geography and natural
resources,
Noting the fact that, in January 2013, following a resolution passed in September 2012 by the Legislative
Council to undertake minor adjustments to the 2009 Constitution of Saint Helena in order to provide improvements
to section 36, Election of elected members of Executive Council, and section 69, Public Accounts Committee, a
public consultation process was launched,
Aware of the proclamation dissolving the Legislative Council on 19 April 2013 and that a general election was
held in July 2013,
Cognizant that Saint Helena continues to receive budgetary aid from the administering Power for the
operation of the territorial Government,
Aware of the efforts of the administering Power and the territorial Government to improve the socioeconomic
conditions of the population of Saint Helena, in particular in the areas of employment and transport and
communications infrastructure,
Noting the efforts of the Territory to address Saint Helena’s demands on its labour market over the next
10 years, including through the Labour Market Strategy for the period 2012–2014, the Sustainable Economic
Development Plan 2012/13–2021/22 and the new National Strategy for the Development of Statistics,
Noting also the importance of improving the infrastructure and accessibility of Saint Helena and, in that
regard, the approval of the administering Power of the building of an airport on the island of Saint Helena,
1. Stresses the importance of the Territory’s 2009 Constitution, and takes note of proposals to promote the
further development of democratic and good governance;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Requests the administering Power and relevant international organizations to continue to support the
efforts of the territorial Government to address the Territory’s socioeconomic development challenges;
4. Calls upon the administering Power to take into account the unique geographical character of Saint
Helena while resolving any emerging issues related to the construction of the airport;

_______________
171

A/AC.109/2013/7.

327

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

X
Turks and Caicos Islands
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the Turks and Caicos Islands172 and other
relevant information,
Recalling the statement made by the representative of the Turks and Caicos Islands at the 2009 Caribbean
regional seminar held in Frigate Bay, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Recalling also the dispatch of the United Nations special mission to the Turks and Caicos Islands in 2006 at
the request of the territorial Government and with the concurrence of the administering Power,
Aware of the 2002 report of the Constitutional Modernization Review Body, and acknowledging the 2006
Constitution of the Turks and Caicos Islands agreed upon between the administering Power and the territorial
Government,
Noting the decision of the administering Power to suspend parts of the 2006 Constitution, the subsequent
presentation of a draft constitution for public consultation in 2011 and the introduction of a new constitution for the
Territory, as well as the election of a new territorial Government in November 2012,
Acknowledging the impact that the global economic slowdown and other relevant developments have had on
tourism and related real estate development, the mainstays of the economy of the Territory,
1. Notes with grave concern the ongoing situation in the Turks and Caicos Islands, and notes the efforts of
the administering Power to restore good governance, including through the introduction in 2011 of a new
constitution and the holding of elections in November 2012, and sound financial management in the Territory;
2. Notes the positions and repeated calls of the Caribbean Community and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries in support of a democratically elected territorial Government;
3. Also notes the extensive public consultations undertaken by the Constitutional and Electoral Reform
Adviser and the continuing debate on constitutional and electoral reform within the Territory, and stresses the
importance of participation by all groups and interested parties in the consultation process;
4. Stresses the importance of having in place in the Territory a constitution that reflects the aspirations and
wishes of the people of the Territory, based on the mechanisms for popular consultation;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
6. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
7. Also welcomes the continuing efforts made by the territorial Government addressing the need for
attention to be paid to the enhancement of socioeconomic development across the Territory;
XI
United States Virgin Islands
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the United States Virgin Islands173 and other
relevant information,
Aware that under United States law the relations between the territorial Government and the federal
Government in all matters not the programme responsibility of another federal department or agency are under the
general administrative supervision of the Secretary of the Interior,174

_______________
172

A/AC.109/2013/12.
A/AC.109/2013/10.
174
United States Congress, Revised Organic Act, 1954.
173

328

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware also of the fifth attempt of the Territory to review the existing Revised Organic Act, which organizes its
internal governance arrangements, as well as its requests to the administering Power and the United Nations system
for assistance to its public education programme,
Cognizant that a draft constitution was proposed in 2009 and subsequently forwarded to the administering
Power, which in 2010 requested the Territory to consider its objections to the draft constitution,
Cognizant also that the Fifth Revision Convention, established and convened in 2012, was mandated to ratify
and approve the final revised draft constitution,
Noting the holding of elections in the Territory in November 2012,
Aware of the closing of the Hovensa plant, and noting the continuing negative impact on manufacturing and
on the labour situation in the Territory,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
1. Welcomes the proposal of a draft constitution emanating from the Territory in 2009, as a result of the
work of the United States Virgin Islands Fifth Constitutional Convention, for review by the administering Power,
and requests the administering Power to assist the territorial Government in achieving its political, economic and
social goals, in particular the successful conclusion of the ongoing internal Constitutional Convention exercise;
2. Requests the administering Power to facilitate the process for approval of the proposed territorial
constitution in the United States Congress and its implementation, once agreed upon in the Territory;
3. Also requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning a public
education programme, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard, calls upon the relevant United
Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
4.

Expresses its concern regarding the continuing negative impact of the Hovensa plant closure;

5. Reiterates its call for the inclusion of the Territory in regional programmes of the United Nations
Development Programme, consistent with the participation of other Non-Self-Governing Territories;
6. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
7. Recalls the holding, in 2012, of the meeting of the Inter-Virgin Islands Council between the Territory
and the British Virgin Islands.
RESOLUTION 68/96
A/RES/68/96

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/433,
para. 26),175 by a recorded vote of 178 to 3, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,

_______________
175

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

329

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: France

68/96.

Dissemination of information on decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2013
relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in
the field of decolonization,176
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 67/133 of
18 December 2012,
Recognizing the need for flexible, practical and innovative approaches towards reviewing the options of selfdetermination for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories with a view to implementing the plan of action for
the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Reiterating the importance of dissemination of information as an instrument for furthering the aims of the
Declaration, and mindful of the role of world public opinion in effectively assisting the peoples of Non-SelfGoverning Territories to achieve self-determination,
Recognizing the role played by the administering Powers in transmitting information to the Secretary-General
in accordance with the terms of Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing also the role of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, through the United
Nations information centres, in the dissemination of information at the regional level on the activities of the United
Nations,
Recalling the issuance by the Department of Public Information, in consultation with the United Nations
Development Programme, the specialized agencies and the Special Committee, of an information leaflet on
assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Aware of the role of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization,
1. Approves the activities in the field of dissemination of information on decolonization undertaken by the
Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization, and recalls with satisfaction the publication, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 61/129 of 14 December 2006, of the information leaflet on what the
United Nations can do to assist Non-Self-Governing Territories, which was updated for the United Nations website
on decolonization in May 2009, and encourages continued updating and wide dissemination of the information
leaflet;
2. Considers it important to continue and expand its efforts to ensure the widest possible dissemination of
information on decolonization, with particular emphasis on the options for self-determination available for the
peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories, and, to this end requests the Department of Public Information, through
the United Nations information centres in the relevant regions, to actively engage and seek new and innovative
ways to disseminate material to the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to further enhance the information provided on the United Nations
decolonization website and to continue to include the full series of reports of the regional seminars on
_______________
176

330

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23), chap. III.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

decolonization, the statements and scholarly papers presented at those seminars and links to the full series of reports
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Requests the Department of Public Information to continue its efforts to update web-based information
on the assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
5. Requests the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Public Information to implement the
recommendations of the Special Committee and to continue their efforts to take measures through all the media
available, including publications, radio and television, as well as the Internet, to give publicity to the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization and, inter alia:
(a) To develop procedures to collect, prepare and disseminate, particularly to the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, basic material on the issue of self-determination of the peoples of the Territories;
(b)

To seek the full cooperation of the administering Powers in the discharge of the tasks referred to above;

(c) To explore further the idea of a programme of collaboration with the decolonization focal points of
territorial Governments, particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean regions, to help to improve the exchange of
information;
(d) To encourage the involvement of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information
on decolonization;
(e) To encourage the involvement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the dissemination of
information on decolonization;
(f)

To report to the Special Committee on measures taken in the implementation of the present resolution;

6. Requests all States, including the administering Powers, to accelerate the dissemination of information
referred to in paragraph 2 above;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine this question and to report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/97
A/RES/68/97

Adopted at the 65th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/433,
para. 26),177 by a recorded vote of 178 to 3, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: France

_______________
177

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

331

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

68/97.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2013,178
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all its subsequent resolutions concerning the implementation
of the Declaration, the most recent of which was resolution 67/134 of 18 December 2012, as well as the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council,
Bearing in mind its resolution 65/119 of 10 December 2010, by which it declared the period 2011–2020 the
Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and the need to examine ways to ascertain the wishes
of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories on the basis of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions on decolonization,
Recognizing that the eradication of colonialism has been one of the priorities of the United Nations and
continues to be one of its priorities for the decade that began in 2011,
Regretting that measures to eliminate colonialism by 2010, as called for in its resolution 55/146 of
8 December 2000, have not been successful,
Reiterating its conviction of the need for the eradication of colonialism, as well as racial discrimination and
violations of basic human rights,
Noting with satisfaction the continued efforts of the Special Committee in contributing to the effective and
complete implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization,
Stressing the importance of the formal participation of the administering Powers in the work of the Special
Committee,
Noting with satisfaction the cooperation and active participation of certain administering Powers in the work
of the Special Committee, and encouraging the others also to do so,
Noting that the Caribbean regional seminar was held in Quito from 28 to 30 May 2013,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 1514 (XV) and all other resolutions and decisions on decolonization, including
its resolution 65/119, by which it declared the period 2011–2020 the Third International Decade for the Eradication
of Colonialism, and calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with those resolutions, to take all steps
necessary to enable the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories concerned to exercise fully as soon as
possible their right to self-determination, including independence;
2. Reaffirms once again that the existence of colonialism in any form or manifestation, including economic
exploitation, is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;179
3. Reaffirms its determination to continue to take all steps necessary to bring about the complete and
speedy eradication of colonialism and the faithful observance by all States of the relevant provisions of the Charter,
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights;
4. Affirms once again its support for the aspirations of the peoples under colonial rule to exercise their right
to self-determination, including independence, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on
decolonization;

_______________
178
179

332

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/68/23).
Resolution 217 A (III).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

5. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to develop and finalize, as soon as possible, a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for
the Non-Self-Governing Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and
the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
6. Recalls with satisfaction the professional, open and transparent conduct of both the February 2006 and
the October 2007 referendums to determine the future status of Tokelau, monitored by the United Nations;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to seek suitable means for the immediate and full
implementation of the Declaration and to carry out the actions approved by the General Assembly regarding the
Second and Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism in all Territories that have not yet
exercised their right to self-determination, including independence, and in particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals to bring about an end to colonialism and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
(b) To continue to examine the implementation by Member States of resolution 1514 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions on decolonization;
(c) To continue to examine the political, economic and social situation in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, and to recommend, as appropriate, to the General Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable
the populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination, including independence, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(d) To develop and finalize, as soon as possible and in cooperation with the administering Power and the
Territory in question, a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing
Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on
decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(e) To continue to dispatch visiting and special missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories in
accordance with the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(f) To conduct seminars, as appropriate, for the purpose of receiving and disseminating information on the
work of the Special Committee, and to facilitate participation by the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
in those seminars;
(g) To take all steps necessary to enlist worldwide support among Governments, as well as national and
international organizations, for the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration and the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
(h)

To observe annually the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;

8. Recalls that the plan of action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,180
updated as necessary, represents an important legislative authority for the attainment of self-government by the NonSelf-Governing Territories, and that the case-by-case assessment of the attainment of self-government in each
Territory can make an important contribution to this process;
9. Calls upon all States, in particular the administering Powers, as well as the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system, to give effect within their respective spheres of competence to the
recommendations of the Special Committee for the implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions
of the United Nations;
10. Calls upon the administering Powers to ensure that economic and other activities in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under their administration do not adversely affect the interests of the peoples but instead
promote development, and to assist them in the exercise of their right to self-determination;

_______________
180

A/56/61, annex.

333

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

11. Urges the administering Powers concerned to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the
inalienable rights of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources and to establish and
maintain control over the future development of those resources, and requests the relevant administering Power to
take all steps necessary to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories;
12. Urges all States, directly and through their action in the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system, to provide moral and material assistance, as needed, to the peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories, and requests the administering Powers to take steps to enlist and make effective use of all
possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the strengthening of the economies of those
Territories;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to provide economic, social and other assistance to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to continue to do
so, as appropriate, after they exercise their right to self-determination, including independence;
14. Reaffirms that the United Nations visiting missions to the Territories are an effective means of
ascertaining the situation in the Territories, as well as the wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants, and calls upon
the administering Powers to continue to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate and to
facilitate visiting missions to the Territories;
15. Calls upon all the administering Powers to cooperate fully in the work of the Special Committee and to
participate formally in its future sessions;
16. Approves the report of the Special Committee covering its work during 2013,178 including the
programme of work envisaged for 2014;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services
required for the implementation of the present resolution, as well as the other resolutions and decisions on
decolonization adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee.

334

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/198.

Information and communications technologies for development.............................................................................. 337

68/199.

International trade and development....................................................................................................................... 342

68/200.

Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries ............... 346

68/201.

International financial system and development...................................................................................................... 347

68/202.

External debt sustainability and development ......................................................................................................... 352

68/203.

Commodities........................................................................................................................................................ 358

68/204.

Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development ............................................................... 362

68/205.

World Wildlife Day.............................................................................................................................................. 369

68/206.

Oil slick on Lebanese shores.................................................................................................................................. 370

68/207.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central America...................................................................... 372

68/208.

Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of environmental effects related to waste originating
from chemical munitions dumped at sea................................................................................................................. 375

68/209.

Agricultural technology for development ............................................................................................................... 377

68/210.

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development........................................................................................................................................................ 381

68/211.

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction.......................................................................................................... 385

68/212.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind ........................................................... 389

68/213.

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa.................................................................................. 392

68/214.

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable development ............... 395

68/215.

Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its first universal
session and the implementation of section IV.C, entitled “Environmental pillar in the context of sustainable
development”, of the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.................. 399

68/216.

Harmony with Nature ........................................................................................................................................... 402

68/217.

Sustainable mountain development........................................................................................................................ 404

68/218.

The role of the international community in averting the radiation threat in Central Asia............................................. 407

68/219.

Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence................ 408

68/220.

Science, technology and innovation for development.............................................................................................. 410

68/221.

International Year of Light and Light-based Technologies, 2015 ............................................................................. 414

68/222.

Development cooperation with middle-income countries ........................................................................................ 416

68/223.

Culture and sustainable development ..................................................................................................................... 418

68/224.

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries ............................................ 423

68/225.

Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome of the
International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation............................................ 427
335

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/226.

Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017)............................................................. 431

68/227.

Women in development ........................................................................................................................................ 436

68/228.

Human resources development.............................................................................................................................. 444

68/229.

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system ....................................................................... 448

68/230.

South-South cooperation....................................................................................................................................... 449

68/231.

International Year of Pulses, 2016.......................................................................................................................... 452

68/232.

World Soil Day and International Year of Soils ...................................................................................................... 453

68/233.

Agriculture development, food security and nutrition.............................................................................................. 454

68/234.

Towards global partnerships: a principle-based approach to enhanced cooperation between the United Nations
and all relevant partners......................................................................................................................................... 461

68/235. Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources ............................................... 465
68/236.

Amendments to the Charter of the United Nations University.................................................................................. 468

68/238.

Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States ......................................................... 469

68/239.

Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and
strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).................................................. 475

336

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 68/198
A/RES/68/198

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/435, para. 15)1

68/198. Information and communications technologies for development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/183 of 21 December 2001, 57/238 of 20 December 2002, 57/270 B of 23 June
2003, 59/220 of 22 December 2004, 60/252 of 27 March 2006, 62/182 of 19 December 2007, 63/202 of
19 December 2008, 64/187 of 21 December 2009, 65/141 of 20 December 2010, 66/184 of 22 December 2011 and
67/195 of 21 December 2012,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/46 of 28 July 2006, 2008/3 of 18 July 2008,
2009/7 of 24 July 2009, 2010/2 of 19 July 2010, 2011/16 of 26 July 2011 and 2012/5 of 24 July 2012, and taking
note of Council resolution 2013/9 of 22 July 2013 on the assessment of the progress made in the implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society,
Recalling further the Declaration of Principles and the Plan of Action adopted by the World Summit on the
Information Society at its first phase, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003,2 and endorsed by the General
Assembly,3 and the Tunis Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society adopted by the Summit at
its second phase, held in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005,4 and endorsed by the Assembly,5
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,6
Recalling also the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals and its outcome document,7 as well as the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals, convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013, and
its outcome document,8
Recalling further the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,9
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to
the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and international levels,10
Noting the holding of the World Summit on the Information Society Forum, organized annually by the
International Telecommunication Union in collaboration with the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations
Development Programme, and the first 10-year review event of the World Summit on the Information Society,
organized by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in Paris, from 25 to
27 February 2013,
Noting also the establishment of the Broadband Commission for Digital Development at the invitation of the
Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, taking note of the “Broadband targets for 2015”, which set targets
for making broadband policy universal and for increasing affordability and uptake in support of internationally
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
See A/C.2/59/3, annex.
3
See resolution 59/220.
4
See A/60/687.
5
See resolution 60/252.
6
Resolution 60/1.
7
Resolution 65/1.
8
Resolution 68/6.
9
Resolution 66/288, annex.
10
A/68/65-E/2013/11.
2

337

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, taking note also of the report entitled
“The state of broadband 2013: universalizing broadband”, which provides a country-by-country evaluation of those
targets and the state of broadband deployment worldwide, as well as the report of the Broadband Commission
entitled “Doubling digital opportunities: enhancing the inclusion of women and girls in the information society”,
which identified a digital gender gap of approximately 200 million fewer women online than men, and noting that
without further action to increase access to broadband for women and girls, this digital gender gap could grow to
350 million by 2015,
Recognizing the role of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development in assisting the
Economic and Social Council as the focal point in the system-wide follow-up, in particular the review and
assessment of the progress made in implementing the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society,
while at the same time maintaining its original mandate on science and technology for development,
Noting the holding of the sixteenth session of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development
in Geneva from 3 to 7 June 2013,
Recognizing the need for respect for national sovereignty and applicable international law in the consideration
of information and communications technologies for development, noting the importance of respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the use of information and communications technologies, and reaffirming that
the same rights people have offline must also be protected online, including the right to privacy, as set out in its
resolution entitled “The right to privacy in the digital age”,11
Noting that cultural diversity is the common heritage of humankind and that the information society should be
founded on and stimulate respect for cultural identity, cultural and linguistic diversity, traditions and religions and
foster dialogue among cultures and civilizations, and noting also that the promotion, affirmation and preservation of
diverse cultural identities and languages, as reflected in relevant agreed United Nations documents, including the
Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,12 will further enrich the information society,
Acknowledging the positive trends in the global connectivity and affordability of information and
communications technologies, in particular the steady increase in Internet access to one third of the world’s
population, the rapid diffusion of mobile telephony and mobile Internet, the increased availability of multilingual
content and the advent of many information and communications technologies services and applications, which
offer great potential for the development of the information society,
Noting that progress and many innovations in the field of information and communications technologies, such
as mobile Internet, social networking and cloud computing, contribute to a dynamic landscape that requires that all
stakeholders continuously adapt to such innovations,
Recognizing ongoing efforts by relevant international and regional organizations and other stakeholders to
conceptualize and articulate the impact of information and communications technologies on development, and
encouraging the international community and relevant stakeholders to support the efforts of developing countries in
harnessing the benefits of information and communications technologies for achieving the eradication of poverty as
an overarching objective for sustainable development,
Stressing, however, that in spite of recent progress, there remains an important and growing digital divide
between countries in terms of the availability, affordability and use of information and communications technologies
and access to broadband, and stressing also the need to close the digital divide, including with regard to such issues
as Internet affordability, and to ensure that the benefits of new technologies, especially information and
communications technologies, are available to all,
Reaffirming the need to more effectively harness the potential of information and communications
technologies to promote the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, through sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development,
_______________
11

Resolution 68/167.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-first Session, Paris,
15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25, annex I.
12

338

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among youth, indebtedness in some countries and widespread fiscal
strains that pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress towards
sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while implementing the
reforms agreed upon to date,
Expressing concern about the ongoing adverse impacts of the world financial and economic crisis on the
positive trends in the diffusion of information and communications technologies and the investment needed to
ensure universal access to those technologies and efforts to bridge the digital divide,
Expressing concern also about the growing gap in broadband provision between developed and developing
countries, as well as about the new dimensions that the digital divide has taken on,
Recognizing that the lack of capacity-building for the productive use of information and communications
technologies needs to be addressed in order to overcome the digital divide,
Recognizing also that the number of Internet users is growing and that the digital divide is also changing in
character from one based on whether access is available to one based on the quality of access, information and skills
that users can obtain and the value they can derive from it, and recognizing further in this regard that there is a need
to prioritize the use of information and communications technologies through innovative approaches, including
multi-stakeholder approaches, within national and regional development strategies,
Recognizing further the fact that information and communications technologies are critical enablers of
economic development and investment, with consequential benefits for employment and social welfare, and that the
increasing pervasiveness of information and communications technologies within society has had profound impacts
on the ways in which governments deliver services, businesses relate to consumers and citizens participate in public
and private life,
Recognizing the immense potential that information and communications technologies have in promoting the
transfer of technologies in a wide spectrum of socioeconomic activity,
Reaffirming paragraphs 4, 5 and 55 of the Declaration of Principles adopted in Geneva in 2003, and
recognizing that freedom of expression and the free flow of information, ideas and knowledge are essential for the
information society and are beneficial to development,
Conscious of the challenges faced by States, in particular developing countries, in combating cybercrime, and
emphasizing the need to reinforce technical assistance and capacity-building activities for the prevention,
prosecution and punishment of the use of information and communications technologies for criminal purposes,
Acknowledging that the Internet is a central element of the infrastructure of the information society and is a
global facility available to the public,
Welcoming the announcement by Brazil that the country will host the Global Multi-stakeholder Meeting on
the Future of Internet Governance, to be held in São Paulo on 23 and 24 April 2014,
Recognizing that the international management of the Internet should be multilateral, transparent and
democratic, with the full involvement of governments, the private sector, civil society, academic and technical
communities and international organizations, as stated in the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society,
Recognizing also the importance of the Internet Governance Forum and its mandate as a forum for multistakeholder dialogue on various matters, as reflected in paragraph 72 of the Tunis Agenda, including discussion on
public policy issues related to key elements of Internet governance, while acknowledging the calls for
improvements in its working methods, and taking into account the recommendations of the Working Group on
Improvements to the Internet Governance Forum of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development,
Reiterating the significance of the process towards enhanced cooperation in full consistency with the mandate
provided in the Tunis Agenda, and noting the ongoing work of the Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation of the
Commission on Science and Technology for Development,
339

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming that the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society related to Internet
governance, namely, the process towards enhanced cooperation and the convening of the Internet Governance
Forum, are to be pursued by the Secretary-General through two distinct processes, and recognizing
that the two processes may be complementary,
Reaffirming also paragraphs 35 to 37 and 67 to 72 of the Tunis Agenda,
Welcoming the efforts undertaken by the host countries in organizing the meetings of the Internet Governance
Forum, held in Athens in 2006, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 2007, in Hyderabad, India, in 2008, in Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt, in 2009, in Vilnius in 2010, in Nairobi in 2011, in Baku in 2012 and in Bali, Indonesia, in 2013,
Taking note of the successful meetings of the Internet Governance Forum held to date, and welcoming the
offers to host the next three meetings of the Forum in Turkey in 2014, Brazil in 2015 and Mexico in 2016, in the
event of the renewal of the mandate of the Forum,
Recognizing the unique role, challenges and opportunities for youth in a deeply interconnected world, and
taking note of the celebration of the “BYND 2015” Global Youth Summit, hosted by the Government of Costa Rica
and organized by the International Telecommunication Union together with other organizations of the United
Nations system as well as partners from government, industry, media and civil society from 9 to 11 September
2013, as a contribution to the discussions on the post-2015 development agenda in the field of communications
technology for development,
Recognizing also the pivotal role of the United Nations system in promoting development, including with
respect to enhancing access to information and communications technologies, inter alia, through partnerships with
all relevant stakeholders,
Welcoming, in view of the existing gaps in information and communications technologies infrastructure,
the Connect Africa summits held in Kigali in 2007 and in Cairo in 2008, the Connect the Commonwealth of
Independent States summit held in Minsk in 2009, the meeting of Commonwealth countries held in Colombo
in 2010, the first and second Digital Agenda Assemblies of the European Union, held in 2011 and 2012, the
Connect Americas summit held in Panama in 2012, the Connect Arab States summit held in Qatar in 2012, the
Connect Asia-Pacific summit held in Thailand in 2013, the Transform Africa summit held in Kigali from 28 to
31 October 2013, the various national and regional Internet governance forums that are held annually around
the globe, the Mesoamerican Information Highway, the Trans-Eurasian Information Superhighway, the Asia
Broadband and Universal Service Leaders Forum to be held in India in October 2015, events of the Alliance
for Affordable Internet and many other regional initiatives aimed at mobilizing human, financial and technical
resources to accelerate the implementation of the connectivity goals of the World Summit on the Information
Society,
1. Recognizes that information and communications technologies have the potential to provide new
solutions to development challenges, particularly in the context of globalization, and can foster sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth and sustainable development, competitiveness, access to information and
knowledge, poverty eradication and social inclusion that will help to expedite the integration of all countries,
especially developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, into the global economy;
2. Also recognizes the rapid growth in broadband access networks, especially in developed countries, and
expresses concern about the growing digital divide in the availability, affordability, quality of access and use of
broadband between high-income countries and other regions, with the least developed countries, and Africa, as a
continent, lagging behind the rest of the world;
3. Expresses concern regarding the digital divide in access to information and communications
technologies and broadband connectivity between countries at different levels of development, which affects many
economically and socially relevant applications in such areas as government, business, health and education, and
also expresses concern with regard to the special challenges faced in the area of broadband connectivity by
developing countries, including the least developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked
developing countries;
4. Acknowledges that a gender divide exists as part of the digital divide, and encourages all stakeholders to
ensure the full participation of women in the information society and women’s access to and use of information and
340

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

communications technologies for their overall empowerment and benefit, and in this regard recalls the agreed
conclusions of the fifty-fifth session of the Commission on the Status of Women;13
5. Stresses that, for the majority of the poor, the development promise of science and technology, including
information and communications technologies, remains unfulfilled, and emphasizes the need to effectively harness
technology, including information and communications technologies, to bridge the digital divide;
6. Also stresses the important role of Governments in the effective use of information and communications
technologies in their design of public policies and in the provision of public services responsive to national needs
and priorities, including on the basis of a multi-stakeholder approach, to support national development efforts;
7. Further stresses the important role played by private sector, civil society and technical communities in
information and communications technologies;
8. Recognizes that, in addition to financing by the public sector, financing of information and
communications technologies infrastructure by the private sector has come to play an important role in many
countries and that domestic financing is being augmented by North-South flows and complemented by South-South
cooperation, and also recognizes that South-South and triangular cooperation can be useful tools for promoting the
development of information and communications technologies;
9. Also recognizes that information and communications technologies present new opportunities and
challenges and that there is a pressing need to address the major impediments that developing countries face in
accessing the new technologies, such as insufficient resources, infrastructure, education, capacity, investment and
connectivity and issues related to technology ownership, standards and flows, and in this regard calls upon all
stakeholders to provide adequate resources, enhanced capacity-building and technology transfer, on mutually agreed
terms, to developing countries, particularly the least developed countries;
10. Further recognizes the immense potential that information and communications technologies have in
promoting the transfer of technologies in a wide spectrum of socioeconomic activity;
11. Encourages strengthened and continuing cooperation between and among stakeholders to ensure the
effective implementation of the outcomes of the Geneva2 and Tunis4 phases of the World Summit on the
Information Society through, inter alia, the promotion of national, regional and international multi-stakeholder
partnerships, including public-private partnerships, and the promotion of national and regional multi-stakeholder
thematic platforms in a joint effort and dialogue with developing countries, including the least developed countries,
development partners and actors in the information and communications technologies sector;
12. Welcomes the efforts undertaken by Tunisia, host of the second phase of the World Summit on the
Information Society, in collaboration with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
International Telecommunication Union and other relevant international and regional organizations, for organizing
annually the ICT 4 All Forum and technological exhibition as a platform within the framework of the follow-up to
the Summit for promoting a dynamic business environment for the information and communications technologies
sector worldwide;
13. Notes the progress that has been made by United Nations entities in cooperation with national
Governments, regional commissions and other stakeholders, including non-governmental organizations and the
private sector, in the implementation of the action lines contained in the outcome documents of the World Summit
on the Information Society, and encourages the use of those action lines for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals;
14. Also notes the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the
regional level, facilitated by the regional commissions, as observed in the report of the Secretary-General on
progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit at the regional and
international levels;10
15. Encourages the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, within their
respective mandates and strategic plans, to contribute to the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit
on the Information Society, and emphasizes the importance of allocating adequate resources in this regard;
_______________
13

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 7 (E/2011/27), chap. I, sect. A.

341

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Recognizes the urgent need to harness the potential of knowledge and technology, and in this regard
encourages the United Nations development system to continue its efforts to promote the use of information and
communications technologies as a critical enabler of development and a catalyst for the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
17. Also recognizes the role of the United Nations Group on the Information Society as an inter-agency
mechanism of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination designed to coordinate United
Nations implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society;
18. Takes note of the report of the Working Group on Improvements to the Internet Governance Forum,14
and requests the Secretary-General to submit, as part of his annual reporting on the progress made in the
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society, information on
the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Working Group,
particularly on enhancing the participation of developing countries;
19. Stresses the need for the enhanced participation of all developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, in all Internet Governance Forum meetings, and in this regard invites Member States, as well
as other stakeholders, to support the participation of Governments and all other stakeholders from developing
countries in the Forum itself, as well as in the preparatory meetings;
20. Invites Member States and other stakeholders to give appropriate consideration to the issue of
information and communications technologies for development in the discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda;
21. Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in the overall review of the implementation of the outcomes
of the World Summit on the Information Society, to be held in 2015, as recognized in paragraph 111 of the Tunis
Agenda for the Information Society;
22. Decides to finalize the modalities for the overall review by the General Assembly of the implementation
of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society, in accordance with paragraph 111 of the Tunis
Agenda, as early as possible, but no later than the end of March 2014, and invites the President of the General
Assembly to appoint two co-facilitators to convene open intergovernmental consultations for that purpose;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, through the
Commission on Science and Technology for Development and the Economic and Social Council, a report on the
status of the implementation of and follow-up to the present resolution, as part of his annual reporting on the
progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society at the regional and international levels;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Information and
communications technologies for development”.
RESOLUTION 68/199
A/RES/68/199

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/436/Add.1, para. 16)15

68/199. International trade and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/178 of 21 December 2001, 57/235 of 20 December 2002, 58/197 of 23 December
2003, 63/203 of 19 December 2008, 66/185 of 22 December 2011 and 67/196 of 21 December 2012 on
international trade and development,
_______________
14
15

342

A/67/65-E/2012/48 and Corr.1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting its resolutions 59/221 of 22 December 2004, 60/184 of 22 December 2005, 61/186 of 20 December
2006, 62/184 of 19 December 2007, 64/188 of 21 December 2009 and 65/142 of 20 December 2010 on
international trade and development,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 16 as well as the outcomes of the International
Conference on Financing for Development17 and the World Summit on Sustainable Development,18 the 2005 World
Summit Outcome19 and the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus,20
Recalling also the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development
and its outcome document,21
Recalling further the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals and its outcome document,22
Recalling the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and its outcome
documents,23
Recalling also the thirteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in
Doha from 21 to 26 April 2012, and its outcome documents,24
Recalling further the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and its outcome document,
entitled “The future we want”,25
Reaffirming the value of multilateralism to the global trading system and the commitment to achieving a
universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system that contributes to growth,
sustainable development and employment generation in all sectors, and emphasizing that bilateral and regional
trading arrangements should contribute and be complementary to the goals of the multilateral trading system,
Reiterating that development concerns form an integral part of the Doha Development Agenda, which places
the needs and interests of all developing countries, especially the least developed countries, at the heart of the Doha
Work Programme of the World Trade Organization,26
Reaffirming that agriculture remains a fundamental and key sector for developing countries, and noting the
importance of working towards eliminating all forms of protectionism and the commitments to comprehensive
negotiations aimed at substantial improvement in market access, substantial reduction in trade-distorting national
support and the parallel elimination of all forms of export subsidies and disciplines on all export measures with
equivalent effect as provided in the mandate from the Doha Work Programme, the framework adopted by the
General Council of the World Trade Organization on 1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration
adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005,
Recalling the Marrakesh Ministerial Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the
Reform Programme on Least Developed and Net Food-importing Developing Countries,
_______________
16

Resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
18
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex, and resolution 2, annex.
19
Resolution 60/1.
20
Resolution 63/239, annex.
21
Resolution 63/303, annex.
22
Resolution 65/1.
23
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chaps. I and II.
24
See TD/500 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and 2.
25
Resolution 66/288, annex.
26
See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
17

343

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing the importance of competition policy and legislation in order to enhance the international
competitiveness of developing countries,
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions and
sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among youth, indebtedness in some countries and widespread fiscal
strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress towards
sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while implementing the
reforms agreed upon to date,
Noting that, while some developing countries have been the main contributors to recent global economic
growth, the economic crisis has reduced their capacity to withstand further shocks, recalling the commitments made
to support development and strong, sustained, balanced and inclusive economic growth, and reaffirming the need to
work cooperatively to meet development commitments to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015,
1. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board 27 and the report of the SecretaryGeneral;28
2. Reaffirms that international trade is an engine for development and sustained economic growth, and also
reaffirms the critical role that a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading
system, as well as meaningful trade liberalization, can play in stimulating economic growth and development
worldwide, thereby benefiting all countries at all stages of development;
3. Emphasizes the need to resist protectionist tendencies and to rectify any trade-distorting measures that
are inconsistent with World Trade Organization rules, recognizing the right of countries, in particular developing
countries, to fully utilize flexibilities consistent with their World Trade Organization commitments and obligations;
4. Expresses serious concern at the lack of progress in the Doha Round of World Trade Organization
negotiations, reiterates the call for the necessary flexibility and political will in order to break the current impasse in
the negotiations, and in this regard calls for a balanced, ambitious, comprehensive and development-oriented
outcome of the Doha Development Agenda multilateral trade negotiations, in keeping with the development
mandate of the Doha Ministerial Declaration,26 the decision of 1 August 2004 of the General Council of the World
Trade Organization and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005;
5. Recognizes the importance of the decisions of the Eighth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization, held in Geneva from 15 to 17 December 2011, including the decision to allow members of the World
Trade Organization to provide preferential treatment to services and suppliers from the least developed countries;
6. Acknowledges that trade has an important role in ensuring the sustainable economic development of the
least developed countries and that the international trade architecture should continue to be supportive of and
responsive to the special needs and priorities of the least developed countries;
7.

Welcomes the appointment of the Director General of the World Trade Organization;

8. Also welcomes the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development;
9. Further welcomes the convening of the Ninth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization,
in Bali, Indonesia, from 3 to 7 December 2013, and stresses the need for a balanced, ambitious, comprehensive and
development-oriented outcome;
10. Reaffirms the commitments made at the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization
relating to the least developed countries,26 and encourages developed countries, and developing countries declaring
_______________
27
28

344

A/68/15 (Part I and Corr.1 and Add.1, Part II and Corr.1 and Parts III and IV).
A/68/205.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

themselves in a position to do so, to take steps towards the goal of realizing the timely implementation of duty-free
and quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all least developed countries, consistent with the Hong Kong
Ministerial Declaration;
11. Emphasizes the full, timely and effective implementation of the relevant provisions of the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020;29
12. Reaffirms the Marrakesh Ministerial Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of
the Reform Programme on Least Developed and Net Food-importing Developing Countries;
13. Stresses the need to remove food export restrictions and extraordinary taxes on food purchased for noncommercial, humanitarian purposes by the World Food Programme and to not impose them in the future;
14. Also stresses the need to increase investment from all sources in agriculture and rural development,
including through the provision of technical and financial assistance, as appropriate, to the least developed and net
food-importing developing countries, with a view to increasing their agricultural productivity and infrastructure;
15. Recognizes the particular challenges that may be faced by small, vulnerable economies to fully benefit
from the multilateral trading system in a manner commensurate with their special circumstances, and in this regard
encourages progress in the implementation of the World Trade Organization work programme on small economies,
as mandated in the 2001 Doha Ministerial Declaration and the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, which
supports their efforts towards sustainable development;
16. Stresses the need to identify and develop strategies to expand trade opportunities for women producers
and facilitate the active participation of women in national, regional and global trade decision-making structures and
processes, thereby ensuring that women- and men-owned businesses and farms have equal opportunities in markets;
17. Reaffirms the commitment to address the special development needs of and the challenges faced by
landlocked developing countries, and calls for the full, timely and effective implementation of the Almaty
Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global
Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries,30 in accordance
with the Declaration of the high-level meeting of the sixty-third session of the General Assembly on the midterm
review of the Almaty Programme of Action;31
18. Expresses concern about the adoption of unilateral actions that are not consistent with the rules of the
World Trade Organization, harm the exports of all countries, in particular those of developing countries, and have a
considerable bearing on the ongoing World Trade Organization negotiations and on the achievement and further
enhancement of the development dimension of the trade negotiations;
19. Notes the holding in Geneva from 8 to 10 July 2013 of the Fourth Global Review of Aid for Trade,
aimed at reviewing progress achieved and identifying additional measures needed to support developing and least
developed countries in building their supply and export capacities, and stresses the need to implement the aid-fortrade commitments, with sufficient focus on results and impact;
20. Recognizes that South-South trade should be strengthened, notes that enhanced market access between
developing countries can play a positive role in stimulating South-South trade, and in this regard, inter alia, takes
note of the conclusion of the third round of the Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing Countries,
by the adoption, on 15 December 2010, of the São Paulo Round Protocol;
21. Reiterates the important role of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as the focal
point within the United Nations system for the integrated treatment of trade and development and interrelated issues
in the areas of finance, technology, investment and sustainable development, invites the Conference to continue
working to enhance its contribution in its three major pillars, namely, consensus-building, research and policy
analysis and technical assistance, and calls upon the international community to work towards the strengthening of
the Conference;
_______________
29

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
30
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003
(A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
31
Resolution 63/2.

345

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

22. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to continue, in accordance with its
mandate, to monitor and assess the evolution of the international trading system and of trends in international trade
from a development perspective, and in particular to analyse issues of concern to developing countries, placing
greater emphasis on practical solutions, to undertake policy analysis, including from a gender perspective, to work
with all relevant stakeholders and to support developing countries in building productive national capacities and
international competitiveness, including through technical assistance activities;
23. Recognizes the role of the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-related Technical Assistance to
Least Developed Countries;
24. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution and developments in the multilateral trading system, including their impact
on women and men, under the sub-item entitled “International trade and development” of the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”;
25. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the Director General of the
World Trade Organization.
RESOLUTION 68/200
A/RES/68/200

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/436/Add.1,
para. 16),32 by a recorded vote of 127 to 2, with 50 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

68/200. Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,33 which states, inter alia, that no
State may use or encourage the use of unilateral economic, political or any other type of measures to coerce another
State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights,
_______________
32

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Belarus, and Fiji (on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
33
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

346

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Bearing in mind the general principles governing the international trading system and trade policies for
development contained in relevant resolutions, rules and provisions of the United Nations and the World Trade
Organization,
Recalling its resolutions 44/215 of 22 December 1989, 46/210 of 20 December 1991, 48/168 of 21 December
1993, 50/96 of 20 December 1995, 52/181 of 18 December 1997, 54/200 of 22 December 1999, 56/179 of
21 December 2001, 58/198 of 23 December 2003, 60/185 of 22 December 2005, 62/183 of 19 December 2007,
64/189 of 21 December 2009 and 66/186 of 22 December 2011,
Gravely concerned that the use of unilateral coercive economic measures adversely affects the economies and
the development efforts of developing countries in particular and has a general negative impact on international
economic cooperation and on worldwide efforts to move towards a non-discriminatory and open multilateral
trading system,
Recognizing that such measures constitute a flagrant violation of the principles of international law as set forth
in the Charter, as well as the basic principles of the multilateral trading system,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;34

2. Urges the international community to adopt urgent and effective measures to eliminate the use of
unilateral coercive economic measures against developing countries that are not authorized by relevant organs of the
United Nations or are inconsistent with the principles of international law as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and that contravene the basic principles of the multilateral trading system;
3. Calls upon the international community to condemn and reject the imposition of the use of such
measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor the imposition of measures of this nature and to
study the impact of such measures on the affected countries, including the impact on trade and development;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/201
A/RES/68/201

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/436/Add.2, para. 8)35

68/201. International financial system and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/186 of 20 December 2000 and 56/181 of 21 December 2001, both entitled
“Towards a strengthened and stable international financial architecture responsive to the priorities of growth and
development, especially in developing countries, and to the promotion of economic and social equity”, as well as its
resolutions 57/241 of 20 December 2002, 58/202 of 23 December 2003, 59/222 of 22 December 2004, 60/186 of
22 December 2005, 61/187 of 20 December 2006, 62/185 of 19 December 2007, 63/205 of 19 December 2008,
64/190 of 21 December 2009, 65/143 of 20 December 2010, 66/187 of 22 December 2011 and 67/197 of
21 December 2012,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration,36 its resolution 56/210 B of 9 July 2002, in which
it endorsed the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,37 the Rio
_______________
34

A/68/218.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
36
Resolution 55/2.
37
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
35

347

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Declaration on Environment and Development,38 Agenda 21,39 the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 2140 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation),41
Recalling further the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008,42
Recalling the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development and its
outcome document,43
Recalling also the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals and the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013, and their respective outcome
documents,44
Recalling further the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,45
Recognizing the work undertaken by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly to
follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis
and Its Impact on Development, and taking note of its progress report,46
Recalling the high-level thematic debate on the state of the world economy and finance and its impact on
development convened by the President of the General Assembly on 17 and 18 May 2012,
Recalling also the meeting of the Second Committee, held pursuant to resolution 67/197, on 13 November
2013, to discuss actions in response to the world financial and economic crisis and its impact on development and
prospects for restoring confidence and economic growth,
Noting the Sixth Astana Economic Forum and the World Anti-Crisis Conference, which were held in Astana
from 22 to 24 May 2013, as well as the convening of the Second World Anti-Crisis Conference, to be held in Astana
from 21 to 23 May 2014,
Noting also the Saint Petersburg International Economic Forum, held in Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation,
from 20 to 22 June 2013,
Noting further the Summit of the Group of 20, held in Saint Petersburg on 5 and 6 September 2013,
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among young people, indebtedness in some countries and widespread
fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress
towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while implementing the
reforms agreed upon to date,
_______________
38

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
39
Ibid., annex II.
40
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
41
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
42
Resolution 63/239, annex.
43
Resolution 63/303, annex.
44
Resolutions 65/1 and 68/6.
45
Resolution 66/288, annex.
46
A/64/884.

348

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting that, while some developing countries have been the main contributors to recent global economic
growth, the economic crisis has reduced their capacity to withstand further shocks, recalling the commitments
made to support development and strong, sustained, balanced and inclusive economic growth, and reaffirming
the need to work cooperatively to meet development commitments to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals by 2015,
Acknowledging that effective global economic governance in an increasingly interconnected world is of
critical importance for the success of national efforts to achieve sustainable development in all countries and that,
while significant efforts have been made over the years, there remains the need to continue to improve global
economic governance and to strengthen the role of the United Nations in this regard,
Recalling the commitment to work in solidarity on a coordinated and comprehensive global response to the
ongoing adverse impacts of the world financial and economic crisis on development and to take actions aimed at,
inter alia, restoring confidence, sustaining economic growth and creating full and productive employment and
decent work for all,
Reaffirming the purposes of the United Nations, as set forth in its Charter, including to achieve international
cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and to be a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of common ends, and reiterating the need to
strengthen the leadership role of the United Nations in promoting development,
Emphasizing that the international financial system should bolster sustained, inclusive and equitable economic
growth, sustainable development and job creation and promote financial inclusion and support efforts to eradicate
poverty and hunger in developing countries, while allowing for the coherent mobilization of all sources of financing
for development,
Recalling the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,47 and recognizing in this context that the
international financial institutions should be supportive, in accordance with their mandates, of the special needs and
priorities of the least developed countries,
Stressing the importance of commitment to ensuring sound domestic financial sectors, which make a vital
contribution to national development efforts, as an important component of an international financial architecture
that is supportive of development,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;48

2. Recognizes the need to continue and intensify efforts to enhance the coherence and consistency of the
international monetary, financial and trading systems, and reiterates the importance of ensuring their openness,
fairness and inclusiveness in order to complement national efforts to ensure sustainable development, including
strong, sustained, balanced, inclusive and equitable economic growth and the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
3. Reiterates the need to act decisively to tackle the challenges confronting the global economy in order to
ensure balanced, sustained, inclusive and equitable global growth with full and productive employment and quality
jobs, and also reiterates the need for significant mobilization of resources from a variety of sources and the effective
use of financing in order to promote full and productive employment and decent work for all;
4. Notes the important efforts undertaken nationally, regionally and internationally to respond to the
challenges posed by the financial and economic crisis, and recognizes that more needs to be done in order to
promote the economic recovery, to address turbulence in global financial and commodity markets, to tackle high
unemployment and indebtedness in several countries, as well as widespread fiscal strains, to reinforce the banking
sector, including by increasing its transparency and accountability, to address systemic fragilities and imbalances, to
reform and strengthen the international financial system and to continue and to enhance the coordination of financial
and economic policies at the international level;
_______________
47

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
48
A/68/221.

349

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Also notes that the United Nations, on the basis of its universal membership and legitimacy, provides a
unique and key forum for discussing international economic issues and their impact on development, and reaffirms
that the United Nations is well positioned to participate in various reform processes aimed at improving and
strengthening the effective functioning of the international financial system and architecture, while recognizing that
the United Nations and the international financial institutions have complementary mandates that make the
coordination of their actions crucial;
6. Recalls, in this regard, the resolve to strengthen the coordination of the United Nations system and
multilateral financial, trade and development institutions so as to support economic growth, poverty eradication, job
creation and sustainable development worldwide, on the basis of a clear understanding of and respect for their
mandates and governance structures;
7. Also recalls that countries must have the flexibility necessary to implement countercyclical measures
and to pursue tailored and targeted responses to the crisis, and calls for conditionalities to be streamlined to ensure
that they are timely, tailored and targeted and that they support developing countries in the face of financial,
economic and development challenges;
8. Notes, in this regard, the increase in resources and the improvement of the lending framework of the
International Monetary Fund through, inter alia, streamlined conditions and flexible instruments, such as the
precautionary and liquidity line, the flexible credit line and the rapid financing instrument, and the refinement of the
lending framework for low-income countries, while also noting that new and ongoing programmes should not
contain unwarranted procyclical conditionalities;
9. Urges, in this regard, the multilateral development banks to continue to move forward on flexible,
concessional, fast-disbursing and front-loaded assistance that will substantially and quickly assist developing
countries facing financing gaps in their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, taking into
consideration the individual absorptive capacities and debt sustainability of those countries;
10. Recognizes the role of private capital flows in mobilizing financing for development, stresses the
challenges posed by excessive volatility of short-term capital flows to many developing countries, notes that the
design and implementation of capital flow management measures to address those challenges, such as
macroeconomic policies, macroprudential measures and various forms of capital account management, need to take
into account the specific circumstances of individual countries, while also remaining fully cognizant of the potential
risks involved in capital flow management;
11. Also recognizes the need for international financial institutions to promote, within their respective
mandates, including by providing the right incentives for medium- and long-term investment and the sharing of best
practices, the mobilization of capital flows in order to better channel national and international investment for
sustainable development based on its three dimensions;
12. Reaffirms the importance of broadening and strengthening the participation of developing countries in
international economic decision-making and norm-setting, notes in this regard the important steps taken in the
reform of the governance structures, quotas and voting rights of the Bretton Woods institutions, which go in the
direction of better reflecting current realities and enhancing the voice, the participation and the voting rights of
developing countries, and recognizes the importance of continuing such reform processes in an ambitious and
expeditious manner in order to deliver more effective, credible, accountable and legitimate institutions;
13. Notes, in this regard, the decisions taken by the World Bank Group on voice and participation and
further institutional reforms to meet new challenges and the addition of the twenty-fifth Chair to the Boards of
Executive Directors of the World Bank Group, and looks forward to progress in its institutional reforms;
14. Calls for the swift implementation of the 2010 quota and governance reform of the International
Monetary Fund, notes the progress made by the Fund on the review of the quota formula in January 2013, and
emphasizes the importance of continued discussions to reach agreement on the quota formula by January 2014,
in parallel to the fifteenth general review of the quotas and as part of ongoing reform processes, in order to ensure
the Fund’s capability to address the challenges encountered by today’s international monetary and financial
system;
15. Recognizes the importance of an open, transparent and merit-based process for selecting the heads of the
international financial institutions, including the Bretton Woods institutions;
350

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Emphasizes the need for more effective government involvement in order to ensure an appropriate
regulation of the market which promotes the public interest, and recognizes in this regard the need to better regulate
financial markets to promote economic stability and sustained, equitable and inclusive growth;
17. Also emphasizes the need for continued coordination at the international, regional and national levels on
regulatory frameworks for the financial markets and some of their products, notes that while it is still too early to
estimate the full effects of Basel III, there is a concern that it may negatively impact some developing countries, and
recognizes in this regard the need for continued efforts to ensure regulation and oversight of financial markets in
fields such as shadow banking, derivatives and banks that are “too big to fail”, with a view to promoting economic
stability and equitable and inclusive growth;
18. Recognizes the role of special drawing rights as an international reserve asset, acknowledges that special
drawing rights allocations helped to supplement international reserves in response to the world financial and
economic crisis, thus contributing to the stability of the international financial system and global economic
resilience, and also recognizes the need to continue regular reviews of the role of special drawing rights, including
with reference to their potential role in the international reserve system;
19. Reiterates that effective, inclusive multilateral surveillance should be at the centre of crisis prevention
efforts, stresses the need to continue strengthening surveillance of the financial policies of countries, and in this
regard takes note of the new surveillance approach of the International Monetary Fund to better integrate bilateral
and multilateral surveillance, along with cross-border and cross-sectoral linkages with macroeconomic and
macroprudential policies, while paying closer attention to the spillover effects from national economic and financial
policies onto the global economy;
20. Stresses, in this regard, the need to strengthen intergovernmental and independent surveillance of
national financial policies and their impact on international interest rates, exchange rates and capital flows;
21. Invites the international financial and banking institutions to continue to enhance the transparency of
risk-rating mechanisms, noting that sovereign risk assessments made by the private sector should maximize the use
of strict, objective and transparent parameters, which can be facilitated by high-quality data and analysis, and
encourages relevant institutions, including the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to continue
their work on the issue, including its potential impact on the development prospects of developing countries;
22. Calls upon the multilateral, regional and subregional development banks and development funds to
continue to play a vital role in serving the development needs of developing countries and countries with economies
in transition, including through coordinated action, as appropriate, stresses that strengthened regional development
banks and subregional financial institutions can add flexible financial support to national and regional development
efforts, thus enhancing their ownership and overall efficiency, and can promote regional integration, increasing
resilience to economic shocks, welcomes in this regard recent capital increases at multilateral and regional
development banks, and, in addition, encourages efforts to ensure that subregional development banks are
adequately funded;
23. Encourages enhanced regional and subregional cooperation, including through regional and subregional
development banks, commercial and reserve currency arrangements and other regional and subregional initiatives;
24. Stresses the need to continuously improve standards of corporate and public sector governance,
including those related to accounting, auditing and measures to ensure transparency, noting the disruptive effects of
inadequate policies;
25. Recognizes the need for international financial institutions, as appropriate, to promote gender
mainstreaming in their policies and programmes, including macroeconomic, job creation and structural reform
policies and programmes, in accordance with relevant national priorities and strategies;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, to be prepared in cooperation with the Bretton Woods institutions and
other relevant stakeholders;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled “International financial system and development”.
351

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 68/202
A/RES/68/202

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/436/Add.3, para. 7)49

68/202. External debt sustainability and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/203 of 23 December 2003, 59/223 of 22 December 2004, 60/187 of 22 December
2005, 61/188 of 20 December 2006, 62/186 of 19 December 2007, 63/206 of 19 December 2008, 64/191 of
21 December 2009, 65/144 of 20 December 2010, 66/189 of 22 December 2011 and 67/198 of 21 December 2012,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted on 8 September 2000,50 and the highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals and its outcome
document,51
Recalling further its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,52
Recalling also its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006 on the follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005
World Summit, including the Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development goals,
Recalling further the International Conference on Financing for Development and its outcome document53
and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus and its outcome document, the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development,54
Recalling the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development and its
outcome document,55
Recalling also the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the Istanbul
Declaration and the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,56
Recalling further the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,57
Recalling the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
held on 25 September 2013, and its outcome document,58
Noting the thematic debate in the General Assembly on the role of credit-rating agencies in the international
financial system, held on 10 September 2013, and the ongoing discussions on these issues,
Noting also the special meeting of the Economic and Social Council on external debt sustainability and
development, held on 23 April 2013, which considered lessons learned from debt crises and the ongoing work on
sovereign debt restructuring and debt resolution mechanisms and the ongoing discussions on these issues,
_______________
49

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 55/2.
51
Resolution 65/1.
52
Resolution 60/1.
53
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
54
Resolution 63/239, annex.
55
Resolution 63/303, annex.
56
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chaps. I and II.
57
Resolution 66/288, annex.
58
Resolution 68/6.
50

352

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Emphasizing that debt sustainability is essential for underpinning growth, underlining the importance of debt
sustainability and effective debt management to the efforts to achieve national and international development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and acknowledging that debt crises are costly and disruptive,
including for employment and productive investment, and tend to be followed by cuts in public spending, including
on health and education, affecting the poor and vulnerable in particular,
Reaffirming that each country has primary responsibility for its own development and that the role of national
policies and development strategies, including in the area of debt management, cannot be overemphasized for the
achievement of sustainable development, and recognizing that national efforts, including to achieve development
goals and to maintain debt sustainability, should be complemented by supportive global programmes, measures and
policies aimed at expanding the development opportunities of developing countries, while taking into account
national conditions and ensuring respect for national ownership, strategies and sovereignty,
Reaffirming also that multilateral institutions, including entities within the United Nations system and other
relevant organizations, should continue to play an important role, given their respective mandates, in assisting
countries in achieving and maintaining debt sustainability,
Reiterating that debt sustainability depends on a confluence of many factors at the international and national
levels, and emphasizing that country-specific circumstances and the impact of external shocks, such as those derived
from the world financial and economic crisis, should continue to be taken into account in debt sustainability
analyses,
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among young people, indebtedness in some countries and widespread
fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress
towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system, while implementing the
reforms agreed upon to date,
Recognizing that the ongoing adverse impacts of the world financial and economic crisis entail the possibility
of undermining the progress made towards achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, and threaten debt sustainability in many countries, especially developing
countries, through, inter alia, the consequences for the real economy and government revenue and the need to
increase borrowing to mitigate the negative impact of the crisis,
Recognizing also the importance of efforts and cooperation undertaken at the national, regional and
international levels in response to the challenges posed by the world financial and economic crisis, and emphasizing
the need to continue these efforts in a coherent and coordinated manner,
Recognizing further the important role, on a case-by-case basis, of debt relief, including debt cancellation, as
appropriate, and debt restructuring as debt crisis prevention and management tools for mitigating the impact of the
world financial and economic crisis on developing countries,
Recognizing the role of private capital flows in mobilizing financing for development, stressing the challenges
posed by excessive short-term capital inflows to many developing countries, including to their debt sustainability,
and encouraging further review of the benefits and disadvantages of the macroprudential measures available to
mitigate the impact of volatile capital flows,
Expressing concern that a number of low- and middle-income countries face challenges in servicing their debt,
Expressing deep concern that, in spite of international efforts, many least developed countries struggle with
high debt burdens and are classified, in accordance with the debt sustainability assessments, as being in debt distress
or at high risk of debt distress,
Noting with appreciation that the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, facilitated by the Paris
Club, the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative and bilateral donors have provided substantial debt relief to
35 countries that have reached the completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative,
353

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

which has provided needed debt relief and facilitated the reallocation of resources to investments in social
services, while expressing concern that some post-completion point countries remain classified as being at
high risk of debt distress and need to avoid rebuilding unsustainable debt burdens,
Convinced that enhanced market access for goods and services of export interest to developing countries
contributes significantly to debt sustainability in those countries,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;59

2. Emphasizes the special importance of a timely, effective, comprehensive and durable solution to the debt
problems of developing countries to promote their economic growth and development;
3. Stresses the importance of sustainable lending and borrowing, emphasizes that creditors and debtors
must share responsibility for preventing unsustainable debt situations and must incorporate debt sustainability
considerations into their financing decisions, notes the endorsement by some Member States of the principles of the
initiative of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to promote responsible sovereign lending
and borrowing, and encourages Member States and relevant stakeholders to continue the ongoing discussions on
this issue;
4. Acknowledges the role played by the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income Countries, jointly
developed by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to guide borrowing and lending decisions, and
encourages the continued periodic review of the Framework in an open and transparent manner and with the full
engagement of borrower and creditor Governments;
5. Reiterates that no single indicator should be used to make definitive judgements about a country’s debt
sustainability, and in this regard, while acknowledging the need to use transparent and comparable indicators, invites
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, in their assessment of debt sustainability, to continue to take
into account a country’s structural weaknesses and the fundamental changes caused by, inter alia, natural disasters,
conflicts and changes in global growth prospects or in the terms of trade, especially for commodity-dependent
developing countries, as well as by the impact of developments on financial markets, and to provide information on
this issue to Member States, using the appropriate frameworks;
6. Recognizes that the long-term sustainability of debt depends on, inter alia, economic growth, the
mobilization of domestic and international resources, the export prospects of debtor countries, sustainable debt
management, sound macroeconomic policies that also support job creation, transparent and effective regulatory
frameworks and success in overcoming structural development problems, and hence on the creation of an enabling
international environment that is conducive to development;
7. Also recognizes the enormity and multidimensional nature of the world financial and economic crisis,
which caused a sharp deterioration of the debt ratios in several developing countries, stresses the need to continue to
assist developing countries in avoiding a build-up of unsustainable debt so as to reduce the risk of relapsing into
another debt crisis, notes in this regard the additional resources made available during and since the crisis through
the International Monetary Fund and the multilateral development banks, calls for the continued provision of
concessional and grant-based financing to low-income countries to enable them to respond to the consequences of
the crisis, and notes the provision by the International Monetary Fund of interest relief to low-income countries in
the form of zero-interest payments on financing from concessional lending facilities until the end of 2014;
8. Further recognizes the roles of the United Nations and the international financial institutions in
accordance with their respective mandates, and encourages them to continue to support global efforts towards
sustained, inclusive and equitable growth, sustainable development and the external debt sustainability of developing
countries, including through continued monitoring of global financial flows and their implications in this regard;
9. Emphasizes the need for coordinated policies aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief and debt
restructuring, recalls in this regard the improvement of the lending framework of the International Monetary Fund
through, inter alia, streamlined conditions and flexible instruments, such as the precautionary and liquidity line, the
_______________
59

354

A/68/203.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

flexible credit line and the rapid financing instrument, while noting that new and ongoing programmes should not
contain unwarranted procyclical conditionalities, and urges the multilateral development banks to continue to move
forward on flexible, concessional, fast-disbursing and front-loaded assistance that will substantially and quickly
assist developing countries facing financing gaps in their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals,
taking into consideration the individual absorptive capacities and debt sustainability of those countries;
10. Notes that countries can seek to negotiate, as a last resort, on a case-by-case basis and through existing
frameworks, agreements on temporary debt standstills between debtors and creditors in order to help mitigate the
adverse impacts of the crisis and stabilize macroeconomic developments;
11. Also notes the progress made under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, facilitated by the
Paris Club, and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, while expressing concern that some countries have yet to
reach decision or completion points, calls for the full and timely implementation of those Initiatives and for
continued support to the remaining eligible countries in completing the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative,
and encourages all parties, both creditors and debtors, to fulfil their commitments as rapidly as possible in order to
complete the debt relief process;
12. Welcomes and encourages the efforts of the heavily indebted poor countries, calls upon them to continue
to strengthen their national policies to promote economic growth and poverty eradication through, inter alia, the
maintenance of a national environment conducive to private-sector development, a stable macroeconomic
framework and transparent and accountable systems of public finance, and invites the international financing
institutions and the donor community to continue to provide adequate and sufficiently concessional financing to
those countries;
13. Encourages the international financial institutions to review the implementation and the impact of debt
relief initiatives in order to better understand why some countries still face persisting debt problems after completion
of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, and calls for creditors and debtors to work together, inter alia,
through the design of responses, including the broader use of debt management, to address them;
14. Underlines the fact that heavily indebted poor countries eligible for debt relief will not be able to enjoy
its full benefits unless all creditors, both public and private, contribute their fair share and become involved in the
international debt resolution mechanisms in order to ensure the debt sustainability of those countries, and invites
creditors, both private and public, that are not yet fully participating in debt relief initiatives to substantially increase
their participation, including through providing comparable treatment, to the extent possible, to debtor countries that
have concluded sustainable debt relief agreements with creditors;
15. Stresses that debt relief can play a key role in liberating resources that should be directed towards
activities consistent with poverty eradication, sustained economic growth, economic development and the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard urges
countries to direct the resources freed through debt relief, in particular through debt cancellation and reduction,
towards achieving those objectives, including in the context of the post-2015 development agenda, according to
their national priorities and strategies;
16. Encourages donor countries to take steps to ensure that resources provided for debt relief under the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative do not detract from other
resources to be available for developing countries in accordance with official development assistance commitments;
17. Notes with concern that some low- and middle-income developing countries that are not part of the
existing debt relief initiatives have large debt burdens that may create constraints on mobilizing the resources
needed to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
indicating a need to consider, as appropriate, stronger debt management and debt relief initiatives for those
countries, and encourages the consideration of medium- and long-term sustainability as well as new approaches to
deal with bilateral and private non-Paris Club debt;
18. Encourages the Paris Club, in dealing with the debt of low- and middle-income debtor countries that are
not part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, to take into account their medium-term debt
sustainability, in addition to their financing gaps, and notes with appreciation the Evian approach of the Paris Club
in providing different terms of debt relief in order to respond to the specific needs of debtor countries while
preserving debt cancellation for heavily indebted poor countries;
355

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

19. Recognizes the concerns about vulture fund litigation and that some debtor countries may experience
difficulties in obtaining comparable treatment from non-Paris Club creditors, as required by the standard clause
included in Paris Club agreements, and calls for the continued provision by the relevant institutions of
mechanisms and legal assistance to debtor countries to solve litigation issues;
20. Stresses the need for the international community to remain vigilant in monitoring the debt situation of
the least developed countries and to continue to take effective measures, preferably within existing frameworks,
when applicable, to address the debt problem of those countries, including through the cancellation of the
multilateral and bilateral debt owed by the least developed countries to creditors, both public and private;
21. Welcomes the efforts of and calls upon the international community to continue to provide flexibility,
and stresses the need to sustain those efforts in helping post-conflict developing countries, especially those that are
heavily indebted and poor, to achieve initial reconstruction for economic and social development;
22. Also welcomes the efforts of and invites creditors to provide flexibility to developing countries affected
by natural disasters so as to allow them to address their debt concerns, while taking into account their specific
situations and needs;
23. Calls for the consideration of additional measures and initiatives aimed at ensuring long-term debt
sustainability through increased grant-based and other forms of concessional financing, the cancellation of
100 per cent of the eligible official multilateral and bilateral debt of heavily indebted poor countries and, where
appropriate and on a case-by-case basis, significant debt relief or restructuring for developing countries with an
unsustainable debt burden that are not part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative;
24. Invites donor countries, taking into account country-specific debt sustainability analyses, to continue
their efforts to increase bilateral grants to developing countries, which could contribute to debt sustainability in the
medium to long term, and recognizes the need for countries to be able to promote employment and productive
investment and to invest in, inter alia, health and education while maintaining debt sustainability;
25. Calls for the intensification of efforts to prevent and mitigate the prevalence and cost of debt crises by
enhancing international financial mechanisms for crisis prevention and resolution, encourages the private sector to
cooperate in this regard, and invites creditors and debtors to further explore, where appropriate and on a mutually
agreed, transparent and case-by-case basis, the use of new and improved debt instruments and innovative
mechanisms such as debt swaps, including debt for equity in Millennium Development Goal projects, as well as
debt indexation instruments;
26. Also calls for the consideration of enhanced approaches to sovereign debt restructuring and debt
resolution mechanisms, based on existing frameworks and principles, with the broad participation of creditors and
debtors, and for the comparable treatment of all creditors and an important role for the Bretton Woods institutions
and other relevant organizations within the United Nations system, and in this regard calls upon all countries to
promote and contribute to the discussions, within the United Nations and other appropriate forums, on the need for
and feasibility of a more structured framework for international cooperation in this area;
27. Decides to convene, at its sixty-ninth session, a special joint meeting of the Second Committee of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council to consider lessons learned from debt crises and the
ongoing work on sovereign debt restructuring and debt resolution mechanisms, with the participation of relevant
stakeholders, as appropriate, building on the report prepared by the Secretary-General, and resulting in a summary
of the meeting;
28. Notes the changing composition of the sovereign debt of some countries, which has shifted increasingly
from official to commercial borrowing and from external to national public debt, although for most low-income
countries external finance is still largely official, also notes that the levels of national debt and the significantly
increased number of creditors, both official and private, could create other challenges for macroeconomic
management and public debt sustainability, and stresses the need to address the implications of these changes,
including through improved data collection and analysis and enhancing international efforts in support of building
the debt management capacity in borrowing countries, at their request;
29. Stresses the need to increase information-sharing, transparency and the use of objective criteria in the
construction and evaluation of debt scenarios, including an assessment of national public and private debt, in order
356

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

to ensure the achievement of development goals, and encourages further improvement of the mutual exchange of
information, on a voluntary basis, on borrowing and lending among all creditors and borrowers;
30. Reaffirms the importance of having access to credit-rating information, and of the reduction of
transaction costs, taking into account that inaccurate forecasts render the international financial system more
vulnerable to herd behaviour and cliff effects, which have the potential to exacerbate financial crises, and in this
regard encourages greater transparency, independence, avoidance of conflicts of interest and competition among
credit-rating agencies, including through the development of national capacities and mechanisms, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to report on this issue when preparing his report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
31. Invites, in this regard, the President of the Economic and Social Council to give appropriate
consideration to this issue by organizing a meeting during the regular programme of work of the next substantive
session of the Council;
32. Invites the international community to continue efforts to increase support, including financial and
technical assistance, for institutional capacity-building in developing countries to enhance sustainable debt
management as an integral part of national development strategies, including by promoting transparent and
accountable debt management systems and negotiation and renegotiation capacities and through supporting legal
advice in relation to tackling external debt litigation and debt data reconciliation between creditors and debtors so
that debt sustainability may be achieved and maintained;
33. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank, in cooperation with the regional commissions, regional development banks and other relevant
multilateral financial institutions and stakeholders, to continue and intensify cooperation in respect of capacitybuilding activities in developing countries in the area of debt management and debt sustainability;
34. Acknowledges that timely and comprehensive data on the level and composition of debt are necessary
for, inter alia, building early warning systems aimed at limiting the impact of debt crises, calls for debtor and
creditor countries to intensify their efforts to collect data, and calls for donors to consider increasing their support
for technical cooperation programmes aimed at increasing the statistical capacity of developing countries in
that regard;
35. Requests both creditor and borrower countries to incorporate debt sustainability considerations and
greater transparency into their financing decisions, and encourages consideration, as appropriate, of the Debt
Sustainability Framework for Low-Income Countries, jointly developed by the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank, and the Principles and Guidelines to Promote Sustainable Lending Practices in the Provision of
Official Export Credits to Low-Income Countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
as strategies for guiding financing policies, recognizing that both creditors and debtors have a shared interest and
responsibility in promoting debt sustainability and sustainable financing;
36. Calls upon all Member States and the United Nations system to take appropriate measures and
actions for the implementation of the commitments, agreements and decisions of the major United Nations
conferences and summits, in particular those related to the question of the external debt sustainability of
developing countries;
37. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the issue of external debt sustainability in the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report,
prepared in consultation with relevant stakeholders, on the implementation of the present resolution and to include
in the report a comprehensive and substantive analysis of the external debt situation of developing countries and
options for enhanced approaches to debt restructuring and resolution mechanisms that take into account the multiple
dimensions of debt sustainability;
39. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled “External debt sustainability and development”.
357

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 68/203
A/RES/68/203

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
60
(A/68/436/Add.4, para. 8)

68/203. Commodities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/224 of 22 December 2004, 61/190 of 20 December 2006, 63/207 of 19 December
2008, 64/192 of 21 December 2009 and 66/190 of 22 December 2011 on commodities,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by Heads of State and Government on
8 September 2000,61 the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted on 16 September 200562 and its resolution 60/265
of 30 June 2006 on the follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the
Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development goals, the outcome document of
the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals63 and the outcome
document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013,64
Recalling further the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,65
Taking note of the targets set out in the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security, held in Rome from
16 to 18 November 2009, which reaffirms the pledge to end hunger and poverty,66
Recalling the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development and its
outcome document,67
Recalling also the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from
18 to 22 March 2002, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008,
Taking note of the outcome of the thirteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 68 and of further decisions and agreed conclusions on commodities adopted by the Trade and
Development Board and its subsidiary bodies in 2012 and 2013,
Taking note also of the political declaration of the high-level meeting on Africa’s development needs, held in
New York on 22 September 2008,69
Taking note further of the Arusha Declaration and Plan of Action on African Commodities adopted at the
African Union Conference of Ministers of Trade on Commodities, held in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania,
from 21 to 23 November 2005, and endorsed by the Executive Council of the African Union at its eighth ordinary
session, held in Khartoum from 16 to 21 January 2006,70
_______________
60

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

61

Resolution 55/2.

62

Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 65/1.

63
64

Resolution 68/6.

65

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.

66

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.

67

Resolution 63/303, annex.
See TD/500/Add.1.

68

358

69

Resolution 63/1.

70

See A/60/693, annex II, decision EX.CL/Dec.253 (VIII).

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation),71 and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,72
Deeply concerned by the fact that many commodity-dependent developing countries and economies in
transition continue to be highly vulnerable to price fluctuations, and recognizing the need to continue efforts to
improve the regulation, where appropriate, and the efficiency, responsiveness, functioning and transparency of
financial and commodity markets nationally, regionally and internationally in order to address excessive commodity
price volatility,
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among youth, indebtedness in some countries and widespread fiscal
strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress towards
sustaining and rebalancing global demand,
Recognizing the adverse impact of excessive price volatility of commodities, especially on women and girls,
Recognizing also that many developing countries continue to be highly dependent on primary commodities as
their principal source of export revenues, employment, income generation and domestic savings and as the driving
force of investment, economic growth and social development, including poverty eradication,
Recognizing further, in this context, that many least developed countries, small island developing States,
landlocked developing countries and African countries are highly dependent on primary commodities, and
recognizing also the challenges and special needs of those countries, many of which are not on track to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals by 2015,
Recognizing that uncertainty in global commodity markets reinforces the need to comprehensively deal with
the commodity problematique, inter alia, the demand for commodities, supply capacities, commodity revenues and
investments in commodity-dependent economies, while taking due account of the diversity of each country’s
individual situation and needs and the promotion of their sustainable development, and to strengthen the nexus
between, inter alia, trade, food, finance, investment in sustainable agriculture, energy and industrialization,
Stressing the importance of policies to address longer-term structural issues of the commodity economy and
integrate commodity policies into wider development and poverty eradication strategies at all levels,
Taking note of all relevant voluntary initiatives aimed at improving transparency in commodity markets and
mitigating the impact of excessive price volatility,
Underlining the importance of timely, accurate and transparent information in helping to address excessive
food price volatility, noting global and regional initiatives, including the Agricultural Market Information System
and its Rapid Response Forum, hosted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the joint
organization data initiative and other regional data platforms and programmes, and urging the participating
international organizations, private sector actors and Governments to ensure the public dissemination of timely and
quality food market information products,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on world commodity trends and prospects;73

2. Underscores the need for further efforts to address excessive commodity price volatility, in particular by
assisting producers, especially small-scale producers, in managing risk;
_______________
71
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
72
Resolution 66/288, annex.
73
A/68/204.

359

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Calls upon the international community to support the efforts of commodity-dependent developing
countries to address the factors that create structural barriers to international trade and impede, inter alia,
diversification, including tariff and non-tariff barriers, limited access to financial services resulting in scarce
resources for investing in the commodity sector, weak infrastructure, particularly regarding both the cost and
availability of transportation and storage, and lack of skills in producing and marketing alternative products;
4. Calls for, in that regard, the successful conclusion of the Doha Development Round of trade
negotiations with a development-oriented outcome that ensures, inter alia, greater market access for products from
developing countries;
5. Welcomes the convening of the Ninth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization in Bali,
Indonesia, held from 3 to 7 December 2013, and stresses the need for a balanced, ambitious, comprehensive and
development-oriented outcome;
6. Calls for a coherent set of policy actions at the national, regional and international levels to address
excessive price volatility and support commodity-dependent developing countries in mitigating negative impacts, in
particular by facilitating value addition and enhancing their participation in commodity and related product value
chains, by supporting large-scale diversification of these economies and by encouraging the use and further
development of market-oriented risk management tools, instruments and strategies;
7. Stresses the importance of developing and strengthening agricultural policies and strategies that
recognize and address women’s critical role in food security and improved nutrition outcomes as an integral part of
both short- and long-term responses to food insecurity and malnutrition, excessive price volatility and food crises in
developing countries;
8. Recognizes the potential for innovation, productivity improvements and the promotion of non-traditional
exports in most commodity-dependent developing countries, particularly in Africa, and calls for enhanced support
by the international community as well as exchanges of experience in these areas within the framework of SouthSouth economic cooperation;
9. Underscores the importance of increased investments in infrastructure as a means of promoting
agricultural development and enhancing commodity diversification, including value-added production, and trade,
and urges the international community to assist commodity-dependent developing countries to mainstream trade as
well as sound investment and financial policies as key elements of development strategies, based on national
circumstances and development priorities, and to invest in and support research and development of agriculture
productivity;
10. Recognizes the endorsement of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security by the Committee on World Food Security
in 2012;
11. Also recognizes the ongoing inclusive consultative process within the Committee on World Food
Security to develop voluntary and non-binding principles for responsible agricultural investments that are intended
for all stakeholders that are involved in, benefit from or are affected by these principles;
12. Stresses that technical assistance and capacity-building aimed at improving the commodity export
competitiveness of producers is particularly important, especially in Africa, and invites the donor community to
provide the necessary resources for commodity-specific financial and technical assistance, in particular for human
and institutional capacity-building, as well as infrastructure development of developing countries, with a view to
reducing their institutional bottlenecks and transaction costs and enhancing their commodity trade and development
in accordance with national development plans;
13. Also stresses that the Aid for Trade initiative should aim to help developing countries, particularly
the least developed countries, to build the supply-side capacity and trade-related infrastructure that they need
to assist them to implement and benefit from World Trade Organization agreements and, more broadly, to
expand their trade;
360

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

14. Recalls the agreement to keep under regular review, by the Ministerial Conference and appropriate
organs of the World Trade Organization, the impact of the results of the Uruguay Round on the least developed
countries as well as on the net food-importing developing countries, with a view to fostering positive measures to
enable them to achieve their development objectives, and in this regard calls for the implementation of the
Marrakesh Ministerial Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme
on Least Developed and Net Food-Importing Developing Countries;
15. Encourages developed countries that have not already done so and developing countries declaring
themselves in a position to do so to take steps towards the goal of realizing timely implementation of duty-free and
quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all least developed countries, consistent with the Hong Kong
Ministerial Declaration adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005;
16. Strongly encourages international financial institutions and development banks to assist developing
countries, in particular commodity-dependent developing countries, in managing the effects of excessive price
volatility;
17. Reaffirms that every State has and shall freely exercise full permanent sovereignty over all its wealth,
natural resources and economic activities;
18. Recognizes the importance of increasing efficiency, effectiveness and transparency in the management
of public and private sector revenues in developed and developing countries derived from all commodities and
commodities-related industries, including final processed goods, in support of development;
19. Also recognizes the important contributions of the Common Fund for Commodities and other
international commodities organizations, and encourages them, in cooperation with the International Trade Centre,
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization and other relevant bodies, to continue to strengthen coordination among them and to study ways to
establish greater stability in the commodities market, as well as to enhance activities in developing countries to
improve access to markets and the reliability of supply, enhance diversification and the addition of value, improve
the competitiveness of commodities, strengthen the market chain, improve market structures, broaden the export
base and ensure the effective participation of all stakeholders;
20. Stresses that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and its partners, in the spirit of
inter-agency cooperation and multi-stakeholder partnerships and within their respective mandates, should continue
to engage actively in collaborative research and analysis of the commodity problematique and related capacity and
consensus-building activities, with a view to providing regular analysis and policy advice relevant to the sustainable
development of commodity-dependent developing countries, particularly low-income countries;
21. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the issue of commodities in the elaboration of the
post-2015 development agenda;
22. Emphasizes the importance of facilitating accession to the World Trade Organization, particularly for
commodity-dependent developing countries, in full compliance with its rules;
23. Underlines the urgent need for the provision of and access to trade finance to commodity-dependent
developing countries, given the tightened access to all types of credit and noting debt sustainability;
24. Stresses the importance of the continuing substantive consideration of the sub-item entitled
“Commodities”, and decides to include the sub-item in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the
item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”;
25. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on the updated
assessment of commodity trends and prospects, long-term commodity prices and ways to strengthen coordination
among international commodities organizations and other relevant international organizations.

361

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 68/204
A/RES/68/204

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
74
(A/68/437, para. 11)

68/204. Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from 18 to
22 March 2002, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008, and its
resolutions 56/210 B of 9 July 2002, 57/250, 57/272 and 57/273 of 20 December 2002, 57/270 B of 23 June 2003,
58/230 of 23 December 2003, 59/225 of 22 December 2004, 60/188 of 22 December 2005, 61/191 of 20 December
2006, 62/187 of 19 December 2007, 63/239 of 24 December 2008, 64/193 of 21 December 2009, 65/145 and
65/146 of 20 December 2010, 66/191 of 22 December 2011 and 67/199 of 14 February 2013, as well as Economic
and Social Council resolutions 2002/34 of 26 July 2002, 2003/47 of 24 July 2003, 2004/64 of 16 September 2004,
2006/45 of 28 July 2006, 2007/30 of 27 July 2007, 2008/14 of 24 July 2008, 2009/30 of 31 July 2009, 2010/26 of
23 July 2010, 2011/38 of 28 July 2011, 2012/31 of 27 July 2012 and 2013/44 of 26 July 2013,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration75 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome,76
Recalling further the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development
and its outcome document,77
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,
held from 20 to 22 September 2010, and its outcome document,78 and the special event to follow up efforts made
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, convened by the President of the General Assembly on
25 September 2013, and its outcome document,79
Recalling also the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,80
Recalling further the sixth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development, held in New York on 7 and
8 October 2013,
Noting the meeting of the Global Business Partnership Forum of the Economic and Social Council, entitled
“Partnering for innovative solutions for sustainable development”, held in New York on 24 April 2013,
Noting also the meeting of the United Nations Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social
Council, held in New York on 5 and 6 July 2012,
Taking note of the summary by the President of the Economic and Social Council of the special high-level
meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, held in New York on 22 April 2013,81
Recalling the special event on the financing of social development, held on 3 February 2012, during the
fiftieth session of the Commission for Social Development,
Noting the fifty-second session of the Commission on the Status of Women, held from 25 February to
7 March 2008, on the theme “Financing for gender equality and empowerment of women”,
_______________
74

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 55/2.
76
Resolution 60/1.
77
Resolution 63/303, annex.
78
Resolution 65/1.
79
Resolution 68/6.
80
Resolution 66/288, annex.
81
A/68/78-E/2013/66.
75

362

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting also the ongoing work on options for innovative sources of financing for development, including in
various forums, such as the Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Development,
Noting further the informal event on innovative sources of financing organized by the Secretary-General on
3 June 2010, the separate meeting of the Second Committee, held on 13 October 2011, and the special event of the
Economic and Social Council, held on 12 July 2012 during its substantive session,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the follow-up to and implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus and the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development,82 modalities of the financing for development
follow-up process83 and innovative mechanisms of financing for development,84
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions and
sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among youth, indebtedness in some countries and widespread fiscal
strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress towards
sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while implementing the
reforms agreed upon to date,
Reaffirming the recognition, as contained in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, of the need for the significant mobilization of resources from a variety of sources and the
effective use of financing in order to give strong support to developing countries in their efforts to promote
sustainable development, including through actions undertaken in accordance with the outcome document of the
Conference and for achieving sustainable development goals,
Noting the establishment of the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion in 2010 as a mechanism for
institutionalizing and continuing the work begun by the Financial Inclusion Experts Group in 2010,
Recalling the meeting of the Second Committee, held pursuant to resolution 67/197 of 21 December 2012, on
13 November 2013, to discuss actions in response to the world financial and economic crisis and its impact on
development and prospects for restoring confidence and economic growth,
Stressing the importance of the full involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the implementation of the
financing for development agenda at all levels,
1. Reaffirms the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development85 in
its entirety, its integrity and its holistic approach, and recalls the resolve to take concrete action to implement the
Monterrey Consensus and to address the challenges of financing for development in the spirit of global partnership
and solidarity in support of the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals;
2. Also reaffirms that each country has primary responsibility for its own development and that the role of
national policies and development strategies for the achievement of sustainable development cannot be
overemphasized, and recognizes that national efforts should be complemented by supportive global programmes,
measures and policies aimed at expanding the development opportunities of developing countries, while taking into
account national conditions and ensuring respect for national ownership, strategies and sovereignty;
3. Reaffirms its determination to advance and strengthen the global partnership for development as the
centrepiece of cooperation in the years ahead, as reaffirmed in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,75 the
Monterrey Consensus, the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
_______________
82

A/68/357.
A/67/353.
84
A/66/334.
85
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
83

363

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),86 the 2005 World Summit Outcome,76 the Doha Declaration on Financing
for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to
Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,87 the outcome document of the Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development,77 the outcome document of the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals”,78 the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,80 and the outcome document of the 2013 special event to
follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals;79
4. Reaffirms that gender equality and women’s empowerment are essential to achieve equitable and
effective development and sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, reiterates the need for gender
mainstreaming in the formulation and implementation of development policies, including financing for
development policies, and for dedicated resources, and recognizes the importance of mainstreaming a gender
perspective into the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to all the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social, environmental and related fields;
5. Recognizes that the mobilization of financial resources for development and the effective use of all of
those resources are central to the global partnership for development, including in support of the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and also recognizes that
the mobilization of national and international resources and an enabling national and international environment are
key drivers for development;
6. Recalls the importance of the overall commitment to just and democratic societies for development, as
spelled out in the Monterrey Consensus, particularly that solid democratic institutions which are responsive to the
needs of the people are essential for sustained economic growth, poverty eradication and employment creation;
7. Reaffirms that good governance and advancement of the rule of law at all levels are essential for the
realization of sustained economic growth, sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and hunger, and
hence reaffirms the importance of the implementation of the commitment to sound policies;
8. Recognizes that sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth contributes to the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals, including the eradication of poverty and hunger;
9. Reaffirms that gender equality is of fundamental importance for achieving sustained and inclusive
economic growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and United Nations conferences, and that investing in the development of women and girls
has a multiplier effect, in particular on productivity, efficiency and sustained and inclusive economic growth, in all
sectors of the economy, especially in key areas such as agriculture, industry and services;
10. Also reaffirms that an effective, efficient, transparent and accountable system for mobilizing public
resources and managing their use by Governments is essential;
11. Recalls the resolve of Member States to enhance and strengthen domestic resource mobilization and
fiscal space, including, where appropriate, through modernized tax systems, more efficient tax collection, the
broadening of the tax base and the effective combating of tax evasion and capital flight, and reiterates that, while
each country is responsible for its tax system, it is important to support national efforts in these areas by
strengthening technical assistance and enhancing international cooperation and participation in addressing
international tax matters;
12. Recognizes that the development of a sound and broad-based financial sector is central to the
mobilization of domestic financial resources and should be an important component of national development
strategies, as well as the need to strive for diversified, well-regulated, inclusive financial systems that promote
savings and access to financial services and channel savings to sound projects that increase sustainable, long-term
economic growth, generate revenues and create jobs;
_______________
86

Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
87
Resolution 63/239, annex.

364

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

13. Also recognizes, in this regard, that microfinance, including microcredit, can be effective in generating
productive self-employment, which can help contribute to the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and underlines the need to appropriately support,
in a coordinated manner, the efforts of developing countries, including in capacity-building for microfinance and
other financial services that can foster financial inclusion;
14. Expresses deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts of the global financial and economic crisis
on development, including on the capacity of developing countries to mobilize resources for development,
recognizes that there is a need to promote the recovery, and acknowledges that an effective response to the impacts
of the crisis requires the timely implementation of all development commitments, including existing aid
commitments;
15. Recalls that the ongoing fight against corruption at all levels is a priority, reaffirms the need to take
urgent and decisive steps to continue to combat corruption in all its manifestations in order to reduce obstacles to
effective resource mobilization and allocation and to prevent the diversion of resources away from activities that are
vital for development, recalls that this requires strong institutions at all levels, including, in particular, effective legal
and judicial systems and enhanced transparency, recognizes the efforts and achievements of developing countries in
this regard, notes the increased commitment of States that have already ratified or acceded to the United Nations
Convention against Corruption,88 and in this regard urges all States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or
acceding to the Convention;
16. Emphasizes the need for more effective government involvement in order to ensure appropriate
regulation of the market, which promotes the public interest, and in this regard recognizes the need to better regulate
financial markets and to promote economic stability and sustained, equitable and inclusive growth;
17. Reaffirms the importance of implementing measures to curtail illicit financial flows at all levels, enhance
disclosure practices and promote transparency in financial information, and in this regard notes that strengthening
national and multinational efforts to address this issue is crucial, including through support and technical assistance
to developing countries to enhance their capacities;
18. Emphasizes the need to pursue, at the national level and in a manner consistent with national laws,
appropriate policy and regulatory frameworks through which to encourage public and private initiatives, including
at the local level, and to foster a dynamic and well-functioning business sector, while improving income growth and
distribution, raising productivity, advancing women’s empowerment and protecting labour rights and the
environment, and reiterates the importance of ensuring that the benefits of growth reach all people by empowering
individuals and communities;
19. Notes that foreign direct investment is a major source of financing for development, in this regard calls
upon developed countries to continue to devise source-country measures to encourage and facilitate the flow of
foreign direct investment, inter alia, through the provision of export credits and other lending instruments, risk
guarantees and business development services, calls upon developing countries to continue their efforts to create a
national environment conducive to attracting investments by, inter alia, achieving a transparent, stable and
predictable investment climate with proper contract enforcement and respect for property rights, and stresses the
importance of enhancing efforts to mobilize investment from all sources in human resources and in physical,
environmental, institutional and social infrastructure;
20. Reaffirms that there is a need to address and to promote conditions for cheaper, faster, more transparent
and safer transfers of remittances, in a non- discriminatory fashion, in both source and recipient countries, and
invites Member States, as well as the private sector, international organizations, the banking community and other
stakeholders, to work towards the further reduction of the transfer costs of remittances;
21. Also reaffirms that international trade is an engine for development and sustained economic growth, and
further reaffirms the critical role that a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral
_______________
88

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42156.

365

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

trading system, as well as meaningful trade liberalization, can play in stimulating economic growth and
development worldwide, thereby benefiting all countries at all stages of development;
22. Emphasizes the need to resist protectionist tendencies and to rectify any trade-distorting measures that
are inconsistent with the rules of the World Trade Organization, recognizing the right of countries, in particular
developing countries, to fully utilize flexibilities consistent with their World Trade Organization commitments and
obligations;
23. Notes the progress made at the Ninth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization, held in
Bali, Indonesia, from 3 to 7 December 2013, and in this regard calls for a balanced, ambitious, comprehensive and
development-oriented outcome of the Doha Development Agenda multilateral trade negotiations, in keeping with
the development mandate of the Doha Ministerial Declaration,89 the decision of 1 August 2004 of the General
Council of the World Trade Organization and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration adopted by the World Trade
Organization in 2005;
24. Underlines the fact that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments is crucial,
including the commitments by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national
income for official development assistance to developing countries by 2015, as well as the target of 0.15 per cent to
0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to least developed countries, and urges
developed countries that have not yet done so to fulfil their commitments for official development assistance to
developing countries;
25. Stresses the essential role that official development assistance plays in complementing, leveraging and
sustaining financing for development in developing countries and in facilitating the achievement of development
objectives, including the internationally agreed development goals, in particular the Millennium Development
Goals, and reiterates that official development assistance can play a catalytic role in assisting developing countries in
removing constraints on sustained, inclusive and equitable growth by, inter alia, enhancing social, institutional and
physical infrastructure, promoting foreign direct investment, trade and technological innovations, improving health
and education, fostering gender equality, preserving the environment and eradicating poverty, and welcomes steps to
improve the effectiveness and quality of aid based on the fundamental principles of national ownership, alignment,
harmonization, managing for results and mutual accountability;
26. Welcomes the increasing efforts to improve the quality of official development assistance, to strengthen
partnerships for development and to increase development effectiveness and impact, recognizes in this regard the
Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council and other initiatives, such as all of the highlevel forums on aid effectiveness, which make important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made
commitments to their outcomes, including through the adoption of the fundamental principles of aid effectiveness,
and bears in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that will guarantee effective assistance and that the
specific situation of each country needs to be fully considered;
27. Considers that innovative financing sources and mechanisms can make a positive contribution towards
achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and
assisting developing countries in mobilizing additional resources for development on a voluntary basis, as well as
maximizing the impact of existing public and private flows, and that such financing can be an important supplement
to traditional sources of financing, and encourages, while highlighting the considerable progress on innovative
sources and mechanisms of financing for development achieved to date, the scaling-up of present initiatives and the
development of new approaches, as appropriate;
28. Stresses the need to strengthen and support South-South cooperation, while stressing further that SouthSouth cooperation is not a substitute for but rather a complement to North-South cooperation, and calls for the
effective implementation of the Nairobi outcome document of the High-level United Nations Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation, held in Nairobi from 1 to 3 December 2009;90
_______________
89
90

366

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
Resolution 64/222, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

29. Recognizes that South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation are mutually supportive in
terms of both technical and financial assistance, emphasizes in this regard the importance of further
invigorating South-South cooperation, and invites all Member States to enhance South-South cooperation and
triangular cooperation, focusing on shared development priorities with the involvement of all relevant
stakeholders in Governments, civil society and the private sector;
30. Urges the donor community, Member States, international organizations, including the United Nations,
the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other stakeholders to strengthen the focus and
the impact of development assistance targeting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls through
gender mainstreaming, the funding of targeted activities and enhanced dialogue between donors and partners, and
also to strengthen the mechanisms needed to effectively measure the resources allocated to incorporating gender
perspectives in all areas of development assistance;
31. Emphasizes the special importance of a timely, effective, comprehensive and durable solution to the debt
problems of developing countries in order to promote their economic growth and development;
32. Also emphasizes that debt sustainability is essential for underpinning growth, underlines in this
regard the importance of debt sustainability and effective debt management to the efforts to achieve national
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and acknowledges that sovereign debt
crises tend to be costly and disruptive, including for employment and productive investments, and tend to be
followed by cuts in public spending, including on health and education, affecting, the poor and the vulnerable
in particular;
33. Stresses that the financial and economic crisis has highlighted the need for reform and has added new
impetus to ongoing international discussions on the reform of the international financial system and architecture,
including on issues related to mandate, scope, governance, responsiveness and development orientation, as
appropriate, and in this regard encourages continued open, inclusive and transparent dialogue;
34. Notes the important efforts undertaken nationally, regionally and internationally to respond to the
challenges posed by the financial and economic crisis in order to ensure a full return to growth with quality jobs, to
reform and strengthen financial systems and to create strong, sustainable and balanced global growth;
35. Recognizes the need to continue to enhance the coherence and consistency of the international
monetary, financial and trading systems and the importance of ensuring their openness, fairness and
inclusiveness as complements to national development efforts to ensure sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth and the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals;
36. Reaffirms the importance of broadening and strengthening the participation of developing countries
in international economic decision-making and norm-setting, notes in this regard the important steps taken in
the reform of the governance structures, quotas and voting rights of the Bretton Woods institutions, which are
directed towards better reflecting current realities and enhancing the voice, the participation and the voting
rights of developing countries, and recognizes the importance of continuing such reform processes in an
ambitious and expeditious manner in order to deliver more effective, credible, accountable and legitimate
institutions;
37. Also reaffirms that the United Nations funds and programmes, the regional commissions and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations system, in accordance with their respective mandates, have an important
role to play in advancing development and protecting development gains, in accordance with national strategies and
priorities, including progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, and further reaffirms its
determination to continue to take steps for a strong, well-coordinated, coherent, effective and efficient United
Nations system in support of the Goals;
38. Further reaffirms the need to intensify the engagement of the regional commissions in the financing for
development follow-up process, including through the provision of technical advice and analyses to be made
available to Member States;
367

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

39. Reiterates the importance of ensuring a strengthened and more effective intergovernmental inclusive
process for carrying out the financing for development follow-up;
40. Stresses the relevance of the holistic financing for development agenda, as contained in the Monterrey
Consensus and the Doha Declaration, for the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social, environmental and related
fields, and in this regard emphasizes that the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development82 provide the conceptual framework, including in the context of the post-2015 development agenda,
for the mobilization of resources from a variety of sources and the effective use of financing required for the
achievement of sustainable development;
41. Welcomes the establishment of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing, and looks forward to the report of the Committee proposing options on an effective sustainable
development financing strategy to facilitate the mobilization of resources and their effective use in achieving
sustainable development objectives as a contribution to the financing for development follow-up process as well as
to an intergovernmentally agreed United Nations development agenda beyond 2015;
42. Stresses, in this regard, the need to reinforce coherence and coordination and to avoid duplication of
efforts with regard to the financing for development process, with a view to ensuring a single, comprehensive,
holistic, forward-looking approach addressing the three dimensions of sustainable development;
43. Decides to convene, in 2015 or 2016, a third international conference on financing for development to
assess the progress made in the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration, to
reinvigorate and strengthen the financing for development follow-up process, to identify obstacles and constraints
encountered in the achievement of the goals and objectives agreed therein, as well as actions and initiatives to
overcome these constraints, and to address new and emerging issues, including in the context of the recent
multilateral efforts to promote international development cooperation, taking into account the current evolving
development cooperation landscape, the interrelationship of all sources of development finance, the synergies
between financing objectives across the three dimensions of sustainable development, as well as the need to support
the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015;
44. Requests the President of the General Assembly to convene, as soon as possible, inclusive and
transparent intergovernmental consultations, with the participation of the major institutional stakeholders involved
in the financing for development process, as appropriate, on all issues related to the conference, including the date,
format, organization and scope, taking into account the elements contained in the present resolution, and requests
the Financing for Development Office of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat to
provide secretariat support for the consultations;
45. Recalls, in this regard, the need to review and explore the modalities of the financing for development
process, including possible arrangements to strengthen the process, as well as options for bringing together the
various processes covering development financing in an integrated manner;
46. Reiterates its appeal to Member States and other potential donors to consider contributing generously to
the Trust Fund for the Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development, which would
facilitate the implementation of a strengthened and more effective inclusive, intergovernmental process for carrying
out the financing for development follow-up;
47. Recognizes the work of the Financing for Development Office, and encourages the Office, in
collaboration with experts from the public and private sectors, academia, civil society and other multilateral
organizations who work in the field of financing for development, to continue its work in accordance with its
mandate;
48. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Follow-up to
and implementation of the outcome of the 2002 International Conference on Financing for Development and the
2008 Review Conference”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit, under the item, an annual analytical
assessment of the status of implementation of the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration, and of the
present resolution, to be prepared in full collaboration with the major institutional stakeholders.
368

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 68/205
A/RES/68/205

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438, para. 37)91

68/205. World Wildlife Day
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto, under the section “Criteria
for the proclamation of international years”, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14 under section II of the annex, which
stipulate that a year should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have
been made,
Reaffirming also the intrinsic value of wildlife and its various contributions, including its ecological, genetic,
social, economic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic contributions to sustainable development
and human well-being,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,92 Agenda 21,93 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 94 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development, 95 the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation)96 and the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,97
Recognizing the important role of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora98 in ensuring that international trade does not threaten the species’ survival,
Taking note of the outcome of the sixteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, held in Bangkok from 3 to 14 March 2013, in
particular its resolution 16.1 designating 3 March as World Wildlife Day, in order to celebrate and raise awareness of
the world’s wild fauna and flora,
Recalling its resolution 67/189 of 20 December 2012, in which it expressed deep concern about
environmental crimes, including trafficking in endangered and, where applicable, protected species of wild fauna
and flora, and emphasized the need to combat such crimes by strengthening international cooperation, capacitybuilding, criminal justice responses and law enforcement efforts,
Recalling also the Convention on Biological Diversity 99 and all its objectives, and recalling that, in its
resolution 65/161 of 20 December 2010, the General Assembly declared the decade 2011–2020 the United Nations
Decade on Biodiversity, with a view to contributing to the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity
2011–2020,
1. Decides to proclaim 3 March, the day of the adoption of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora,98 as World Wildlife Day;
_______________
91

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
93
Ibid., annex II.
94
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
95
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
96
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
97
Resolution 66/288, annex.
98
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
99
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
92

369

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other global, regional and
subregional organizations, as well as other relevant stakeholders, including civil society, non-governmental
organizations and individuals, to observe and raise awareness of World Wildlife Day in an appropriate manner, in
accordance with national priorities;
3. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions, and that such activities would be subject to the availability and
provision of voluntary contributions;
4. Requests the secretariat of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora, in collaboration with relevant organizations of the United Nations system, to facilitate the implementation
of World Wildlife Day, and, mindful of the provisions of paragraphs 23 to 27 under section IV of the annex to
Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to inform the General Assembly at its seventy-first session about
the implementation of the present resolution, elaborating, inter alia, on the evaluation of the Day.
RESOLUTION 68/206
A/RES/68/206

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/438,
para. 37),100 by a recorded vote of 169 to 6, with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Tonga

68/206. Oil slick on Lebanese shores
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 61/194 of 20 December 2006, 62/188 of 19 December 2007, 63/211 of 19 December
2008, 64/195 of 21 December 2009, 65/147 of 20 December 2010, 66/192 of 22 December 2011 and 67/201 of
21 December 2012 on the oil slick on Lebanese shores,
Reaffirming the outcome of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, especially principle 7
of the Declaration of the Conference,101 in which States were requested to take all possible steps to prevent pollution
of the seas,
Emphasizing the need to protect and preserve the marine environment in accordance with international law,
_______________
100

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Fiji (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
101
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972 (A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1), part
one, chap. I.

370

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking into account the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,102 especially principle 16, in
which it was stipulated that the polluter should, in principle, bear the cost of pollution, and taking into account also
chapter 17 of Agenda 21,103
Noting with great concern the environmental disaster caused by the destruction by the Israeli Air Force on
15 July 2006 of the oil storage tanks in the direct vicinity of the Jiyeh electric power plant in Lebanon, resulting in
an oil slick that covered the entirety of the Lebanese coastline, extended to the Syrian coastline and hindered efforts
to achieve sustainable development, as already highlighted by the General Assembly in its resolutions 61/194,
62/188, 63/211, 64/195, 65/147, 66/192 and 67/201,
Noting that the Secretary-General expressed grave concern at the lack of any acknowledgement on the part of
the Government of Israel of its responsibilities vis-à-vis reparations and compensation to the Government and
people of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic affected by the oil spill,
Recalling that, in paragraph 4 of its resolution 67/201, it reiterated its request to the Government of Israel to
assume responsibility for prompt and adequate compensation to the Government of Lebanon and other countries
directly affected by the oil slick, such as the Syrian Arab Republic, whose shores have been partially polluted, and
recognizing the conclusion of the Secretary-General that this request of the Assembly has yet to be implemented,
Acknowledging that the Secretary-General concluded that this oil spill is not covered by any of the
international oil spill compensation funds and thus merits special consideration, and recognizing that further
consideration needs to be given to the option of securing the relevant compensation from the Government of Israel,
Acknowledging also the possible options proposed to measure and quantify the environmental damage as
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General,104
Noting again with appreciation the assistance offered by donor countries and international organizations for
the clean-up operations and the early recovery and reconstruction of Lebanon through bilateral and multilateral
channels, including the Athens Coordination Meeting on the response to the marine pollution incident in the Eastern
Mediterranean, held on 17 August 2006, as well as the Stockholm Conference for Lebanon’s Early Recovery, held
on 31 August 2006,
Acknowledging that the Secretary-General has welcomed the agreement of the Lebanon Recovery Fund to
host the Eastern Mediterranean Oil Spill Restoration Trust Fund, under its existing mechanism, and expressing
concern that to date no contributions have been made to the Trust Fund,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly resolution
67/201 on the oil slick on Lebanese shores;104
2. Reiterates, for the eighth consecutive year, its deep concern about the adverse implications of the
destruction by the Israeli Air Force of the oil storage tanks in the direct vicinity of the Lebanese Jiyeh electric power
plant for the achievement of sustainable development in Lebanon;
3. Considers that the oil slick has heavily polluted the shores of Lebanon and partially polluted Syrian
shores and consequently has had serious implications for livelihoods and the economy of Lebanon, owing to the
adverse implications for natural resources, biodiversity, fisheries and tourism, and for human health, in the country;
4. Reiterates its request to the Government of Israel to assume responsibility for prompt and adequate
compensation to the Government of Lebanon and other countries directly affected by the oil slick, such as the
Syrian Arab Republic, whose shores have been partially polluted, for the costs of repairing the environmental
damage caused by the destruction, including the restoration of the marine environment, in particular in the light of
the conclusion contained in the report of the Secretary-General that there remains grave concern at the lack of
implementation of the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly on the subject vis-à-vis
reparations and compensation to the Government and people of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic affected by
the oil spill;
_______________
102

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
103
Ibid., annex II.
104
A/68/544.

371

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Requests the Secretary-General to urge United Nations bodies and agencies and other relevant
organizations involved in the initial assessment of the relevant environmental damage to undertake, within existing
resources, a further study, building on the initial work of the World Bank presented through the report of the
Secretary-General to the sixty-second session of the General Assembly,105 with a view to measuring and quantifying
the environmental damage sustained by Lebanon and by neighbouring countries;
6. Reiterates its appreciation for the efforts of the Government of Lebanon and those of Member States,
regional and international organizations, regional and international financial institutions, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector in the initiation of clean-up and rehabilitation operations on the polluted shores,
and encourages Member States and the above-mentioned entities to continue their financial and technical support to
the Government of Lebanon towards achieving the completion of clean-up and rehabilitation operations, with the
aim of preserving the ecosystem of Lebanon and that of the Eastern Mediterranean Basin;
7. Welcomes the agreement of the Lebanon Recovery Fund to host the Eastern Mediterranean Oil Spill
Restoration Trust Fund, based on voluntary contributions, to provide assistance and support to the States directly
adversely affected in their integrated environmentally sound management, from clean-up to safe disposal of oily
waste, of this environmental disaster resulting from the destruction of the oil storage tanks at the Jiyeh electric
power plant;
8. Notes that in his report the Secretary-General urged Member States, international organizations,
international and regional financial institutions, non-governmental organizations and the private sector to continue
their support for Lebanon in this matter, in particular for the rehabilitation activities on the Lebanese coast and in the
broader recovery efforts, and stated that such international effort should be intensified, since Lebanon is still
engaged in the treatment of wastes and the monitoring of recovery, reiterates its invitation to States and the
international donor community to make voluntary financial contributions to the Trust Fund, and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General to mobilize international technical and financial assistance in order to ensure that the
Trust Fund has sufficient and adequate resources;
9. Recognizes the multidimensionality of the adverse impact of the oil slick, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution under the item entitled “Sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 68/207
A/RES/68/207

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438, para. 37)106

68/207. Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central America
The General Assembly,
Recalling all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on this matter, in particular its resolution 66/196 of
22 December 2011,
Recalling also the Manila Declaration on World Tourism, 107 the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development 108 and Agenda 21, 109 the Amman Declaration on Peace through Tourism, 110 the Johannesburg
_______________
105

A/62/343.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal,
Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Ukraine, United States of America and Uruguay.
107
A/36/236, annex, appendix I.
108
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
109
Ibid., annex II.
110
A/55/640, annex.
106

372

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Declaration on Sustainable Development111 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),112 the Declaration of Barbados113 and the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,114 the Mauritius Declaration115 and the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States,116 the Istanbul Declaration,117 the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011–2020118 and the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,119
Recalling further the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”,120
Welcoming the ongoing efforts made by Member States and the United Nations system in the elaboration of
the post-2015 development agenda,
Recognizing the important role of sustainable tourism as a positive instrument towards the eradication of
poverty, the protection of the environment and the improvement of quality of life and its contribution to the three
dimensions of sustainable development, especially in developing countries,
Emphasizing that sustainable tourism in Central America is a cross-cutting issue with close linkages to other
sectors, generates trade opportunities and is a fundamental pillar of regional integration and an engine of social and
economic development, income, investment and hard currency and therefore contributes to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals,
Stressing that poverty eradication through tourism with a focus on ecotourism, community-based tourism and
micro- and small businesses in the tourism supply chain is a key objective in the strategic planning of the Central
American countries,
Acknowledging the objectives, efforts and achievements of the Marrakech Process on sustainable consumption
and production and of the Global Partnership for Sustainable Tourism,
Acknowledging with appreciation the processes called for in the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development that are now under way, including the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals,
Recalling the Joint Declaration, the Plan of Action and the declaration of 2012 as the Year of Sustainable
Tourism in Central America, adopted in San Salvador on 22 July 2011, and the Declaration of the Central American
Tourism Council, adopted at its eighty-second meeting, held in Guanacaste, Costa Rica, on 7 July 2011,
Noting the outcomes of the Forum on Tourism, Sustainability and Climate Change in Central America, held
from 11 to 13 April 2013 in La Ceiba, Honduras, under the auspices of the World Tourism Organization, the Central
American Commission on Environment and Development, the Central American Integration System and the
Forests of the World organization, among others,
1. Takes note of the report submitted by the Secretary-General, taking into account the reports prepared by
the World Tourism Organization;121
_______________
111
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
112
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
113
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
114
Ibid., annex II.
115
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
116
Ibid., annex II.
117
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. I.
118
Ibid., chap. II.
119
Resolution 68/6.
120
Resolution 66/288, annex.
121
A/68/278.

373

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Notes the ongoing efforts of the Governments of Central America, in coordination with the Central
American Commission for Environment and Development, in the implementation of existing and new programmes
designed to launch and promote sustainable tourism throughout the region;
3. Welcomes the adoption of the principles of sustainable tourism by the Central American Tourism
Integration Secretariat, conceptualized by the Global Sustainable Tourism Council of the World Tourism
Organization through its Global Sustainable Tourism Criteria to serve as the framework for tourism development,
which are expressed in the strategic plan for sustainable development, 2009–2013, developed by the Central
American Tourism Integration Secretariat, capturing the region’s vision of itself as an integrated, sustainable, multilocation destination of high quality;
4. Notes the valuable role of international cooperation with relevant partners in the implementation of
various projects aimed at promoting sustainable tourism in the region, including by strengthening ecotourism, rural
tourism and colonial cities tourism;
5. Also notes the existing joint initiatives designed and implemented to stimulate regional tourism
integration, such as the Mayan World regional brand;
6. Welcomes the progress made by the Central American countries in converging on a regional tourism
strategy based on conserving the region’s biodiversity and natural and cultural attractions, reducing poverty through
employment and entrepreneurial tourism development that emphasizes the micro- and medium-sized enterprises
that dominate the industry, addressing climate change and using tourism as a tool to improve the quality of life of
the region’s inhabitants;
7. Notes the progress made by the Central American Tourism Integration Secretariat in promoting an action
plan for tourism and climate change, as a component of the regional strategy on climate change, with support from
the Central American Commission for Environment and Development, which contemplates actions to reduce
vulnerability in the tourism sector and foster climate change adaptation and mitigation;
8. Welcomes the actions taken with the aim of establishing the Global Observatory of Sustainable Tourism
network in the Americas, which may well serve as a model for the rest of the region and the Americas in using data
on sustainable tourism for improving policies and offering capacity-building to enhance the sustainability of
destinations;
9. Recognizes the need to support sustainable tourism activities and relevant capacity-building efforts that
promote environmental awareness, conserve and protect the environment, respect wildlife, flora, biodiversity,
ecosystems and cultural diversity and improve the welfare and livelihoods of local communities by supporting their
local economies and the human and natural environment as a whole;
10. Also recognizes the opportunities for promoting sustainable tourism activities through the programme on
sustainable tourism and its component on ecotourism under the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable
consumption and production patterns;
11. Stresses the need to promote the further development of sustainable tourism, in particular through the
consumption of sustainable tourism products and services, to strengthen the development of ecotourism, building on
the implementation of the declaration of 2012 as the Year of Sustainable Tourism in Central America, while
maintaining the culture and environmental integrity of indigenous and local communities and enhancing the
protection of ecologically sensitive areas and the natural heritage, and to promote the development of sustainable
tourism and capacity-building in order to contribute to the strengthening of rural and local communities and microand medium-sized enterprises, taking into account the need to address, inter alia, the challenges of climate change
and the need to halt the loss of biodiversity;
12. Also stresses the need for enhanced support for sustainable tourism activities and relevant capacitybuilding in developing countries, in order to contribute to the achievement of sustainable development;
13. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the issue of sustainable tourism in the elaboration of the
post-2015 development agenda;
14. Welcomes the efforts of the World Tourism Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity to promote sustainable
tourism worldwide;
374

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

15. Invites States Members of the United Nations and other stakeholders and the World Tourism
Organization to continue to support the activities undertaken by the Central American countries for the promotion of
responsible and sustainable tourism in the region, in the context of emergency preparedness and mitigation of and
response to natural disasters, as well as for capacity-building, in order to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals by extending the benefits of tourism to all sectors of society, in particular the most vulnerable
and marginalized groups of the population;
16. Encourages the Central American countries, through the Central American Tourism Council and the
Central American Tourism Integration Secretariat, to continue to support sustainable tourism with policies that foster
responsive and inclusive tourism, strengthen regional identity and protect the natural and cultural heritage,
especially their ecosystems and biodiversity, and notes that existing initiatives, such as the Global Partnership for
Sustainable Tourism, among other international initiatives, can deliver direct and focused support to Governments to
this end;
17. Also encourages the Central American countries to share their experiences on sustainable tourism aimed
at contributing to poverty alleviation for the benefit of all countries;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session on
developments related to the implementation of the present resolution, taking into account the reports prepared by the
World Tourism Organization in this field.
RESOLUTION 68/208
A/RES/68/208

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438, para. 37)122

68/208. Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of environmental effects related to waste
originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/149 of 20 December 2010,
Recalling also the relevant recommendations of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
held in Stockholm in June 1972,123
Noting the relevant provisions of Agenda 21, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992124 and reaffirmed in the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation), adopted in Johannesburg, South
Africa, in September 2002, 125 and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”, adopted in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 2012,126
Reaffirming the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,127 which provides the legal framework for
ocean activities, and emphasizing its fundamental character, conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely
interrelated and need to be considered as a whole through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral approach,
_______________
122

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
123
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972 (A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1),
part one.
124
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
125
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
126
Resolution 66/288, annex.
127
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.

375

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling relevant international and regional instruments such as the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,128 the Convention
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 129 the Convention for the
Protection and Development of the Marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean Region,130 the Convention for the
Protection of the Marine Environment and the Coastal Region of the Mediterranean,131 the Agreement on the
Protection of the Marine Environment and the Coastal Area of the South-East Pacific,132 the Convention on the
Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area133 and the Convention for the Protection of the Marine
Environment of the North-East Atlantic,134
Taking note of the ministerial declaration of the Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission
(Helsinki Commission) adopted in Copenhagen on 3 October 2013, in which the signatories recognized the need
for forward-looking options for solutions and an assessment of the environmental risks posed by, inter alia,
munitions dumped at sea, welcomed the 2013 report of the ad hoc expert group to update and review the existing
information on dumped chemical munitions in the Baltic Sea and agreed to produce, by 2015, a one-off thematic
assessment of the environmental risks of hazardous submerged objects, also utilizing the 2013 report on dumped
chemical munitions,
Noting the national, regional and international activities, including scientific research,135 data collection and
sharing, awareness-raising, reporting on encounters and technical advice, related to munitions dumped at sea, inter
alia, in the frameworks of the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other
Matter, the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic and the Convention
for the Protection of the Marine Environment and the Coastal Region of the Mediterranean,
Emphasizing that, in the report on the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review
the Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention (the Third Review Conference), adopted at The Hague on
19 April 2013, the States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction were invited to support voluntary sharing of information,
raising awareness and cooperation on this issue,
Noting that Member States, international and regional organizations and civil society have undertaken
activities to discuss and promote the issues related to waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea,
including international cooperation and the exchange of experiences and practical knowledge, in particular at the
International Workshop on Environmental Effects Related to Waste Originating from Chemical Munitions Dumped
at Sea, held on 5 November 2012 in Gdynia, Poland,
Noting also the concerns about the potential long-term environmental effects related to waste originating from
chemical munitions dumped at sea, including their potential impact on human health and safety and on the marine
environment and resources,
Recognizing the mandates and capacities of competent United Nations system entities in the fields of marine
environment monitoring, research and information sharing, as well as pollution preparedness and response,136
1.
therein;

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 137 including the views submitted and contained

_______________
128

Ibid., vol. 1974, No. 33757.
Ibid., vol. 1046, No. 15749.
130
Ibid., vol. 1506, No. 25974.
131
Ibid., vol. 1102, No. 16908.
132
Ibid., vol. 1648, No. 28325.
133
Ibid., vol. 2099, No. 36495.
134
Ibid., vol. 2354, No. 42279.
135
See, for example, the Baltic Sea research project entitled “Chemical Munitions, Search and Assessment (CHEMSEA)”, which is
conducting research on environmental effects related to chemical munitions dumped at sea.
136
Competent United Nations system entities include, inter alia, the United Nations Environment Programme, the International Maritime
Organization, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the Secretariat.
137
A/68/258.
129

376

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Notes the importance of raising awareness of the environmental effects related to waste originating from
chemical munitions dumped at sea;
3. Invites Member States and relevant international and regional organizations to keep under observation
the issue of the waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea, to continue outreach efforts to assess and
increase awareness of environmental effects related to that issue and to cooperate, including by strengthening
existing efforts within regional seas conventions and other international, regional and subregional activities related
to risk assessment, monitoring, information gathering, risk prevention and response to incidents;
4. Encourages voluntary sharing of information on waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at
sea through conferences, seminars, workshops, training courses and publications aimed at the general public and
industry in order to reduce related risks;
5. Also encourages partnerships between Governments, industry and civil society for raising awareness,
reporting and monitoring of waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea;
6. Invites Member States in a position to do so to consider providing assistance and sharing expertise aimed
at building capacities related to risk assessment, monitoring, information gathering, risk prevention and response to
incidents resulting from waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to seek the views of Member States and relevant regional and
international organizations on cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of the environmental effects
related to waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea, also with a view to exploring the possibility of
establishing a database138 and options for the most appropriate institutional framework for such a database, as well
as identifying the appropriate intergovernmental bodies within the United Nations system for further consideration
and implementation, as appropriate, of the cooperative measures envisaged in the present resolution, building on
and without duplicating existing activities, and with a view to achieving efficiency and synergies, taking into
account the mandates and capacities of relevant international and regional organizations;
8. Also invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report
on the matters covered in the present resolution, prepared using responses of Member States and relevant regional
and international organizations, as well as other available information.
RESOLUTION 68/209
A/RES/68/209

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/438,
para. 37),139 by a recorded vote of 144 to 1, with 34 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,

_______________
138

Such a database could contain relevant and voluntarily shared information on, inter alia, the location of dumping sites, the type, quantity
and, to the extent possible, the current condition of chemical munitions, the recorded environmental impact, best practices on risk
prevention and response to incidents or accidental encounters and destruction or impact reduction technologies, including by means of data
collection and management.
139
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay and Zambia.

377

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zambia
Against: Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
Abstaining: Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen

68/209. Agricultural technology for development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/195 of 22 December 2011 on agricultural technology for development,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,140 Agenda 21,141 the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,142 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development143 and the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),144
Recalling further the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,145
Recalling the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
held on 25 September 2013, and its outcome document,146
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome,147
Recalling further its resolution 67/228 of 21 December 2012 on agriculture development and food security,
Recalling its resolution 64/136 of 18 December 2009 on cooperatives in social development, in which it
proclaimed 2012 the International Year of Cooperatives,
Recalling also its resolution 66/221 of 22 December 2011 on the International Year of Quinoa, 2013,
Recalling further its resolution 66/222 of 22 December 2011 on the International Year of Family Farming, 2014,
Recalling the World Summit on Food Security, convened by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations in Rome from 16 to 18 November 2009, and underlining the importance of advancing and
implementing agricultural technologies,
Recalling also the outcome of the thirty-eighth (special) session of the Committee on World Food Security,
held in Rome on 11 May 2012, at which the Committee endorsed the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible
Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries, and Forests in the Context of National Food Security,148 and the outcome
of the thirty-ninth session of the Committee, held in Rome from 15 to 20 October 2012,
_______________
140

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
141
Ibid., annex II.
142
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
143
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
144
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
145
Resolution 66/288, annex.
146
Resolution 68/6.
147
Resolution 60/1.
148
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.

378

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Welcoming the work of the fortieth session of the Committee on World Food Security, held in Rome from 7 to
11 October 2013, and taking note of its outcome document,
Welcoming also the Zero Hunger Challenge initiative launched by the Secretary-General at the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development as a vision for a future free from hunger,
Welcoming further the commitments set out in the Joint Statement on Global Food Security, adopted in
L’Aquila, Italy, on 10 July 2009, which focused on sustainable agriculture development,
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,
held in New York from 20 to 22 September 2010, and its outcome document,149 reaffirming its commitment to
achieving the Millennium Development Goals, while concerned by the pace of progress to date in achieving those
Goals, particularly in countries lagging furthest behind,
Recognizing the beneficial impact that the adoption of agricultural technologies can have for the
achievement of food security and nutrition, poverty eradication, empowering women and ensuring environmental
sustainability,
Taking note of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020
adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in Istanbul, Turkey, from
9 to 13 May 2011,150 and recognizing the need to continue to work towards fulfilling the commitments made in the
Programme of Action,
Stressing the critical role of women in the agricultural sector and their contribution to enhancing agricultural
and rural development, improving food security and nutrition and eradicating rural poverty, and underlining the fact
that meaningful progress in agricultural development necessitates, inter alia, closing the gender gap and ensuring
that women have equal access to agricultural technologies, related services and inputs, all the necessary productive
resources, including tenure rights and access to land, fisheries and forests as well as to education and training, social
services, health care, health services and financial services, and access to and participation in markets,
Recognizing that young people are an asset for sustainable economic growth and that agricultural technology
has an essential role to play in facilitating access to agricultural skills for young women and men and in improving
the livelihoods of youth,
Acknowledging the role and work of civil society and the private sector in furthering progress in developing
countries, in promoting the use of sustainable agricultural technology and in the training of smallholder farmers, in
particular rural women,
Considering the increasing need for innovation in agriculture food chains in order to respond to the challenges
posed by, inter alia, climate change, depletion and scarcity of natural resources, urbanization and globalization, and
recognizing that agricultural research and sustainable agricultural technologies can greatly contribute to agricultural,
rural and economic development, adaptation of agriculture and food security and nutrition and help mitigate the
negative impact of climate change, desertification, land degradation and drought,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on agricultural technology for development;151

2. Urges Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and other stakeholders to strengthen efforts
to improve the development of sustainable agricultural technologies and their transfer and dissemination, under
mutually agreed terms, to developing countries, especially the least developed countries, in particular at the bilateral
and regional levels, and to support national efforts to foster utilization of local know-how and agricultural
technologies, to promote agricultural technology research and access to knowledge and information through suitable
_______________
149

Resolution 65/1.
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
151
A/68/308.
150

379

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

communication for development strategies and to enable rural women, as well as men and youth, to increase
sustainable agricultural productivity, reduce post-harvest losses and enhance food and nutritional security;
3. Encourages international, regional and national efforts to strengthen the capacity of developing
countries, especially smallholder and family farmers, in particular rural women and youth, in order to enhance the
productivity and nutritional quality of food crops and animal products, to promote sustainable practices in preharvest and post-harvest agricultural activities and to enhance food security and nutrition-related programmes and
policies that take into consideration the specific needs of women, young children and youth;
4. Calls upon Member States and relevant United Nations organizations and other stakeholders to
mainstream gender into agricultural policies and projects and to focus on closing the gender gap to achieve equal
access for women to labour-saving technologies and agricultural technology information and know-how,
equipment, decision-making forums and associated agricultural resources to ensure that agriculture, food security
and nutrition-related programmes and policies take into consideration the specific needs of women and the barriers
that women face in accessing agricultural inputs and resources;
5. Encourages Governments to develop and implement youth-focused agricultural development projects
and programmes, including through training, education and capacity-building, in order to stimulate the interest and
the involvement of youth in agriculture;
6. Invites Governments and international organizations, in collaboration with cooperatives and cooperative
organizations, to promote, as appropriate, and consistent with the rules of the World Trade Organization, the growth
of agricultural cooperatives through easy access to affordable finance, the adoption of sustainable production
techniques, investment in rural infrastructure and irrigation, strengthened marketing mechanisms, access to
appropriate risk management instruments and support for the participation of women in economic activities;
7. Underlines the importance of supporting and advancing research in improving and diversifying crop
varieties and seed systems, as well as supporting the establishment of sustainable agricultural systems and
management practices, such as conservation agriculture, animal disease control and integrated pest management, in
order to make agriculture more resilient and, in particular, to make crops and farm animals more tolerant to diseases,
pests and environmental stresses, including drought and climate change, in accordance with national regulations and
relevant international agreements;
8. Stresses the need to significantly reduce post-harvest and other food losses and waste throughout the
food supply chain through, inter alia, increased promotion of appropriate harvesting practices, agro-food processing
and appropriate facilities for the storage and packaging of food;
9. Underlines the importance of the sustainable use and management of water resources to increase and
ensure agricultural productivity, and calls for further efforts to develop and strengthen irrigation facilities and watersaving technology;
10. Notes the ongoing discussions on responsible agricultural investments within the framework of the
Committee on World Food Security;
11. Encourages Member States, civil society and public and private institutions to develop partnerships to
support financial and market services, including training, capacity-building, infrastructure and extension services,
and calls for further efforts by all stakeholders to include smallholder farmers, in particular rural women, in planning
and in taking decisions about making appropriate sustainable agricultural technologies and practices available and
affordable to them;
12. Recognizes the potential of information and communications technologies as tools for improving
agricultural productivity, practices and smallholder livelihoods, strengthening agricultural markets and institutions,
improving agricultural services, empowering farmer communities and connecting farmers in developing countries
to regional and global agricultural markets, and stresses the need to ensure women’s access to information and
communication technologies, especially in rural areas;
13. Calls upon Member States to include sustainable agricultural development as an integral part of their
national policies and strategies, notes the positive impact that North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation
380

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

can have in this regard, and urges the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to include elements of
agricultural technology, research and development in efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, with a
focus on the research and development of technology that is affordable, durable and sustainable and that can be
easily used by and disseminated to smallholder farmers, in particular rural women;
14. Requests relevant United Nations organizations, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the International Fund for Agricultural Development, to promote, support and facilitate the
exchange of experience among Member States on ways to augment sustainable agriculture and management
practices, such as conservation agriculture, and to increase the adaptive capacity of agriculture and the use of
agricultural technologies that positively impact the entire value chain, including technology for post-harvest crop
storage and transportation, including in pressing environmental circumstances;
15. Underlines the instrumental role of agricultural technology, agricultural research and technology transfer
on mutually agreed terms and the sharing of knowledge and practices in furthering sustainable development and in
achieving the Millennium Development Goals, calls, therefore, upon Member States and encourages relevant
international bodies to support sustainable agricultural research and development, and in this regard calls for
continued support to the international agricultural research system, including the Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research and other relevant international organizations and initiatives;
16. Invites Member States and other stakeholders to give appropriate consideration to the issue of
agricultural technology for development in the discussions on the post-2015 development agenda;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/210
A/RES/68/210

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.1, para. 8)152

68/210. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21
and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December 2001, 57/253 and 57/270 A of
20 December 2002, 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 64/236 of 24 December 2009, 65/152 of 20 December 2010, 66/197
of 22 December 2011 and 66/288 of 27 July 2012, as well as its resolution 67/203 of 21 December 2012 and all
other relevant resolutions on the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development,
Recalling also its resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013 on the format and organizational aspects of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development and 68/1 of 20 September 2013 on the review of the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006 on the strengthening of the Economic and
Social Council,
Recalling further the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,153 Agenda 21,154 the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,155 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development156 and the
_______________
152

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
154
Ibid., annex II.
155
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
156
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
153

381

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),157 the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,158 as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for
Development, 159 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus,160 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,161 the key
actions for the further implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development,162 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,163 and the outcome document of the special
event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,164
Recalling the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020 (Istanbul
Programme of Action),165
Recalling also the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States,166 the Declaration and state of progress and initiatives for the future implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,167 the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States168 and the outcome document of the high-level review meeting on the implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States,169
Reaffirming the commitment to implement Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, including the time-bound goals and targets, and the other
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and reaffirming also other
internationally agreed goals in the economic, social and environmental fields since 1992, as well as the outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
Recognizing that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge facing the world today and an
indispensable requirement for sustainable development, in particular for developing countries, and that although
each country has the primary responsibility for its own sustainable development and poverty eradication and that the
role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized, concerted and concrete measures are
required at all levels to enable developing countries to achieve their sustainable development goals as related to the
internationally agreed poverty-related targets and goals, including those contained in Agenda 21, the relevant
outcomes of other United Nations conferences and the United Nations Millennium Declaration,170
_______________
157

Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
159
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
160
Resolution 63/239, annex.
161
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
162
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
163
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
164
Resolution 68/6.
165
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
166
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
167
Resolution S-22/2, annex.
168
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
169
Resolution 65/2.
170
Resolution 55/2.
158

382

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming the need to further mainstream sustainable development at all levels, integrating economic, social
and environmental aspects and recognizing their interlinkages, so as to achieve sustainable development in all its
dimensions, and reiterating that sustainable development is a key element of the overarching framework for United
Nations activities,
Recognizing that eradicating poverty, changing unsustainable and promoting sustainable patterns of
consumption and production and protecting and managing the natural resource base of economic and social
development are the overarching objectives of and essential requirements for sustainable development,
Reaffirming the importance of freedom, peace and security, respect for all human rights, including the right to
development and the right to an adequate standard of living, including the right to food, the rule of law, gender
equality, women’s empowerment and the overall commitment to just and democratic societies for development,
Recalling the decision of the Economic and Social Council to abolish the Commission on Sustainable
Development with effect from the conclusion of its twentieth and last session, held on 20 September 2013,171
1. Reaffirms the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”,158 and urges its speedy implementation;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development;172
3. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, entitled “A life of dignity for all: accelerating
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and advancing the United Nations development agenda
beyond 2015”,173 and of the report of the Secretary-General on intergenerational solidarity and the needs of future
generations;174
4. Recalls the commitment made at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development to
strengthen the Economic and Social Council within its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations as a
principal organ in the integrated and coordinated follow-up of the outcomes of all major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic, social, environmental and related fields, and recognizes its key role in achieving a
balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for
All,175 requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States, to lead the coordination of the activities of
the Decade on behalf of the United Nations system, from extrabudgetary resources, and invites Member States and
others in a position to do so to contribute, on a voluntary basis, to the funding of the activities of the Decade;
6. Welcomes the decision contained in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development to convene, in 2014, a third international conference on small island developing States,
and in this regard renews its encouragement to the international community, the relevant entities of the United
Nations system and other international and regional organizations and other relevant stakeholders to provide the
necessary support to ensure the success of the conference and its preparatory process;
7. Reaffirms its resolution 67/290 on the format and organizational aspects of the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development, welcomes the inaugural meeting of the Forum, held under the auspices of the
General Assembly on 24 September 2013, and takes note of the summary of the meeting in the note by the
President of the General Assembly;176
8. Requests the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Economic and Social Council
to coordinate with the bureaux of the relevant committees of the Assembly and with the Bureau of the Council to
_______________
171

Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/19.
A/68/321.
173
A/68/202 and Corr.1.
174
A/68/322.
175
A/68/309.
176
A/68/588.
172

383

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

organize the activities of the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development so as to benefit from the
inputs and advice of the United Nations system, the major groups and other relevant stakeholders, as appropriate,
and encourages broad consultations on the organization of the meeting of the Forum under the auspices of the
Council in 2014;
9. Welcomes the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals,164 and acknowledges with appreciation the processes mandated in the outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development that are now under way, in particular the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals and the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing, as well as the process to develop options for a technology facilitation
mechanism, and urges these processes to complete their work in a comprehensive, balanced and expeditious manner
by September 2014;
10. Stresses the need for synergy, coherence and mutual support among all these processes and other
processes that are also relevant for the post-2015 development agenda;
11. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on options for facilitating the development, transfer
and dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies177 and on a technology bank and science,
technology and innovation supporting mechanism dedicated to the least developed countries,178 welcomes the
workshops at which these issues were discussed and takes note of their summaries,179 decides in this regard to hold
a series of four one-day structured dialogues, supported by the United Nations system and enabling the involvement
of relevant stakeholders, including international and regional organizations, multilateral and regional financial and
development institutions, universities and research institutions, the private sector and civil society, to consider
possible arrangements for a facilitation mechanism to promote the development, transfer and dissemination of clean
and environmentally sound technologies by identifying and addressing, where appropriate, fragmentation,
synergies, areas of duplication and opportunities for cooperation between existing mechanisms and processes, thus
improving overall coherence and enhancing interlinkages, identifying and addressing gaps throughout the full
technology life cycle, from research to development, demonstration, market formation, transfer and diffusion,
fostering innovation and promoting an enabling environment at all levels, while respecting the mandates of existing
institutions, frameworks and processes, and also decides that the dialogues will result in a summary of the
discussions and recommendations emerging therefrom, including on the possible modalities and organization of
such a mechanism, to be submitted by the President of the General Assembly to the Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session and for consideration and appropriate action by the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, with the aim of
reaching a conclusion in this regard;
12. Welcomes the establishment of the 10-member board of the 10-year framework of programmes on
sustainable consumption and production patterns, recalls the decision that the High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development may provide recommendations to the board and the secretariat of the 10-year framework
of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns, taking into account their reports,180 also recalls
paragraph 5 of its resolution 67/203, including its decision to review the arrangement to designate the Economic and
Social Council as the ad interim Member State body to receive reports from the board and the secretariat as
elaborated in the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns, and in
this regard decides to review the ad interim arrangement at its sixty-ninth session, after the meeting of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council in 2014;
13. Recalls its decision that the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development shall strengthen
the science-policy interface by examining documentation, bringing together dispersed information and
assessments, including in the form of a global sustainable development report, building on existing assessments,
enhancing evidence-based decision-making at all levels and contributing to the strengthening of ongoing
capacity-building for data collection and analysis in developing countries, and also recalls its request that the
Forum consider, in 2014, the scope and methodology of a global sustainable development report, based on a
_______________
177

A/67/348 and A/68/310.
A/68/217.
179
Available from the United Nations sustainable development knowledge platform website.
180
See resolution 67/290.
178

384

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

proposal by the Secretary-General, reflecting the views and recommendations of Member States and relevant
United Nations entities, including the Committee for Development Policy;180
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the mainstreaming of the three dimensions of
sustainable development throughout the United Nations system, 181 reiterates the call of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development for the further mainstreaming of the three dimensions throughout the
United Nations system, and in this regard invites the Secretary-General to continue to report to the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, on progress made, including for the consideration of the
High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development”.
RESOLUTION 68/211
A/RES/68/211

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.3, para. 7)182

68/211. International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/219 of 22 December 1999, 56/195 of 21 December 2001, 60/195 of 22 December
2005, 64/200 of 21 December 2009, 65/157 of 20 December 2010, 66/199 of 22 December 2011 and 67/209 of
21 December 2012, and taking into consideration all other relevant resolutions,
Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,183 in particular the decisions related to disaster risk reduction,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,184 Agenda 21,185 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,186 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development187 and the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),188
Recalling also the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals189 and the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,190
Stressing the importance of stronger interlinkages among disaster risk reduction, recovery and long-term
development planning, calling for more coordinated and comprehensive strategies that integrate disaster risk
_______________
181

A/68/79-E/2013/69.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
183
Resolution 66/288, annex.
184
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
185
Ibid., annex II.
186
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
187
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
188
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
189
Resolution 65/1.
190
Resolution 68/6.
182

385

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

reduction and climate change adaptation considerations into public and private investment, decision-making and the
planning of humanitarian and development actions in order to reduce risk, increase resilience and provide a
smoother transition between relief, recovery and development, and in this regard recognizing the need to integrate
gender and disability perspectives into the design and implementation of all phases of disaster risk management,
Emphasizing the added value of Governments at all levels, as well as relevant subregional, regional and
international organizations, in committing adequate, timely and predictable resources for disaster risk reduction in
order to enhance resilience of cities and communities to disasters, according to their own circumstances and
capacities,
Recognizing that developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing
States, remain most vulnerable to natural disasters and the impact of climate change and that they need adequate
international assistance for the development and strengthening of their capacities in the areas of disaster prevention
and building resilience,
Recalling that the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, which will be held in Japan in 2015,
will review the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations
and Communities to Disasters191 and adopt a post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly resolution
67/209;192
2. Stresses the importance of the continued substantive consideration of the issue of disaster risk reduction,
and encourages all States and relevant United Nations bodies to take into consideration the important role of disaster
risk reduction activities for, inter alia, the achievement of sustainable development and poverty eradication;
3. Welcomes the deliberations and results of the fourth session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk
Reduction, held in Geneva from 19 to 23 May 2013, as the main forum at the global level for strategic advice,
coordination and partnership development for disaster risk reduction and the review of progress on the
implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and
Communities to Disasters;191
4. Stresses the importance of regional coordination in the framework of the preparatory process in order to
promote broad participation in the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, welcomes in this regard the
deliberations of the regional platforms and meetings which have been held in Jordan, Indonesia, New Caledonia,
Chile, Croatia and Norway and which have provided a critical contribution to the consultations on the post-2015
framework for disaster risk reduction and the preparations for the fourth session of the Global Platform, and looks
forward to the upcoming regional platforms scheduled in 2014 in Ecuador, Thailand, Spain, Belgium, Nigeria, Fiji
and Egypt;
5. Strongly encourages giving appropriate consideration to disaster risk reduction and the building of
resilience to disasters within the post-2015 development agenda;
6. Reiterates its strong encouragement for the promotion of a complementary and coherent approach
to the relationship between the post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction and the post-2015
development agenda;
7. Stresses the need to foster better understanding and knowledge of the causes of disasters, as well as to
build resilience and strengthen coping capacities, in particular in developing countries, through, inter alia, the
exchange of best practices, technology transfer, as mutually agreed, and technical knowledge, educational and
training programmes for disaster risk reduction, access to relevant data and information, the strengthening of
institutional arrangements, the promotion of community participation, recognizing that women play a vital role in
disaster risk reduction, ownership through community-based disaster risk management approaches and a peoplecentred, holistic approach, in order to build an inclusive society, and to protect livelihoods and productive assets,
including livestock, working animals, tools and seeds;
_______________
191
192

386

A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2.
A/68/320.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

8. Recognizes the importance of the development of strategies at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels, including government-led strategies, in particular in developing countries, to achieve disaster
risk reduction, reiterates the need to further develop regional initiatives and risk reduction capacities of regional
mechanisms, where they exist, and to strengthen them within national disaster management planning, and requests
the regional commissions, within their mandates, to support the efforts of States in this regard, in close coordination
with the implementing entities of the United Nations system;
9. Welcomes the United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience as an important
contribution in the implementation of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of 2012, while requesting the
secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction as the coordinator of the Plan of Action to report on
progress, bearing in mind agreed reporting provisions of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review;
10. Reiterates its deep appreciation for the offer of the Government of Japan to host the Third World
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, decides that the Conference will be held in Sendai, Japan, from 14 to
18 March 2015, and notes with appreciation the generous pledge made by the Government of Japan to cover costs
of the Third World Conference and by the Government of Switzerland to host and to cover the costs of two
meetings of the preparatory committee for the Conference;
11. Agrees that the Third World Conference will be convened at the highest possible level and will include a
high-level segment;
12. Decides that the Third World Conference will result in a concise, focused, forward-looking and actionoriented outcome document and will have the following objectives:
(a)

To complete the assessment and review of the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action;

(b) To consider the experience gained through the regional and national strategies/institutions and plans for
disaster risk reduction and their recommendations as well as relevant regional agreements under the implementation
of the Hyogo Framework for Action;
(c)

To adopt a post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction;

(d) To identify modalities of cooperation based on commitments to implement a post-2015 framework for
disaster risk reduction;
(e) To determine modalities for periodic review of the implementation of a post-2015 framework for
disaster risk reduction;
13. Also decides to establish the Open-ended Intergovernmental Preparatory Committee for the Third World
Conference to review the organizational and substantive preparations for the Conference, approve the programme of
work of the Conference and propose rules of procedure for adoption by the Conference, and further decides that the
Preparatory Committee will meet in Geneva in July and November 2014, for two days each time, and that it will
hold a meeting at Sendai to be decided by the Preparatory Committee, as necessary;
14. Further decides to establish a Bureau consisting of two members of each regional group, and that Japan
will serve as an ex officio member of the Bureau of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Preparatory Committee;
15. Invites regional groups to nominate their candidates for the 10-member Bureau of the Open-ended
Intergovernmental Preparatory Committee no later than mid-February 2014, so that they can be involved in the
preparations for the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee in advance;
16. Decides that the Third World Conference and the meetings of its Preparatory Committee shall provide
for the full and effective participation of all States Members of the United Nations and members of specialized
agencies, that the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council, as well as
the supplementary arrangements established for the Commission on Sustainable Development by the Council in its
decisions 1993/215 of 12 February 1993 and 1995/201 of 8 February 1995, shall apply to the meetings of the
Preparatory Committee, as applicable, and that the Preparatory Committee shall consider and adopt the provisional
rules of procedure of the Conference, taking into consideration the established practice of the General Assembly,
except as otherwise provided in the present resolution;
17. Urges international and bilateral donors, as well as the private sector, financial institutions, foundations
and other donors in a position to do so, to support the preparations for the Third World Conference through
387

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

voluntary contributions to the trust fund in support of global preparations for the Conference and to support the
participation of representatives of developing countries in the meetings of the Preparatory Committee and in the
Conference itself, priority being given to the least developed countries and small island developing States, including
coverage of economy-class air tickets, daily subsistence allowance and terminal expenses;
18. Recognizes, in this context, the importance of the contributions and participation of all relevant
stakeholders, including major groups, parliaments, civil society, the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, non-governmental organizations, national platforms for disaster risk reduction, focal points for the
Hyogo Framework for Action, local government representatives, scientific institutions and the private sector, as well
as organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental organizations, at the Third World Conference
and its preparatory process, and at the same time requests the Secretary-General to ensure appropriate involvement
of resident coordinators and country teams in preparations for the Conference, in particular in country- and
regional-level preparations;
19. Decides that non-governmental organizations and other major groups whose work is relevant to the
subject of the Third World Conference that are not currently accredited by the Economic and Social Council as nongovernmental organizations, as well as those accredited to the third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the International Meeting to Review the
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the World Conference on Disaster Reduction, the four
sessions of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction and regional platforms and ministerial meetings on
disaster risk reduction, may submit applications to participate as observers in the Conference, as well as its
preparatory meetings, subject to the approval of the Preparatory Committee;
20. Stresses the importance of mainstreaming gender and disability perspectives in disaster risk management
to strengthen the resilience of communities and reduce social vulnerabilities to disasters, and recognizes the need for
the inclusive participation and contribution of women, as well as vulnerable people within groups such as children,
older persons and persons with disabilities, to the Third World Conference and its preparatory process;
21. Recognizes the substantial loss of life and of the social, economic and environmental assets of
communities and countries as a result of disasters;
22. Requests the organizations of the United Nations system, and invites the Bretton Woods institutions, the
World Trade Organization and other relevant international and regional organizations, within their respective
mandates, to provide necessary support and to actively contribute to the preparatory process and to the Third World
Conference itself through inter-agency cooperation and effective participation and coherence within the United
Nations system, as well as the efficient use of resources, so that the objectives of the Conference can be addressed;
23. Decides that the additional costs of the preparatory process and the Third World Conference itself should
be funded through extrabudgetary resources, without negatively affecting programmed activities;
24. Requests the Secretariat to provide conference services for the preparatory process and the Third World
Conference itself, the costs thereof to be borne by the host country, on the understanding that the Secretariat will
ensure that its existing human resources are utilized to the maximum extent possible, without further charge to the
host country;
25. Acknowledges the importance of the work of the United Nations in disaster risk reduction, the growing
demands on the secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction and the need for increased, timely,
stable and predictable resources for the implementation of the International Strategy, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to consider how best to support the implementation of the natural disaster reduction strategy,
taking into account the important role played by the secretariat of the Strategy, with a view to ensuring adequate
resources for its operation;
26. Expresses its appreciation to those countries that have provided financial support for the activities of the
secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction by making voluntary contributions to its trust fund;
27. Invites voluntary commitments by all stakeholders and their networks to implement the Hyogo
Framework for Action as well as to support the development of the post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the outcome of the Third World Conference to the attention of
relevant international organizations, processes and forums;
388

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

29. Encourages the further implementation of all priorities for action of the Hyogo Framework for Action
and, in particular, the carrying out of periodic risk assessments, the establishment of reliable disaster statistics, inter
alia, a disaster loss database, and the dissemination of and ensured access to and availability of risk information, and,
in order to assess outcomes, requests the Secretary-General to lead a review process on the 10 years of
implementation of the Hyogo Framework;
30. Notes the importance of the periodic reviews of the Hyogo Framework for Action, and requests the
Secretary-General to formulate proposals for effective periodic review mechanisms for the post-2015 framework for
disaster risk reduction;
31. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “International Strategy for Disaster Reduction”;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/212
A/RES/68/212

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.4, para. 10)193 and as orally revised

68/212. Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 43/53 of 6 December 1988, 54/222 of 22 December 1999, 62/86 of 10 December
2007, 63/32 of 26 November 2008, 64/73 of 7 December 2009, 65/159 of 20 December 2010, 66/200 of
22 December 2011 and 67/210 of 21 December 2012 and other resolutions and decisions relating to the protection
of the global climate for present and future generations of humankind,
Recalling also the objectives, principles and provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change,194
Concerned that human activities have been substantially increasing the atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gases, that these increases enhance the natural greenhouse effect and that this will result on average in an
additional warming of the Earth’s surface and atmosphere and may adversely affect the natural ecosystem and
humankind,
Acknowledging that the developed country parties must take the lead in combating climate change and its
adverse effects,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 195 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development196 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation),197 the 2005 World Summit Outcome,198 the outcomes of the thirteenth to eighteenth
sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and of
the third to eighth sessions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol, the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,199 the

_______________
193

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
195
Resolution 55/2.
196
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
197
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
198
Resolution 60/1.
199
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
194

389

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Mauritius Declaration200 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States201 and the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, held in Istanbul, Turkey, from 9 to 13 May 2011,202
Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,203
Reaffirming its commitment to the ultimate objective of the Convention, namely, to stabilize greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that prevents dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system, and reaffirming also that such a level should be achieved within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems
to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable economic
development to proceed in a sustainable manner,
Reaffirming also the financial obligations under the Convention of developed country parties and other
developed parties included in annex II to the Convention and under the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change,204
Recognizing the importance of transparency in proceedings of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention
and the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
Noting the decision of the parties to the Convention to adopt a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed
outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all parties at its twenty-first session, to be held from
30 November to 11 December 2015, and for it to come into effect and be implemented from 2020,
1. Takes note of the outcome of the eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and of the eighth session of the Conference of the Parties
serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, hosted by the Government of Qatar in Doha from
26 November to 8 December 2012;205
2. Reaffirms that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time, expresses profound alarm
that the emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise globally, remains deeply concerned that all countries,
particularly developing countries, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change and are already
experiencing increased impacts, including persistent drought and extreme weather events, sea-level rise, coastal
erosion and ocean acidification, further threatening food security and efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve
sustainable development, and in this regard emphasizes that adaptation to climate change represents an immediate
and urgent global priority;
3. Recognizes the need to build on the existing political momentum, with a view to achieving the ultimate
objective of the Convention and to further advancing climate change negotiations;
4. Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change on the United Nations Climate Change Conference held in Doha from 20 November to
8 December 2012;206
5. Notes that the parties to the Kyoto Protocol adopted decision 1/CMP.8 on the Doha Amendment to the
Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;207
_______________
200

Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
201
Ibid., annex II.
202
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
203
Resolution 66/288, annex.
204
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2303, No. 30822.
205
FCCC/CP/2012/8/Add.1–3 and FCCC/KP/CMP/2012/13/Add.1 and 2 and Add.2/Corr.1.
206
A/68/260, sect. I.
207
See FCCC/KP/CMP/2012/13/Add.1.

390

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Notes with appreciation the hosting by the Government of Poland of the nineteenth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention and the ninth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the
Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol in Warsaw from 11 to 22 November 2013;
7. Registers its encouragement to Member States to approach the United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Warsaw with a view to achieving an ambitious, substantive and balanced outcome, building on the
conclusion of the Bali Action Plan208 and the decisions adopted at Cancun, Mexico,209 Durban, South Africa,210 and
Doha,205 and to accelerating progress towards the full implementation of those decisions through the ongoing
negotiations, including at the nineteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention and the ninth
session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol;
8. Takes note of decision 1/CP.18 of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its eighteenth
session,211 which, together with decisions adopted at its sixteenth and seventeenth sessions, constitutes the agreed
outcome pursuant to its decision 1/CP.13;
9. Also takes note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention that parties will
urgently work towards the deep reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions required to hold the increase in the
global average temperature below two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to attain a global peaking of
global greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible, consistent with science and as documented in the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, reaffirming that the time frame for peaking
will be longer in developing countries;211
10. Further takes note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention that parties’ efforts
should be undertaken on the basis of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities, as well as the provision of finance, technology transfer and capacity-building to developing countries in
order to support their mitigation and adaptation actions under the Convention, and should take into account the
imperatives of equitable access to sustainable development, the survival of countries and the protection of the
integrity of Mother Earth;211
11. Takes note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention to extend the work
programme on long-term finance for one year, to the end of 2013, with the aim of informing developed country parties
in their efforts to identify pathways for mobilizing the scaling-up of climate finance to 100 billion United States dollars
per year by 2020 from public, private and alternative sources in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and
transparency on implementation, and informing parties in enhancing their enabling environments and policy
frameworks to facilitate the mobilization and effective deployment of climate finance in developing countries;211
12. Notes the determination of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, in its decision 2/CP.18, to
adopt a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to
all parties at its twenty-first session, due to be held from 30 November to 11 December 2015, and for it to come into
effect and be implemented from 2020;212
13. Takes note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention that the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action will consider elements for a draft negotiating text no later than
at its session to be held in conjunction with the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties, due to be held
from 3 to 14 December 2014, with a view to making a negotiating text available before May 2015;212
14. Also takes note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention to identify and to
explore in 2013 options for a range of actions that can close the pre-2020 ambition gap with a view to identifying
further activities for its plan of work in 2014, ensuring the greatest possible mitigation efforts under the
Convention;212

_______________
208

FCCC/CP/2007/6/Add.1, decision 1/CP.13.
FCCC/CP/2010/7/Add.1 and 2 and FCCC/KP/CMP/2010/12/Add.1 and 2.
210
FCCC/CP/2011/9/Add.1 and 2 and FCCC/KP/CMP/2011/10/Add.1 and 2.
211
FCCC/CP/2012/8/Add.1, decision 1/CP.18.
212
Ibid., decision 2/CP.18.
209

391

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

15. Notes the recognition by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention that climate change represents
an urgent and potentially irreversible threat to human societies and the planet and thus requires to be urgently
addressed by all parties and its acknowledgement that the global nature of climate change calls for the widest
possible cooperation by all countries and their participation in an effective and appropriate international response,
with a view to accelerating the reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions, and also notes the acknowledgement
by the Conference of the Parties that the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced
Action shall be guided by the principles of the Convention;212
16. Recognizes the need to engage a broad range of stakeholders at the global, regional, national and local
levels, including national, subnational and local governments and the scientific community, private businesses and
civil society and also including youth and persons with disabilities, and that gender equality and the effective
participation of women and indigenous peoples are important for effective action on all aspects of climate change;
17. Takes note with appreciation of the announcement by the Secretary-General that a Climate Summit
would be convened in 2014;
18. Invites the secretariat of the Convention to report, through the Secretary-General, to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the work of the Conference of the Parties;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to make provisions for the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention and its subsidiary bodies in his proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Protection of global climate for present and future generations of
humankind”.
RESOLUTION 68/213
A/RES/68/213

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.5, para. 8)213

68/213. Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/211 of 21 December 2012, as well as other resolutions relating to the
implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,214
Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,215 in which the Conference, inter alia, recognized the economic and social significance of
good land management, including soil, particularly its contribution to economic growth, biodiversity, sustainable
agriculture and food security, eradicating poverty, women’s empowerment, addressing climate change and
improving water availability, stressed that desertification, land degradation and drought are challenges of a global
dimension that continue to pose serious challenges to the sustainable development of all countries, in particular
developing countries, stressed also the particular challenges this poses for Africa, the least developed countries and
the landlocked developing countries, expressed deep concern at the devastating consequences of cyclical drought
and famine in Africa, in particular in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel region, and called for urgent action through
short-, medium- and long-term measures at all levels,
Recalling further that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development recognized the need for
urgent action to reverse land degradation and, in view of this, for striving to achieve a land-degradation-neutral
world in the context of sustainable development, which should act to catalyse financial resources from a range of
public and private sources,
_______________
213

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
215
Resolution 66/288, annex.
214

392

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Concerned by the devastating consequences of extreme weather phenomena in arid, semi-arid and dry
sub-humid regions, characterized by recurrent and long spells of drought, flooding and increasing frequency and
severity of dust-storms and sandstorms, and their negative impact on the environment and the economy,
Emphasizing the need to promote sustainable land management, sustainable forest management and the
restoration of degraded lands in order to combat desertification, land degradation and drought,
Noting that avoiding additional land degradation, especially in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, while
restoring degraded land, is crucial in order for the rural poor to achieve food security and access to energy and water,
Noting also the need for enhanced coordination and cooperation at all levels among the parties to and the
secretariats of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change216 and the Convention on Biological Diversity,217 while respecting their individual mandates,
Underlining the cross-sectoral nature of desertification, land degradation and drought mitigation, including its
economic, social and environmental dimensions, and in this regard inviting all relevant United Nations
organizations to cooperate with the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, within
their respective mandates, in supporting an effective response to those challenges,
Welcoming the organization of the third special session of the Committee on Science and Technology, during
the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification Second Scientific Conference, held in Bonn, Germany,
from 9 to 12 April 2013,
Noting the eleventh session of the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention, held
from 15 to 19 April 2013 in Bonn, Germany, at which the Committee reviewed information relating to all
performance and impact indicators of the 10-year strategic plan and framework, as well as information on financial
flows for the implementation of the Convention, submitted by the parties and other reporting entities,
Welcoming the organization by the secretariats of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
and the World Meteorological Organization, in collaboration with a number of United Nations agencies and relevant
United Nations offices, international and regional organizations and key national agencies, of a high-level meeting
on national drought policy, held in Geneva from 11 to 15 March 2013, and taking note of the declaration adopted at
that meeting,
Expressing its deep appreciation and gratitude to the Government of Namibia for hosting the eleventh session
of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention in Windhoek from 16 to 27 September 2013, and welcoming the
offer of the Government of Turkey to host the twelfth session of the Conference of the Parties in 2015,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 67/211 and the
implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa;218
2. Calls upon Member States to take urgent action to reverse desertification, land degradation and drought,
as appropriate, with the assistance of the United Nations system, relevant regional and international organizations,
multilateral agencies, major groups and other stakeholders;
3. Reaffirms its resolve, in accordance with the Convention, to take coordinated action, nationally,
regionally and internationally, to globally monitor land degradation and restore degraded lands in arid, semi-arid and
dry sub-humid areas, also reaffirms its resolve to support and strengthen the implementation of the Convention and
the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance its implementation (2008–2018), including by mobilizing
adequate, predictable and timely financial resources, notes the importance of mitigating the effects of desertification,
land degradation and drought, including by preserving and developing oases, restoring degraded lands, improving
soil quality and improving water management in order to contribute to sustainable development and poverty
eradication, encourages and recognizes in this regard the importance of partnerships and initiatives for the
safeguarding of land resources, and also encourages capacity-building, extension training programmes and scientific
_______________
216

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
218
A/68/260, sect. II.
217

393

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

studies and initiatives aimed at deepening understanding and raising awareness of the economic, social and
environmental benefits of sustainable land management policies and practices;
4. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the issues of desertification, land degradation and
drought in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
5. Stresses the importance of the further development and implementation of scientifically based, sound
and socially inclusive methods and indicators for monitoring and assessing the extent of desertification, land
degradation and drought, as well as the importance of efforts under way to promote scientific research in accordance
with the Convention;
6. Invites the parties to the Convention to provide the new Executive Secretary of the Convention with full
support in the fulfilment of her mandate and in promoting the implementation of the Convention;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the outgoing Executive Secretary in advancing the cause of
the Convention;
8. Takes note with appreciation of the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention to
establish an intergovernmental working group to follow up the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development 219 and its decision to strengthen the Convention’s scientific basis and improve the
science-policy dialogue;220
9. Takes note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention to relocate the Global
Mechanism from the International Fund for Agricultural Development, in Rome, to Bonn, to be co-located with the
secretariat of the Convention, as well as its decision to establish a liaison office in Rome with appropriate staff;221
10. Reiterates the need for cooperation through the sharing of climate and weather information, forecasting
and early warning systems related to desertification, land degradation and drought, as well as to dust-storms and
sandstorms, at the global, regional and subregional levels, and in this regard invites States and relevant organizations
to cooperate in the sharing of related information, forecasting and early warning systems;
11. Also reiterates that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development has reaffirmed women’s
vital role and full and equal participation and leadership in all areas of sustainable development, and in this regard
invites donors and international organizations, including the organizations of the United Nations system, as well as
international financial institutions, regional banks and major groups, including the private sector, to fully integrate
their commitments and their considerations on gender equality and women’s empowerment and to ensure the
participation of women and effective gender mainstreaming in their decision-making in combating desertification,
land degradation and drought;
12. Notes the importance of the participation of civil society organizations and other stakeholders, including the
private sector, in the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention and its subsidiary bodies in accordance
with the rules of procedure of the Conference of the Parties, as well as the involvement of those stakeholders in the
implementation of the Convention and the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance its implementation;
13. Invites the Global Environment Facility, in further enhancing resource allocation during future
replenishments, to consider increasing allocations to the Convention, depending on the availability of resources, and
further invites donors to the sixth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility to strive for a robust
replenishment of resources, including for the land degradation focal area;
14. Decides to include in the United Nations calendar of conferences and meetings for the biennium
2014–2015 the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention and its subsidiary bodies envisaged for
the biennium, and requests the Secretary-General to make provisions for the sessions of the Conference of the
Parties and its subsidiary bodies in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
15. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa”;
_______________
219

ICCD/COP(11)/23/Add.1 and Corr.1, decision 8/COP.11.
Ibid., decision 23/COP.11.
221
Ibid., decision 6/COP.11.
220

394

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/214
A/RES/68/214

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.6, para. 8)222

68/214. Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 64/203 of 21 December 2009, 65/161 of 20 December 2010, 66/202 of 22 December
2011, 67/212 of 21 December 2012 and previous resolutions relating to the Convention on Biological Diversity,223
Recalling also the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992, 224 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 225 the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development226 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)227 and the outcome document of the special event
to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals convened by the President of the
General Assembly,228
Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want,”229 and, inter alia, the commitments concerning biodiversity contained therein,
Reaffirming also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development230 and its principles,
Recalling the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,231
Recalling also that the objectives of the Convention, to be pursued in accordance with its relevant provisions,
are the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing
of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources
and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to
technologies, and by appropriate funding,
Reaffirming the intrinsic value of biological diversity as well as the ecological, genetic, social, economic,
scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of biological diversity and its critical role in
maintaining ecosystems that provide essential services, which are critical foundations for sustainable development
and human well-being,
Recognizing that the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention is crucial for sustainable
development, poverty eradication and the improvement of human well-being and a major factor underpinning the
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
_______________
222

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
224
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annexes I and II.
225
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
226
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
227
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
228
Resolution 68/6.
229
Resolution 66/288, annex.
230
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
231
Resolution 61/295, annex.
223

395

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law,
States have the sovereign right to exploit their own resources pursuant to their own environmental policies and the
responsibility to ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment of
other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
Recalling that, in its resolution 65/161, the General Assembly declared the decade 2011–2020 the United
Nations Decade on Biodiversity, with a view to contributing to the implementation of the Strategic Plan for
Biodiversity 2011–2020,232
Recognizing that the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities
make an important contribution to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and that their wider
application can support social well-being and sustainable livelihoods,
Recognizing also the vital role that women play in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity,
and reaffirming the need for the full participation of women at all levels of policy-making and implementation for
the conservation of biological diversity,
Recognizing further the important role of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora,233 an international agreement that stands at the intersection between trade, the environment
and development, promotes the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, should contribute to tangible
benefits for local people and ensures that no species entering into international trade is threatened with extinction,
recognizing the economic, social and environmental impacts of poaching and of illicit trafficking in wildlife, where
firm and strengthened action needs to be taken on both the supply and demand sides, emphasizing in this regard the
importance of effective international cooperation among relevant multilateral environmental agreements and
international organizations, and further stressing the importance of basing the listing of species on agreed criteria,
Noting the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, at its tenth
meeting, of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
Arising from Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity,234 and acknowledging the role of access to
genetic resources and equitable benefit-sharing arising from their utilization in contributing to the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity, poverty eradication and environmental sustainability and, thereby, to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
Noting also that 91 States and 1 regional economic integration organization have signed and that 25 States that
are parties to the Convention have deposited their instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the
Nagoya Protocol,
Noting further that 50 States and 1 regional economic integration organization have signed and that 19 States
that are parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity235 have deposited
their instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary
Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety,236
Noting that 192 States and 1 regional economic integration organization are parties to the Convention and that
165 States and 1 regional economic integration organization are parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety,
Recalling the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its ninth meeting of the strategy
for resource mobilization in support of the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention,237 as well as
decision X/3, adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its tenth meeting,238 on the review of its implementation,
including the establishment of preliminary targets by the Conference of the Parties in its decision XI/4, adopted at its
eleventh meeting,239
_______________
232

See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/2.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
234
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/1.
235
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2226, No. 30619.
236
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/BS/COP-MOP/5/17, annex, decision BS-V/11.
237
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I, decision IX/11.
238
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
239
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/11/35, annex I.
233

396

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the outcomes of the eleventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention239 and the
sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol,240
both held in Hyderabad, India, in 2012,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological Diversity on the
work of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention;241
2. Encourages parties in close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, to take concrete measures towards
achieving the objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity223 and the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic
Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization,234 requests the parties, in
close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, to coherently and efficiently implement the obligations and
commitments under the Convention, and in this regard emphasizes the need to comprehensively address at all levels
the difficulties that impede the full implementation of the Convention;
3. Recognizes that the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity can significantly contribute to
disaster risk reduction and to reducing the adverse impacts of climate change, including by adding resilience to
fragile ecosystems and making them less vulnerable;
4. Urges the parties to the Convention to facilitate the transfer of technology for the effective
implementation of the Convention in accordance with its provisions, and in this regard takes note of the strategy for
the practical implementation of the programme of work on technology transfer and scientific and technical
cooperation developed by the Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group on Technology Transfer and Scientific and
Technological Cooperation, as well as of decision XI/2, entitled “Review of progress in implementation of national
biodiversity strategies and action plans and related capacity-building support to parties”;239
5. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the secretariat and the Global Environment Facility, as the
financial mechanism of the Convention, in conjunction with United Nations funds and programmes and the
specialized agencies, as well as other entities, in organizing capacity-building workshops to support countries in the
updating of national biodiversity strategies and action plans, with a view to enhancing capacity and addressing the
need for human, technical and financial resources to implement the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020232
and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its tenth meeting,232
in particular for developing countries;
6. Urges parties to promote the mainstreaming of gender considerations in developing, implementing and
revising their national and, where appropriate, regional, biodiversity strategies and action plans and equivalent
instruments in implementing the three objectives of the Convention;
7. Calls upon Governments and all stakeholders to take appropriate measures to mainstream consideration
of the socioeconomic impacts and benefits of the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and its
components, as well as ecosystems that provide essential services, into relevant programmes and policies at all
levels, in accordance with national legislation, circumstances and priorities;
8. Reaffirms the importance of continuing to pursue more efficient and coherent implementation of the
three objectives of the Convention, and calls upon parties and stakeholders to strengthen international cooperation
measures for the fulfilment of obligations contained in the Convention, including through addressing
implementation gaps, in particular with regard to article 15 of the Convention;
9. Also reaffirms the importance of achieving the Aichi Biodiversity Targets adopted by the Conference
of Parties to the Convention at its tenth meeting, and the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity
2011–2020;
10. Recognizes that parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity have reiterated that resources,
financial, human and technical, need to be mobilized from all sources, and that this should be balanced with the
effective implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020, stresses the need for further
consideration of the evaluation of all resources mobilized in terms of the biodiversity outcomes achieved, and in this
_______________
240
241

See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/BS/COP-MOP/6/18.
A/68/260, sect. III.

397

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

regard welcomes the decision of the parties to the Convention on an overall substantial increase in total biodiversityrelated funding for the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 from a variety of sources,
including national and international resource mobilization, international cooperation and the exploration of new and
innovative financial mechanisms;
11.

Invites countries that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the Convention;

12. Invites parties to the Convention to ratify or accede to the Nagoya Protocol so as to ensure its early entry
into force and its implementation, and invites the Executive Secretary and the Global Environment Facility, as the
financial mechanism of the Convention, in collaboration with relevant organizations, to continue supporting
capacity-building and development activities to support the ratification, early entry into force and implementation of
the Nagoya Protocol;
13. Notes with appreciation the realization of the joint briefing by the United Nations Environment
Programme, the World Intellectual Property Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the secretariat of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture and the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity on the implementation of the
objectives of the Convention, including actions undertaken to promote access to genetic resources and the fair
and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilization and associated traditional knowledge held on
30 October 2013, and notes that similar interactions should be encouraged, recognizing the respective
mandates of the organizations involved;
14. Takes note of the work done by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Intersessional Working Group on Article 8 (j)
and Related Provisions, and in this regard invites the secretariat of the Convention, through the Secretary-General,
to report on the progress made when reporting on the implementation of the present resolution to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
15. Encourages parties and all stakeholders, institutions and organizations concerned to give appropriate
consideration to biodiversity issues in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda, keeping in mind the
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and taking into account the three
dimensions of sustainable development;
16. Recognizes the progress made towards the development of the first work programme of the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, which aims to provide the best
available policy-relevant information on biodiversity to assist decision makers;
17. Stresses the importance of the engagement of the private sector and other stakeholders in the
implementation of the three objectives of the Convention and in achieving biodiversity targets, invites
businesses to align their policies and practices more explicitly with the objectives of the Convention, including
through partnerships, and in this regard notes the ongoing work of the Global Partnership on Business and
Biodiversity;
18. Notes the ongoing work of the Joint Liaison Group of the secretariats and offices of the relevant
subsidiary bodies of the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,242
and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change243 (the Rio conventions) and of the Liaison
Group of Biodiversity-related Conventions, acknowledges the importance of improving coherence in the
implementation of those conventions, recognizes the importance of enhancing synergies among the biodiversityrelated conventions, without prejudice to their specific objectives, and encourages the conferences of the parties
to the biodiversity-related multilateral environmental agreements to consider strengthening efforts in this regard,
taking into account relevant experiences and bearing in mind the respective independent legal status and
mandates of those instruments;
_______________
242
243

398

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

19. Invites the secretariat of the Convention to report, through the Secretary-General, at its sixty-ninth
session on the implementation of the present resolution, including progress in the implementation of the
Convention and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, and on difficulties encountered in the process of their
implementation;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Convention on Biological Diversity”.
RESOLUTION 68/215
A/RES/68/215

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.7, para. 8)244

68/215. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its first
universal session and the implementation of section IV.C, entitled “Environmental pillar in the
context of sustainable development”, of the outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the mandate contained in its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it
established the United Nations Environment Programme, and other relevant resolutions that reinforce its mandate,
as well as the 1997 Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of the United Nations Environment Programme of
7 February 1997, 245 the Malmö Ministerial Declaration of 31 May 2000 246 and the Nusa Dua Declaration of
26 February 2010,247
Reaffirming also its commitment to strengthening the role of the United Nations Environment Programme as
the leading global environmental authority that sets the global environmental agenda, promotes the coherent
implementation of the environmental dimension of sustainable development within the United Nations system and
serves as an authoritative advocate for the global environment,
Recalling its resolution 67/213 of 21 December 2012 on the report of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme on its twelfth special session and the implementation of section IV.C, entitled
“Environmental pillar in the context of sustainable development”, of the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development,
Recalling also its resolution 67/251 of 13 March 2013 on the change of the designation of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Reaffirming the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development248 and its principles,
Taking into account Agenda 21249 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),250
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,251
Recalling also the Bali Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacity-building,252
_______________
244

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/52/25), annex, decision 19/1, annex.
246
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/55/25), annex I, decision SS.VI/1, annex.
247
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/65/25), annex I, decision SS.XI/9.
248
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
249
Ibid., annex II.
250
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
251
Resolution 60/1.
252
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/GC.23/6/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex.
245

399

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Committed to strengthening international environmental governance within the context of the institutional
framework for sustainable development in order to promote a balanced integration of the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development as well as coordination within the United Nations system,
Committed also to enhancing the voice of the United Nations Environment Programme and its ability to fulfil
its coordination mandate within the United Nations system by strengthening its engagement in key United Nations
coordination bodies and empowering it to lead efforts to formulate United Nations system-wide strategies on the
environment,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held from
20 to 22 June 2012 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, entitled “The future we want”,253 in which the General Assembly was
invited to adopt, at its sixty-seventh session, a resolution strengthening and upgrading the United Nations
Environment Programme in the manner outlined in paragraph 88, subparagraphs (a) to (h), of the outcome
document,
Reiterating the need for secure, stable, adequate and predictable financial resources for the United Nations
Environment Programme, and in accordance with resolution 2997 (XXVII) underlining the need to consider the
adequate reflection of all the administrative and management costs of the Programme in the context of the United
Nations regular budget,
1. Welcomes the convening of the first universal session of the Governing Council/Global Ministerial
Environment Forum of the United Nations Environment Programme in Nairobi from 18 to 22 February 2013;
2. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum254 and the
decisions contained therein;
3. Looks forward to the first session of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United Nations
Environment Programme, to be held in June 2014;
4. Takes note of decision 27/2 of 22 February 2013, adopted by the Governing Council at its first universal
session, on the implementation of paragraph 88 of the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development,255 as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012;
5. Welcomes the request of the Governing Council to the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme to continue the current emphasis on the achievement of results for the achievement of
programme objectives;
6. Takes note of decision 27/13 of 22 February 2013, adopted by the Governing Council at its first
universal session, on the proposed medium-term strategy for the period 2014–2017 and biennial programme of
work and budget for 2014–2015;255
7. Also takes note of the ongoing discussions at the United Nations Environment Assembly on its rules of
procedure;
8. Welcomes the continued support of the United Nations Environment Programme to the United Nations
system in the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of all major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social, environmental and related fields;
9. Also welcomes the establishment of the 10-member board of the 10-year framework of programmes on
sustainable consumption and production patterns, and recalls the decision that the United Nations Environment
Programme would serve as the secretariat of the 10-year framework;
10. Reiterates the continuing need for the United Nations Environment Programme to conduct up-to-date,
comprehensive, scientifically based and policy-relevant global environmental assessments, in close consultation
with Member States, in order to support decision-making processes at all levels;
_______________
253

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/68/25).
255
Ibid., annex.
254

400

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

11. Takes note of decision 27/11 of 22 February 2013, adopted by the Governing Council at its first
universal session, on the state of the environment and contribution of the United Nations Environment Programme
to meeting substantive environmental challenges,255 and in this regard welcomes:
(a) The Governing Council’s request to the Executive Director to strengthen the policy relevance of the
Global Environment Outlook reports, and the Governing Council’s request to the Executive Director related to the
objectives, scope and process for the next Global Environment Outlook assessment;
(b) Inputs by the Programme, as the leading global environmental authority, on the environmental
dimension of sustainable development, including in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda, as well as
in discussions on the scope and modalities of a global sustainable development report;
(c) The proposal in the programme of work for 2014–2015 for a gender and environment outlook that
would use social science information and gender-sensitive indicators to review gender-environment links and guide
policy actions towards gender equality;
12. Reiterates the importance of the Nairobi headquarters location of the United Nations Environment
Programme, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of the Programme and the United
Nations Office at Nairobi under review so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary services to
the Programme and to the other United Nations organizations and entities in Nairobi;
13. Notes the commitment of the governing body of the United Nations Environment Programme to
progressively consolidate headquarters functions of the Programme in Nairobi and, in this context, of the request
of the governing body of the Programme to the Executive Director to present a report to the governing body at its
next session and to include recommendations in the programme of work for the period 2016–2017 to be acted
upon and implemented in a timely manner, and also takes note of the decision of the governing body of the
Programme to strengthen the Programme’s regional presence in order to assist countries in the implementation of
their national environmental programmes, policies and plans and, in this regard, of the requests of the governing
body of the Programme to the Executive Director to increase the Programme’s participation in United Nations
country teams;
14. Also notes the continued support of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme for the full and effective participation of representatives of developing countries in the United Nations
Environment Assembly of the Programme, and welcomes the commitment of the United Nations Environment
Assembly in this regard;
15. Reiterates that capacity-building and technology support to developing countries in environment-related
fields are important components of the work of the United Nations Environment Programme, and in this regard
calls for the continued and focused implementation of the Bali Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacitybuilding,252 adopted by the Programme;
16. Recalls the decision contained in paragraph 88 (b) of the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution
66/288, that the United Nations Environment Programme have secure, stable, adequate and increased
financial resources from the regular budget of the United Nations and voluntary contributions to fulfil the
mandate of the Programme;
17. Notes the inclusion by the Secretary-General in the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2014–2015 of regular budget resources for the revised programme of work of the United Nations Environment
Programme, and requests the Secretary-General to maintain the resource needs of the Programme under review;
18. Urges donors, and other stakeholders in a position to do so, to increase voluntary funding to the United
Nations Environment Programme, including to the Environment Fund;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled “Report of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United
Nations Environment Programme”.
401

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 68/216
A/RES/68/216

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.8, para. 8)256

68/216. Harmony with Nature
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,257 Agenda 21,258 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,259 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development260 and the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),261
Recalling its resolutions 64/196 of 21 December 2009, 65/164 of 20 December 2010, 66/204 of 22 December
2011 and 67/214 of 21 December 2012 on Harmony with Nature and its resolution 63/278 of 22 April 2009, by
which it designated 22 April as International Mother Earth Day,
Recalling also the 1982 World Charter for Nature,262
Noting the interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on Harmony with Nature, held on 22 April 2013, to
commemorate International Mother Earth Day by discussing different economic approaches, in the context of
sustainable development, to further a more ethical basis for the relationship between humanity and the Earth,
Noting also the first Peoples’ World Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth, hosted by
the Plurinational State of Bolivia in Cochabamba from 20 to 22 April 2010,263
Recognizing that a number of countries consider Mother Earth the source of all life and nourishment, and that
these countries consider Mother Earth and humankind an indivisible, living community of interrelated and
interdependent beings,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,264
Expressing concern about documented environmental degradation, potentially more frequent and intense
natural disasters and the negative impact on nature resulting from human activity, and recognizing the need to
strengthen scientific knowledge on the effects of human activities on the Earth ecosystems, with the aim of
promoting and ensuring an equitable, balanced and sustainable relationship with the Earth,
Recognizing that gross domestic product was not designed as an indicator for measuring environmental
degradation resulting from human activity and the need to overcome this limitation with regard to sustainable
development and the work carried out in this regard,
Recognizing also the uneven availability of basic statistical data under the three dimensions of sustainable
development and the need to improve their quality and quantity,
Reaffirming that fundamental changes in the way societies produce and consume are indispensable for
achieving global sustainable development and that all countries should promote sustainable consumption and
production patterns, with the developed countries taking the lead and with all countries benefiting from the process,
taking into account the Rio principles,
_______________
256

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
258
Ibid., annex II.
259
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
260
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
261
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
262
Resolution 37/7, annex.
263
A/64/777, annexes I and II.
264
Resolution 66/288, annex.
257

402

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing that many ancient civilizations, indigenous peoples and indigenous cultures have a rich history of
understanding the symbiotic connection between human beings and nature that fosters a mutually beneficial
relationship,
Recognizing also the work undertaken by civil society, academia and scientists in regard to signalling the
precariousness of life on Earth, as well as their efforts, along with those of Governments and private sector
organizations, to devise more sustainable models and methods for production and consumption,
Considering that sustainable development is a holistic concept that requires the strengthening of
interdisciplinary linkages in the different branches of knowledge,
1.

Takes note of the fourth report of the Secretary-General on Harmony with Nature;265

2. Invites Member States to consider existing studies and reports on Harmony with Nature, including the
follow-up to the discussions at the interactive dialogues of the General Assembly, such as the dialogue held on
22 April 2013 on different economic approaches, in the context of sustainable development, in order to further a
more ethical basis of the relationship between humanity and the Earth, and to promote further studies on
this subject;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly to hold a regular, inclusive and interactive dialogue, at
the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly, to be held at the plenary meetings to be convened during the
commemoration of International Mother Earth Day on 22 April 2014, with the participation of Member States,
United Nations organizations, independent experts and other stakeholders, to advance discussions on Harmony with
Nature in order to promote a balanced integration of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development;
4. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the issue of Harmony with Nature in the elaboration of
the post-2015 development agenda;
5. Recalls its resolutions requesting the Secretary-General to establish a trust fund for the participation of
independent experts in the interactive dialogue to be held at the plenary meetings to be convened during the
commemoration of International Mother Earth Day, and in this regard invites Member States and other relevant
stakeholders to consider contributing to this trust fund once it is established;
6. Also recalls the launching of the Harmony with Nature website on the occasion of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development by the secretariat of the Conference and the Division for Sustainable
Development of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to make use of the existing website maintained by the Division by gathering information and
contributions on ideas and activities to promote a holistic approach to sustainable development in harmony with
nature being undertaken to advance the integration of scientific interdisciplinary work, including success stories on
the use of traditional knowledge and on existing national legislation;
7. Recognizes that planet Earth and its ecosystems are our home and that “Mother Earth” is a common
expression in a number of countries and regions, and that some countries recognize the rights of nature in the
context of the promotion of sustainable development and are convinced that, in order to achieve a just balance
among the economic, social and environmental needs of present and future generations, it is necessary to promote
harmony with nature;
8. Calls for holistic and integrated approaches to sustainable development that will guide humanity to live
in harmony with nature and lead to efforts to restore the health and integrity of the Earth’s ecosystems;
9.

Invites States:

(a) To further build up a knowledge network in order to advance a holistic conceptualization to identify
different economic approaches that reflect the drivers and values of living in harmony with nature, relying on
current scientific information to achieve sustainable development, and to facilitate the support and recognition of the
fundamental interconnections between humanity and nature;
_______________
265

A/68/325 and Corr.1.

403

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(b) To promote harmony with the Earth, as found in indigenous cultures, and learn from them, and to
provide support for and promote efforts being made from the national level down to the local community level to
reflect the protection of nature;
10. Encourages all countries and the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to develop and strengthen
the quality and quantity of basic statistical data on the three dimensions of sustainable development, and invites the
international community and the pertinent bodies of the United Nations system to assist the efforts of developing
countries by providing capacity-building and technical support;
11. Recognizes the need for broader measures of progress to complement gross domestic product in order to
better inform policy decisions, and in this regard welcomes the launching by the Statistical Commission of a work
programme to develop broader measures of progress,266 which, based on a stocktaking exercise of current national,
regional and international practices to measure progress, will conduct a technical review of existing efforts in this
area, with a view to identifying best practices, and to facilitating the sharing of knowledge, especially for the benefit
of developing countries;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to continue the consideration of the sub-item entitled “Harmony with Nature” at its sixty-ninth
session under the item entitled “Sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 68/217
A/RES/68/217

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.9, para. 6)267

68/217. Sustainable mountain development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/189 of 20 December 2000, 57/245 of 20 December 2002, 58/216 of 23 December
2003, 59/238 of 22 December 2004, 60/198 of 22 December 2005, 62/196 of 19 December 2007, 64/205 of
21 December 2009 and 66/205 of 22 December 2011,
Reaffirming chapter 13 of Agenda 21268 and all relevant paragraphs of the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),269 in particular paragraph 42
thereof, as the overall policy frameworks for sustainable development in mountain regions,
Reaffirming also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”,270
Recognizing that the benefits derived from mountain regions are essential for sustainable development and that
mountain ecosystems play a crucial role in providing water resources to a large portion of the world’s population,
Recognizing also that fragile mountain ecosystems are particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of
climate change, deforestation and forest degradation, land use change, land degradation and natural disasters, and
that mountain glaciers around the world are retreating and getting thinner, with increasing impacts on the
environment and human well-being,
_______________
266

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 4 (E/2013/24), chap. I, sect. C, decision 44/114.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Ecuador, Germany, Guatemala, Honduras, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Peru, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Ukraine and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
268
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
269
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
270
Resolution 66/288, annex.
267

404

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Acknowledging that, despite the progress that has been made in promoting sustainable development of
mountain regions and conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, poverty, food insecurity,
social exclusion and environmental degradation are still high, and access to safe and affordable drinking water and
basic sanitation as well as to sustainable modern energy services continues to be limited,
Noting the International Partnership for Sustainable Development in Mountain Regions (Mountain
Partnership), launched during the World Summit on Sustainable Development, with benefits from the committed
support of 52 countries, 1 intergovernmental organization and 15 organizations from major groups, as an important
multi-stakeholder approach to addressing the various interrelated dimensions of sustainable development in
mountain regions,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;271

2. Encourages States to adopt a long-term vision and holistic approaches, including through incorporating
mountain-specific policies into national sustainable development strategies, which could include poverty reduction
plans and programmes for mountain areas, as appropriate;
3. Encourages greater efforts by States, all stakeholders and the international community towards the
conservation of mountain ecosystems and the enhancement of the well-being of their local populations, taking into
account the extent of the current challenges they face and bearing in mind the increased economic, social and
environmental costs that inaction might represent for countries and societies;
4. Expresses its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters and their increasing impact in
recent years, which have resulted in massive loss of life and long-term negative social, economic and environmental
consequences for societies throughout the world, recognizing the special vulnerability of people living in usually
remote mountain environments, especially those in developing countries, and encourages the international
community to take further steps to support national and regional efforts to ensure the sustainable development of
mountains;
5. Stresses the special vulnerability of people living in usually remote mountain environments, often with
limited access to health, education and economic systems and particularly at risk because of the negative impact of
extreme natural phenomena, and invites States to strengthen cooperative action, with the effective involvement and
sharing of experience of all relevant stakeholders, by strengthening existing arrangements, agreements and centres
of excellence for sustainable mountain development, as well as exploring new arrangements and agreements, as
appropriate;
6. Encourages States to develop and improve disaster risk management and resilience strategies in
mountain regions, including a forward-looking perspective, to cope with such extreme events as rockfalls,
avalanches, glacial lake outburst floods and landslides, which can be exacerbated by climate change and
deforestation;
7. Recognizes that mountains provide sensitive indications of climate change through phenomena such as
modifications of biological diversity, the retreat of mountain glaciers and changes in seasonal runoff that are having
an impact on major sources of freshwater in the world, and stresses the need to undertake actions to minimize the
negative effects of these phenomena and promote adaptation measures;
8. Underlines the fact that action at the national level is a key factor in achieving progress in sustainable
mountain development, welcomes its steady increase in recent years with a multitude of events, activities and
initiatives, and invites the international community to support the efforts of developing countries to develop and
implement strategies and programmes, including, where required, enabling policies and laws for the sustainable
development of mountains, within the framework of national sustainable development plans;
9. Encourages the increased involvement of local authorities, as well as other relevant stakeholders, in
particular the rural population, indigenous peoples, civil society and the private sector, in the development and
implementation of programmes, land-use planning and land tenure arrangements, and in activities related to
sustainable development in mountains;
_______________
271

A/68/307.

405

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Underlines the need for improved access to resources, including land, for women in mountain regions,
as well as the need to strengthen the role of women in mountain regions in decision-making processes that affect
their communities, cultures and environments, and encourages Governments and intergovernmental organizations
to integrate the gender dimension, including gender-disaggregated data, in mountain development activities,
programmes and projects;
11. Encourages the further undertaking of multi-stakeholder and transboundary initiatives at the national
and regional levels, where appropriate, such as those supported by all relevant international and regional
organizations, to enhance sustainable development in mountain regions;
12. Stresses that indigenous peoples’ traditions and knowledge, including in the field of medicine, are to be
fully considered, respected and promoted in development policy, strategies and programmes in mountain regions,
and underlines the need to promote the full participation and involvement of mountain communities in decisions
that affect them and to integrate indigenous knowledge, heritage and values in all development initiatives;
13. Takes note of decision X/30 of 29 October 2010, entitled “Mountain biological diversity”, adopted by
the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity at its tenth meeting,272 in which the parties
noted with appreciation the progress made by the Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment and invited parties,
other Governments and stakeholders to take specific actions for the conservation, sustainable use and benefitsharing of mountain biological diversity;
14. Welcomes the growing contribution of sustainable tourism initiatives in mountain regions as a way to
enhance environmental protection and socioeconomic benefits to local communities, and the fact that consumer
demand is increasingly moving towards responsible and sustainable tourism;
15. Notes that public awareness needs to be raised with respect to the positive and unaccounted economic
benefits that mountains provide not only to highland communities but also to a large portion of the world’s
population living in lowland areas, and underlines the importance of enhancing the sustainability of ecosystems that
provide essential resources and services for human well-being and economic activity and of developing innovative
means of financing for their protection;
16. Encourages Member States to increase efforts to address poverty, food security and nutrition, social
exclusion and environmental degradation in mountain areas, so as to improve the livelihood of the local
communities and the sustainable use of mountain resources;
17. Also encourages Member States to collect at the local, national and regional level, as appropriate,
disaggregated scientific data on mountain areas through systematic monitoring, including of trends of progress and
change, based on relevant criteria, to support interdisciplinary research programmes and projects and to enhance an
integrated and inclusive approach to decision-making and planning;
18. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, to further
enhance their constructive efforts to strengthen inter-agency collaboration to achieve more effective implementation of
the relevant chapters of Agenda 21,268 including chapter 13, and paragraph 42 and other relevant paragraphs of the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,269 and the relevant paragraphs of the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,270 taking into account the need for the further
involvement of the United Nations system, in particular the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations University, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations
Children’s Fund, as well as international financial institutions and other relevant international organizations;
19. Recognizes that mountain ranges are usually shared among several countries, and in this context
encourages transboundary cooperation approaches where the States concerned agree to the sustainable development
of mountain ranges and information-sharing in this regard;
20. Notes with appreciation, in this context, the Convention on the Protection of the Alps (Alpine
Convention),273 as well as the Framework Convention on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the
_______________
272
273

406

See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1917, No. 32724.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Carpathians, which promote constructive new approaches to the integrated, sustainable development of the
Alps and the Carpathians and provide a forum for dialogue among stakeholders;
21. Encourages States and all stakeholders to give appropriate consideration to the issues of sustainable
mountain development in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution under the sub-item entitled “Sustainable mountain development” of the
item entitled “Sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 68/218
A/RES/68/218

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.10, para. 6)274

68/218. The role of the international community in averting the radiation threat in Central Asia
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the outcome of the high-level international forum entitled “Uranium Tailings in Central
Asia: Local Problems, Regional Consequences, Global Solution”, held in Geneva on 29 June 2009,
Taking into account also the outcome of the international conference entitled “Uranium Tailings in Central
Asia: Joint Efforts in Risk Reduction”, held in Bishkek on 24 and 25 October 2012,
Noting that numerous burial sites of uranium waste and other extremely hazardous radioactive processing
wastes are located in densely populated areas of the Central Asian countries,
Noting also that many tailings ponds are located in seismically active areas close to population centres and the
banks of major rivers in the region and are subject to the threat of natural disasters,
Reaffirming the human rights to life, to an adequate standard of living and to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health, and stressing in this regard the need to mitigate the impact of
natural and man-made disasters in the areas around uranium waste burial sites and tailings ponds in order to avoid
loss of human life, as well as immediate and long-term negative consequences for human health,
Considering that, despite the efforts made by the States of Central Asia at the national level and despite the
support of international programmes and projects to remediate former uranium mines and tailings ponds, a number
of States continue to have serious social, economic and environmental problems associated with former uranium
mines and tailings ponds,
Striving to contribute to strengthening the security and safety of radioactive materials,
Expressing gratitude to donor countries, in particular the Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Japan, Norway,
the Russian Federation, Switzerland and the United States of America, and to international and regional
organizations and financial institutions, including the United Nations Development Programme, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union, the
Eurasian Economic Community, the Global Environment Facility, the World Bank and others, which are providing
assistance in addressing the problems of uranium tailings in the Central Asian region,
Welcoming the efforts of the secretariat of the International Atomic Energy Agency relating to technical
coordination for multilateral initiatives to remediate legacy uranium production sites, notably in Central Asia,
through the Coordination Group for Uranium Legacy Sites, as emphasized in resolution GC (57)/RES/9 on
measures to strengthen international cooperation in nuclear, radiation, transport and waste safety, adopted by the
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its fifty-seventh session,
_______________
274
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Azerbaijan, Canada, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and United States of
America.

407

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Stressing the importance of sharing information, good practices and lessons learned in the management of
radioactively contaminated areas obtained in the process of overcoming the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster,
and encouraging cooperation to strengthen national expertise in radiation safety and radiation protection, including
through relevant training programmes, and the use of experience gained, in cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme, in addressing the human dimension of preparedness and recovery from nuclear disaster
situations,275
Taking into account that the Governments and populations of the States of Central Asia are aware of the threat
of possible natural or man-made disasters and their global consequences for the lives and the health of a large
number of people and for the environment,
1.

Notes the importance of remediating areas affected by former uranium extraction plants;

2. Recognizes the need to devise and promote effective programmes and projects for the responsible and
safe management of radioactive and toxic waste in Central Asia;
3. Also recognizes the role of the international community in averting the radiation threat in Central Asia,
and emphasizes the importance of adopting preventive and other measures to resolve the problem of radioactive and
toxic waste and to remediate the polluted areas in accordance with the highest safety standards and best global
practices;
4. Calls upon the international community to assist the States of Central Asia in resolving the problems of
uranium tailings ponds, and emphasizes the importance of regional cooperation in the following priority areas:
improvement of the legislative framework; management and maintenance at safe levels of uranium and other
radioactive and toxic tailings; remediation of tailings ponds and development and implementation of special
programmes and projects to improve the monitoring of their safety; raising public awareness; adoption of measures
to prevent people from gaining access to polluted materials; and implementation of socioeconomic, health and
humanitarian measures to enhance the quality and standard of living of the population in regions where tailings
ponds are located;
5. Also calls upon the international community to continue the active sharing of experience and knowledge
so as to effectively resolve the problems of uranium and other radioactive and toxic tailings;
6. Expresses support for the efforts made by the States of Central Asia in devising and implementing their
country programmes, including in mobilizing domestic resources, and encourages the States of the region to hold
further bilateral and multilateral negotiations to avert the radiation threat in Central Asia.
RESOLUTION 68/219
A/RES/68/219

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/440/Add.1, para. 8)276

68/219. Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and
interdependence
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 62/199 of 19 December 2007, 63/222 of 19 December 2008, 64/210 of 21 December
2009, 65/168 of 20 December 2010 and 66/210 of 22 December 2011 on the role of the United Nations in
promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence,
Acknowledging the vital importance of an inclusive, transparent and effective multilateral system in order to
address the urgent global challenges of today, recognizing the universality of the United Nations, and reaffirming its
commitment to promote and strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations,
_______________
275
276

408

See A/68/498.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming the role and authority of the General Assembly on global matters of concern to the international
community, as set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
Acknowledging that the United Nations, particularly the General Assembly, provides a universal and inclusive
multilateral forum which confers incomparable value to its discussions and its decisions on global matters of
concern to the international community,
Recalling the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and its outcome document, entitled
“The future we want”, 277 and all major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields for the promotion of sustainable development and their outcomes and follow-up
processes,
Recognizing that the international multilateral system should continue to support sustainable development,
particularly in relation to inclusive and equitable economic growth, job creation and the efforts of developing
countries to eradicate poverty and hunger and achieve environmental sustainability, and should continue to promote
good governance and the rule of law at all levels,
Recognizing also that globalization and interdependence imply that the economic performance of a country is
increasingly affected by factors outside its geographical borders, that maximizing the benefits of globalization in an
equitable manner requires responses at the global, regional and national levels and that there remains a need for a
strengthened global partnership for development to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals,
Emphasizing that globalization is a useful tool for development that should benefit all countries and that every
effort should be made by all to meaningfully integrate all countries into the global economy by creating an enabling
international environment for their goods and services,
Reaffirming its strong support for fair and inclusive globalization and the need to translate sustained, inclusive
and equitable growth into sustainable development, particularly poverty eradication, and, in this regard, its resolve to
make the goals of full and productive employment and decent work for all, including women and young people, a
central objective of relevant national and international policies and national development strategies, including
poverty eradication strategies, as part of efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals,
Reaffirming also the commitment to eradicate poverty and hunger and promote sustained, inclusive and
equitable growth, sustainable development and global prosperity for all and to promote the development of the
productive sectors in developing countries to enable them to participate more effectively in and benefit from the
process of globalization,
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts of the world financial and economic crisis,
particularly on development, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among young people, indebtedness in some countries and widespread
fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress
towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system, while implementing the
reforms agreed upon to date,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,278
1. Reiterates the need for inclusive, transparent and effective multilateral approaches to managing global
challenges, and in this regard reaffirms the central role of the United Nations system in ongoing efforts to find
common solutions to such challenges;
2. Recognizes the need for the multilateral trade, economic and financial architecture to incorporate
and promote sustainable development and ensure greater coherence and coordination to promote an enabling
international environment that facilitates the work of Member States in addressing, inter alia, poverty,
inequalities and environmental challenges;
_______________
277
278

Resolution 66/288, annex.
A/68/259.

409

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Reaffirms the need for the United Nations to play a fundamental role in the promotion of international
cooperation for development and the coherence, coordination and implementation of development goals and actions
agreed upon by the international community, and reiterates its commitment to strengthening coordination within the
United Nations in close cooperation with all other multilateral financial, trade and development institutions in order
to support sustainable development, particularly in the context of the post-2015 development agenda;
4. Also reaffirms the need to strengthen the central role of the United Nations in enhancing the global
partnership for development, with a view to creating a supportive global environment for the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals, including accelerating efforts to deliver and fully implement existing global
partnership for development commitments, and emphasizes in this regard the need for enhanced accountability of
the United Nations development system to Member States;
5. Recognizes that the scaling-up of successful policies and approaches in the implementation and the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals needs to be complemented by a strengthened global
partnership for development;
6. Also recognizes the central role of a strengthened global partnership for development, based on lessons
learned in the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals, to support a truly universal global
development agenda beyond 2015;
7. Further recognizes that the increasing interdependence of national economies in a globalizing world and
the emergence of rules-based regimes for international economic relations have meant that the space for national
economic policy, that is, the scope for domestic policy, especially in the areas of trade, investment and international
development, is now often framed by international disciplines, commitments and global market considerations and
that it is for each Government to evaluate the trade-off between the benefits of accepting international rules and
commitments and the constraints posed by the loss of policy space;
8. Recognizes that policies which integrate the three dimensions of sustainable development can contribute
to reducing inequalities within and among countries, with a view to guaranteeing that the poor and those living in
the most vulnerable situations maximize their benefits from a globalized world;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session the item entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly a report on the sub-item
entitled “Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and
interdependence”.
RESOLUTION 68/220
A/RES/68/220

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/440/Add.2, para. 14)279

68/220. Science, technology and innovation for development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/200 of 23 December 2003, 59/220 of 22 December 2004, 60/205 of 22 December
2005, 61/207 of 20 December 2006, 62/201 of 19 December 2007, 64/212 of 21 December 2009 and 66/211 of
22 December 2011,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/46 of 28 July 2006, 2009/8 of 24 July 2009,
2010/3 of 19 July 2010, 2011/17 of 26 July 2011 and 2012/6 of 24 July 2012,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,280
Recalling also the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society,281
_______________
279

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 60/1.
281
See A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.
280

410

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling further the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”,282
Recognizing the importance of technology as one of the key means of implementation in the pursuit of
sustainable development, along with finance, capacity-building and trade,
Taking note of the reports of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its fourteenth,
fifteenth and sixteenth sessions,283
Recalling its resolutions 64/208 of 21 December 2009 and 65/280 of 17 June 2011,
Recalling also the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women on access and participation
of women and girls in education, training and science and technology, adopted at its fifty-fifth session,284
Recognizing the vital role that science, technology and innovation, including environmentally sound
technologies, can play in development and in facilitating efforts to address global challenges, such as efforts to
eradicate poverty, achieve food security, enhance access to energy and increase energy efficiency, fight diseases,
improve education, protect the environment, accelerate the pace of economic diversification and transformation,
improve productivity and competitiveness and ultimately support sustainable development,
Recognizing also that science, technology and innovation cooperation and collaboration with, as well as
foreign direct investment in and trade with and among, developing countries is fundamental to enhancing their
ability to produce, access, comprehend, select, adapt and use science, technology and innovation knowledge,
Concerned that many developing countries lack affordable access to information and communications
technologies and that for the majority of the poor the promise of science, technology and innovation remains
unfulfilled, and emphasizing the need to effectively harness technology to bridge the digital divide,
Recognizing that international support can help developing countries to benefit from technological advances
and enhance their productive capacity to build, support and nurture innovation capacity to enable the development,
adoption and dissemination of technology,
Recognizing also the importance of the creation of a conducive environment that attracts and supports private
investment, entrepreneurship and corporate social responsibility, including an efficient and effective intellectual
property framework,
Reaffirming the need to enhance the science, technology and innovation programmes of the relevant entities of
the United Nations system,
Noting with appreciation the collaboration between the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in establishing a network of centres of
excellence in science, technology and innovation for developing countries and in designing and carrying out
science, technology and innovation policy reviews,
Noting the ongoing efforts by the World Intellectual Property Organization, under its existing mandate, to
establish technology and innovation support centres in over 65 countries, providing access to technological
information through patent databases and access to scientific literature through the Access to Research for
Development and Innovation project,
Cognizant of the establishment of the inter-agency cooperation network on biotechnology, UN-Biotech, in 2004,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General,285
Encouraging the development of initiatives to promote private sector engagement in technology transfer, on
mutually agreed terms, and technological and scientific cooperation,
_______________
282

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 11 (E/2011/31); ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 11 and
corrigendum (E/2012/31 and Corr.1); and ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 11 and corrigendum (E/2013/31 and Corr.1).
284
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 7 (E/2011/27), chap. I, sect. A.
285
A/66/208 and A/68/227.
283

411

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1.

Reaffirms its commitment:

(a) To strengthen and enhance existing mechanisms and to support initiatives for research and development,
including through voluntary partnerships between the public and private sectors, to address the special needs of
developing countries in the areas of health, agriculture, conservation, sustainable use of natural resources and
environmental management, energy, forestry and the impact of climate change;
(b) To promote and facilitate, as appropriate, access to, and development, transfer and diffusion of,
technologies, including environmentally sound technologies and the corresponding know-how, to developing
countries, and in this regard takes note of paragraph 273 of the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,282 in which relevant United Nations
agencies were requested to identify options for a facilitation mechanism that promotes the development, transfer
and dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies by, inter alia, assessing the technology needs
of developing countries, options to address those needs and capacity-building, on the basis of which the
Secretary-General, taking into account existing models, submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session a report on options for a facilitation mechanism that promotes the development, transfer and
dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies,286 also takes note of the decision to hold a series
of workshops on, inter alia, the technology needs of developing countries, options to address those needs,
including capacity-building, and a technology facilitation mechanism, taking into account existing mechanisms
and the need to avoid duplication and promote synergies and coherence, as well as for the Secretary-General to
report at its sixty-eighth session on the discussions, options and recommendations arising from the workshops,
including on the way forward, as well as on additional input from Member States and the United Nations system,
and further takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on options for facilitating the development, transfer
and dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies, submitted to the Assembly at its sixtyeighth session;287
(c) To assist developing countries in their efforts to promote and develop national strategies for human
resources in science, technology and innovation through, inter alia, education, basic science and engineering, which
are primary drivers of national capacity-building for development;
(d) To the actions agreed upon by the least developed countries and development partners on science,
technology and innovation, as outlined in paragraphs 52 and 53 of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries;288
(e) To promote and support greater efforts to develop renewable sources of energy, including appropriate
technology;
(f) To implement policies at the national and international levels to attract both public and private
investment, domestic and foreign, including through public and private partnerships, that enhances knowledge,
transfers technology on mutually agreed terms and raises productivity;
(g) To support the efforts of developing countries, individually and collectively, to harness new agricultural
technologies in order to increase agricultural productivity through environmentally sustainable means;
(h) To encourage the engagement of the private sector to support, through voluntary partnerships, including
the transfer of technology and related know-how, developing countries, on mutually agreed terms, through
mechanisms such as the Climate Technology Centre and Network of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, the climate innovation centres of the World Bank infoDev programme and the Re:Search and
GREEN programmes of the World Intellectual Property Organization, and in this regard emphasizes the importance
of applying best practices in coordination and sharing of lessons learned within and between partners to avoid
duplication and increase impact;
_______________
286

A/67/348.
A/68/310.
288
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
287

412

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(i) To support better coordination and coherence, including the application of best practices in coordination
and the sharing of lessons learned among United Nations agencies and international organizations providing
technical assistance and capacity-building in the field of science, technology and innovation directed towards
development priorities and needs;
2. Reaffirms the central role of Governments, with active contributions from stakeholders from the public
and private sectors, civil society and research institutions, in creating and supporting an enabling environment for
innovation and entrepreneurship and the advancement of science, technology and engineering, in accordance with
national priorities;
3. Recognizes the current role of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other
relevant United Nations agencies, as well as other relevant organizations, in helping Governments, upon request, to
ensure that science, technology and innovation policies are integrated into and are supportive of national
development strategies and sustainable development in their countries and that their science, technology and
innovation policies and programmes support national development agendas;
4. Also recognizes that science, technology and innovation, including information and communications
technologies, are vital for the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, and for the full participation of developing countries in the global economy;
5. Affirms that science, technology and innovation are essential enablers and drivers for the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals and the promotion of the economic, social and environmental components of
sustainable development and should be given due consideration in the elaboration of the post-2015 development
agenda;
6. Recognizes that full and equal access to and participation in science, technology and innovation for
women of all ages is imperative for achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women, and underlines that
addressing barriers to equal access for women and girls to science, technology and innovation requires a systematic,
comprehensive, integrated, sustainable, multidisciplinary and multisectoral approach, and in this regard urges
Governments to mainstream a gender perspective in legislation, policies and programmes;
7. Notes the importance of facilitating access to and sharing accessible and assistive technologies, through
the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms and other actions, to advance disability-inclusive development,
ensure accessibility for persons with disabilities and promote their empowerment, recognizing that persons with
disabilities make up an estimated 15 per cent of the world’s population;
8. Requests the Commission on Science and Technology for Development to provide a forum within
which to continue to assist the Economic and Social Council as the focal point in the system-wide follow-up to the
outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society281 and to address within its mandate, in accordance with
Council resolution 2006/46, the special needs of developing countries in areas such as agriculture, rural
development, information and communications technologies and environmental management;
9. Encourages the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in collaboration with relevant
partners, such as the World Intellectual Property Organization, the International Telecommunication Union, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations University, to continue to
undertake science, technology and innovation policy reviews, with a view to assisting developing countries and
countries with economies in transition in identifying the measures that are needed to integrate science, technology
and innovation policies into their national development strategies;
10. Encourages Governments to strengthen and foster investment in research and development for
environmentally sound technologies and to promote the involvement of the business and financial sectors in the
development of those technologies, and invites the international community to support those efforts;
11. Encourages efforts to increase the availability of data to support the measurement of national innovation
systems (such as the existing global innovation indices) and empirical research on innovation and development to
assist policymakers in designing and implementing innovation strategies;
12. Also encourages existing arrangements and the further promotion of regional, subregional and
interregional joint research and development projects, where feasible, by mobilizing existing scientific and research
and development resources and by networking sophisticated scientific facilities and research equipment;
413

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

13. Emphasizes that science, technology and innovation are critical in meeting development goals, including
sustainable development objectives, and that many developing countries are facing serious challenges in building
their national science, technology and innovation base;
14. Encourages scientific organizations and research institutions dealing with science, technology and
innovation to develop dynamic strategic alliances with Governments, the public and private sectors, universities,
laboratories and civil society to further expand their fellowship and training programmes, including through NorthSouth, South-South and triangular cooperation;
15. Calls upon Member States and the United Nations development system, and encourages other
stakeholders, as appropriate, to continue to initiate, implement and support measures to improve the level of
participation of scientists and engineers from developing countries in international collaborative research, science,
technology and innovation projects and to promote investments in order to enhance public knowledge and to
achieve sustainable development;
16. Also calls upon Member States and the United Nations development system, and encourages other
stakeholders, as appropriate, to continue to strengthen their support for the different science, technology and
innovation partnerships with developing countries in primary, secondary and higher education, vocational education
and continuing education, business opportunities for the private sector, science, technology and innovation
infrastructure and science, technology and innovation advice for developing countries;
17. Encourages the international community to continue to facilitate, in view of the differences in levels of
development between countries, an adequate diffusion of scientific and technical knowledge and transfer of, access
to and acquisition of technology for developing countries, under fair, transparent and mutually agreed terms, in a
manner conducive to social and economic welfare for the benefit of society;
18. Reiterates its call for continued collaboration between United Nations entities and other international
organizations, civil society and the private sector in implementing the outcomes of the World Summit on the
Information Society, with a view to putting the potential of information and communications technologies at the
service of development through policy research on the digital divide and on new challenges of the information
society, as well as technical assistance activities, involving multi-stakeholder partnerships;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and recommendations for future follow-up, including lessons learned in
integrating science, technology and innovation policies into national development strategies.
RESOLUTION 68/221
A/RES/68/221

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/440/Add.2, para. 14)289

68/221. International Year of Light and Light-based Technologies, 2015
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006, on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto, on the agreed criteria for
the proclamation of international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, which state that an international year
should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Recognizing the importance of light and light-based technologies in the lives of the citizens of the world and
for the future development of global society on many levels,
_______________
289

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, France, Ghana, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Mauritius, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Palau, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Somalia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine and United States of America.

414

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Stressing that enhanced global awareness of and increased education in the science and technologies of light
are vital for addressing challenges such as sustainable development, energy and community health, as well as for
improving the quality of life in both developed and developing countries,
Considering that the applications of light science and technology are vital for existing and future advances in,
inter alia, medicine, energy, information and communications, fibre optics, agriculture, mining, astronomy,
architecture, archaeology, entertainment, art and culture, as well as many other industries and services, and that
light-based technologies contribute to the fulfilment of internationally agreed development goals, including by
providing access to information and increasing societal health and well-being,
Considering also that technology and design can play an important role in the achievement of greater energy
efficiency, in particular by limiting energy waste, and in the reduction of light pollution, which is key to the
preservation of dark skies,
Noting that 2015 coincides with the anniversaries of a series of important milestones in the history of the
science of light, including the works on optics by Ibn Al-Haytham in 1015, the notion of light as a wave proposed
by Fresnel in 1815, the electromagnetic theory of light propagation proposed by Maxwell in 1865, Einstein’s theory
of the photoelectric effect in 1905 and of the embedding of light in cosmology through general relativity in 1915,
the discovery of the cosmic microwave background by Penzias and Wilson and Kao’s achievements concerning the
transmission of light in fibres for optical communication, both in 1965,
Considering that the celebration of the anniversaries of these discoveries in 2015 would provide an important
opportunity to highlight the continuous nature of scientific discovery in different contexts, with particular emphasis
on women’s empowerment in the science sector and on promoting science education among young people,
especially in developing countries,
Noting that, at its 2013 substantive session, the Economic and Social Council organized its work for the
annual ministerial review under the theme “Science, technology and innovation, and the potential of culture, for
promoting sustainable development and achieving the Millennium Development Goals”,
Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,290
Noting the endorsement by the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its 190th session of the initiative to proclaim 2015 the International Year of Light and the adoption
of that initiative by the General Conference at its thirty-seventh session, on 19 November 2013,291
1.

Decides to proclaim 2015 the International Year of Light and Light-based Technologies;

2. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, mindful of the provisions
of the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to facilitate the organization and implementation
of the International Year, in collaboration with Governments, relevant organizations of the United Nations system,
the International Council for Science and other relevant academic and non-governmental organizations;
3. Stresses that the costs of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
above and beyond activities currently within the mandate of the lead agency should be met from voluntary
contributions, including from the private sector;
4. Encourages all States, the United Nations system and all other actors to take advantage of the
International Year to promote actions at all levels, including through international cooperation, and to increase
awareness among the public of the importance of light science, optics and light-based technologies and of
promoting widespread access to new knowledge and related activities;
5. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, mindful of the
provisions of paragraphs 23 to 27 of the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to inform the
General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the implementation of the present resolution, elaborating, inter alia,
on the evaluation of the International Year.
_______________
290

Resolution 66/288, annex.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-seventh Session, Paris,
5–20 November 2013, vol. 1, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25.
291

415

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 68/222
A/RES/68/222

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/440/Add.3, para. 10)292

68/222. Development cooperation with middle-income countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields,
Reaffirming its resolution 67/226 of 21 December 2012 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system,
Recalling its resolutions 63/223 of 19 December 2008, 64/208 of 21 December 2009 and 66/212 of
22 December 2011,
Taking note of the outcomes of the international conferences on development cooperation with middle-income
countries held in Madrid on 1 and 2 March 2007,293 San Salvador on 3 and 4 October 2007,294 Windhoek from 4 to
6 August 2008295 and San José from 12 to 14 June 2013,296
Noting the regional conferences on development cooperation with middle-income countries held in Cairo on
11 and 12 March 2008, Minsk on 16 and 17 May 2013 and Amman on 23 May 2013,
Emphasizing that middle-income countries must take primary responsibility for their own development and
that their national efforts should be complemented by supportive global programmes, measures and policies aimed
at expanding the development opportunities of middle-income countries, while taking into account their specific
national conditions,
Reaffirming that the fundamental characteristics of the operational activities for development of the United
Nations system should be, inter alia, their universal, voluntary and grant nature, their neutrality and their
multilateralism, as well as their ability to respond to the development needs of programme countries in a flexible
manner, and that the operational activities are carried out for the benefit of programme countries, at the request of
those countries and in accordance with their own policies and priorities for development,
Emphasizing that there is no “one-size-fits-all” approach to development and that development assistance by
the United Nations development system should be able to respond to the varying development needs of programme
countries, including the development needs of middle-income countries, and should be aligned with their national
development plans and strategies in accordance with its mandates, keeping in mind the needs of the least developed
countries,
Noting that national averages based on criteria such as per capita income do not always reflect the actual
particularities and development needs of middle-income countries and that, despite notable reductions in poverty,
middle-income countries are still home to the majority of the world’s people living in poverty and inequalities remain,
Recognizing that high degrees of inequality may contribute to vulnerability in middle-income countries and
constrain sustainable development in many of those countries, and that economic growth needs to be sustained,
inclusive and equitable,
Stressing that middle-income countries continue to face particular challenges related to, inter alia, job creation, the
diversification and transformation of their economies and access to international markets and, in this regard, that efforts
to create a national enabling environment for development should be complemented by a global enabling environment,
_______________
292

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
See A/62/71-E/2007/46, annex.
294
See A/62/483-E/2007/90, annex.
295
See A/C.2/63/3, annexes I and II.
296
See A/C.2/68/5.
293

416

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing the need to better understand the multidimensional nature of development and poverty, and
acknowledging the significant role that the United Nations system has played and should continue to play in
this regard,
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among young people, indebtedness in some countries and widespread
fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress
towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while implementing the
reforms agreed upon to date,
Recalling the resolve of Member States to enhance and strengthen domestic resource mobilization and fiscal
space, including, where appropriate, through modernized tax systems, more efficient tax collection, the broadening
of the tax base and the effective combating of tax evasion and capital flight, and reiterating that, while each country
is responsible for its tax system, it is important to support national efforts in these areas by strengthening technical
assistance and enhancing international cooperation and participation in addressing international tax matters,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;297

2. Acknowledges the efforts made and successes achieved by many middle-income countries to eradicate
poverty and achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
as well as their significant contribution to global and regional development and economic stability;
3. Expresses concern that some middle-income countries are highly indebted and face increased challenges
to their long-term debt sustainability;
4. Acknowledges that identifying structural gaps can improve the understanding of development needs of
developing countries, including middle-income countries;
5. Requests the United Nations development system to ensure that it addresses the diverse development
needs of middle-income countries in a coordinated manner through, inter alia, an accurate assessment of the national
priorities and needs of these countries, taking into account the use of variables that go beyond per capita income
criteria;
6. Also requests the United Nations development system, in particular the funds and programmes, in
accordance with their respective mandates, and in the context of their respective strategic frameworks and within
their existing budgets, to provide better focused support to middle-income countries and to improve coordination
and exchange of experiences with other international organizations, international financial institutions and regional
organizations in this field, as appropriate;
7. Welcomes the solidarity of middle-income countries with other developing countries, in particular the
financial, technical, technology transfer and capacity-building support being provided by middle-income countries,
particularly to the least developed countries, through South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation, while
stressing that South-South cooperation is a complement to, and not a substitute for, North-South cooperation, and in
this regard calls upon the United Nations development system to continue its ongoing efforts to mainstream support
to South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation;
8. Encourages developed countries, and developing countries declaring themselves in a position to do so,
to take steps towards the goal of realizing the timely implementation of duty-free and quota-free market access on a
lasting basis for all least developed countries, consistent with the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration adopted by the
World Trade Organization in 2005;
9. Recognizes the importance of the private sector as well as the role of public-private partnerships in
meeting the challenges of sustainable development for middle-income countries and other developing countries;
_______________
297

A/68/265.

417

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Also recognizes that middle-income countries still face significant challenges in their efforts to
achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and in
that regard underlines the importance of international support, through various forms, that is well aligned with
national priorities to address the development needs of middle-income countries, including through capacitybuilding;
11. Acknowledges that official development assistance is still essential for a number of middle-income
countries and that it has a role to play in targeted areas, taking into account the needs and domestic resources of
these countries;
12. Also acknowledges that good governance and the rule of law at the national and international levels
are essential for sustained economic growth, sustainable development and the eradication of poverty
and hunger;
13. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the diverse development challenges of middle-income
countries in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution that also looks further into the development challenges of middleincome countries, including through, inter alia, measurements that take into account the multidimensional nature of
poverty and development, and that provides recommendations and proposals to ensure efficient, effective, better
focused and better coordinated cooperation with middle-income countries, and decides to include in its provisional
agenda, under the item entitled “Globalization and interdependence”, the sub-item entitled “Development
cooperation with middle-income countries”.
RESOLUTION 68/223
A/RES/68/223

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/440/Add.4, para. 10)298

68/223. Culture and sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 41/187 of 8 December 1986, 46/158 of 19 December 1991, 51/179 of 16 December
1996, 52/197 of 18 December 1997, 53/184 of 15 December 1998, 55/192 of 20 December 2000, 57/249 of
20 December 2002, 65/166 of 20 December 2010 and 66/208 of 22 December 2011, concerning culture and
development, and 66/288 of 27 July 2012, entitled “The future we want”,
Recalling also the adoption by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization of the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity 299 and the Action Plan for its
implementation,300 on 2 November 2001, and of the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity
of Cultural Expressions301 on 20 October 2005, as well as other international conventions of that organization that
acknowledge the important role of cultural diversity for social and economic development,302
Noting the adoption by the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization at its 192nd session, held from 23 September to 11 October 2013, of a decision
_______________
298

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-first Session, Paris,
15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25, annex I.
300
Ibid., annex II.
301
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2440, No. 43977.
302
The Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1954); the Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (1970); the Convention concerning
the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (1972); the Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage
(2001); and the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003).
299

418

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

highlighting the need to intensify efforts to integrate culture as an enabler and driver of sustainable
development in the post-2015 development agenda,
Recognizing that culture is an essential component of human development, that it represents a source of
identity, innovation and creativity for the individual and the community and that it is an important factor in social
inclusion and poverty eradication, providing for sustainable economic growth and ownership of development
processes,
Recognizing also the importance of respect and understanding for cultural diversity throughout the world and
of working together and not against each other,
Recalling the principles of the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, and acknowledging that cultural
diversity is a source of enrichment for humankind and an important contribution to the sustainable development of
local communities, peoples and nations, empowering them to play an active and unique role in development
initiatives,
Recognizing the importance of multilingualism as a means of promoting, protecting and preserving the
diversity of languages and cultures globally and that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity and
international understanding, and recognizing also the importance for the peoples of the world to communicate in
their own language,
Recalling the concerns expressed in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 303 on the
underrepresentation of women in decision-making positions in the area of culture, which has prevented women
from having a significant impact in the area of culture and development,
Recalling also the importance of the promotion of national cultures, artistic creation in all its forms and
international and regional cultural cooperation, and reaffirming in this regard the relevance of strengthening national
efforts and regional and international cooperation mechanisms for cultural action and artistic creation, recognizing
respect for cultural pluralism, as defined by the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, as policies for the
inclusion and participation of all citizens that guarantee social cohesion and the vitality of civil society and peace,
enhance cultural development and contribute to sustainable development,
Recognizing the linkages between cultural and biological diversity and the positive contribution of local and
indigenous traditional knowledge in addressing environmental challenges in a sustainable manner,
Recalling that, in its resolution 65/1 of 22 September 2010, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals”, the General Assembly emphasized the importance of culture for development
and its contribution to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and, in that respect, encouraged
international cooperation in the cultural field, aimed at achieving development objectives,
Noting the positive results and impact of programmes on culture and development at the country level, inter
alia, the programmes jointly implemented by several United Nations agencies, including but not limited to those
financed by the Millennium Development Goals Achievement Fund,
Taking note of the Hangzhou Declaration: Placing Culture at the Heart of Sustainable Development Policies,
adopted at the Hangzhou International Congress, entitled “Culture: key to sustainable development”, organized by
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and held in Hangzhou, China, from 15 to
17 May 2013,
Welcoming the World Culture Forum on the power of culture in sustainable development, held in Bali,
Indonesia, from 24 to 27 November 2013, which enriches the deliberations on the impact of culture on the three
dimensions of sustainable development,
_______________
303

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

419

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”, 304 which recognizes that all cultures and civilizations can contribute to sustainable
development and calls for holistic and integrated approaches to sustainable development,
Recalling also the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September
2013 305 and the decision contained therein to launch a process of intergovernmental negotiations at the
beginning of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, which will lead to the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda,
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report prepared by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,306 and in this regard acknowledges the work undertaken by the
United Nations agencies to optimize the contributions of culture to sustainable development;
2. Also takes note of the nine recommended actions contained in the Hangzhou Declaration to place culture
at the heart of future policies for sustainable development, and invites all Member States, intergovernmental
organizations, organizations of the United Nations system, relevant non-governmental organizations and all relevant
stakeholders to consider them in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the discussions and conclusions of the high-level thematic debate on
culture and development sponsored by the President of the General Assembly and held at United Nations
Headquarters on 12 June 2013, which focused on culture as a resource for achieving the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
4. Takes note of the special edition of the Creative Economy Report, co-published by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations Development Programme through the
United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation in November 2013, which explores the role of cultural and
creative industries in achieving inclusive social and economic development;
5. Recognizes the role of culture as an enabler of sustainable development that provides peoples and
communities with a strong sense of identity and social cohesion and contributes to more effective and sustainable
development policies and measures at all levels, and stresses in this regard that policies responsive to cultural
contexts can yield better, sustainable, inclusive and equitable development outcomes;
6. Also recognizes the potential of culture as a driver of sustainable development, which contributes to a
strong and viable economic sector by generating income, creating decent jobs and addressing both the economic
and social dimensions of poverty through cultural heritage and cultural and creative industries, while providing
innovative and effective solutions to cross-cutting issues, such as education, health, gender equality and the
environment;
7. Emphasizes the important contribution of culture to the three dimensions of sustainable development
and to the achievement of national development objectives and the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard acknowledges:
(a) That culture contributes to inclusive economic development, as cultural heritage, cultural and creative
industries, sustainable cultural tourism and cultural infrastructure are sources of income generation and job creation,
including at the community level, thus improving living conditions and fostering community-based economic
growth, and contribute to empowering individuals;
(b) That culture contributes to inclusive social development for all, including local communities and
indigenous peoples, with respect for cultural diversity, safeguarding of the cultural and natural heritage, fostering of
cultural institutions and strengthening of cultural and creative industries;
_______________
304

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Resolution 68/6.
306
A/68/266.
305

420

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(c) That culture contributes to environmental sustainability, since the protection of cultural and biological
diversity and the natural heritage is crucial to sustainable development, while supporting traditional systems of
environmental protection, and resource management can contribute to the increased sustainability of fragile
ecosystems and the preservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, reducing land degradation and mitigating the
effects of climate change;
8. Acknowledges that culture contributes to peace and security, as a valuable resource for empowering
communities to participate fully in social and cultural life, facilitating inclusive governance and dialogue at the
national, regional and international levels and contributing to conflict prevention and resolution, as well as to
reconciliation and recovery;
9. Recognizes that culture should be taken into account in the promotion and implementation of new
sustainable consumption and production patterns that contribute to the responsible use of resources and address the
adverse impacts of climate change;
10. Acknowledges that quality education is enriched by culture, which transmits shared values, knowledge
and skills;
11. Invites all Member States, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system,
relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders:
(a) To raise public awareness of the importance of cultural diversity for sustainable development, promoting
its positive value through education and media tools;
(b) To ensure a more visible and effective integration and mainstreaming of culture into social,
environmental and economic development policies and strategies at all levels;
(c) To ensure that women and men equally access, participate and contribute to cultural life and decisionmaking, and to further commit themselves to the development of cultural policies and programmes with a gender
perspective at the local, national and international levels in order to promote gender equality and the empowerment
of women and girls;
(d) To promote capacity-building, where appropriate, at all levels for the development of a dynamic cultural
and creative sector, in particular by encouraging creativity, innovation and entrepreneurship, supporting the
development of cultural institutions and cultural industries, providing technical and vocational training for culture
professionals and increasing employment opportunities in the cultural and creative sector for sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth and development;
(e) To actively support the emergence of local markets for cultural goods and services and to facilitate the
effective and licit access of such goods and services to international markets, taking into account the expanding
range of cultural production and consumption and, for States parties to it, the provisions of the Convention on the
Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions;301
(f) To preserve and maintain local and indigenous traditional knowledge and community practices of
environmental management, which are valuable examples of culture as a vehicle for sustainable development, and
to foster synergies between modern science and technology and local and indigenous knowledge, practices and
innovation;
(g) To promote global awareness of the linkages between cultural and biological diversity, including
through the protection and encouragement of the customary use of biological resources, in accordance with
traditional cultural practices, as a key element of a comprehensive approach to sustainable development;
(h) To support national legal frameworks and policies for the protection and preservation of cultural heritage
and cultural property,307 the fight against illicit trafficking in cultural property and the return of cultural property, in
accordance with national legislation and applicable international legal frameworks, including by promoting
_______________
307

As defined in article 1 of the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 823, No. 11806).

421

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

international cooperation to prevent the misappropriation of cultural heritage and products, recognizing the
importance of intellectual property rights in sustaining those involved in cultural creativity;
(i) To note that, in achieving these objectives, innovative mechanisms of financing can make a positive
contribution in assisting developing countries in mobilizing additional resources for development on a stable,
predictable and voluntary basis, and to reiterate that such voluntary mechanisms should be effective, should aim to
mobilize resources that are stable and predictable, should supplement and not be a substitute for traditional sources
of financing, should be disbursed in accordance with the priorities of developing countries and should not unduly
burden such countries;
(j) To mobilize culture as a vehicle to foster tolerance, mutual understanding, peace and reconciliation in
the context of conflict-prevention, conflict-resolution and peacebuilding processes;
12. Encourages all Member States, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system,
relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to enhance international cooperation in
supporting the efforts of developing countries towards the development, strengthening and consolidation of cultural
industries, cultural tourism and culture-related microenterprises and to assist those countries in developing the
necessary infrastructure and skills, as well as in mastering information and communications technologies and in
gaining access to new technologies on mutually agreed terms;
13. Encourages initiatives to foster cultural cooperation agreements and networks at the regional level for
knowledge- and information-sharing for sustainable development;
14. Invites the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, to continue to provide support, to facilitate financing and to assist Member
States, upon their request, in developing their national capacities to optimize the contribution of culture to
development, including through information-sharing, the exchange of best practices, data collection, research and
study and the use of appropriate evaluation indicators, as well as to implement applicable international cultural
conventions, taking into account the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
15. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other relevant United
Nations bodies to continue to assess, in consultation with Member States, the contribution of culture to the
achievement of sustainable development through the compilation of quantitative data, including indicators and
statistics, with a view to informing development policies and relevant reports, where appropriate;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations country teams continue to further integrate
and mainstream culture into their programming exercises, in particular United Nations Development Assistance
Frameworks, in consultation with relevant national authorities, when assisting countries in the pursuit of their
development objectives;
17. Encourages all Member States, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system,
relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to give due consideration to the
contribution of culture to the achievement of sustainable development in the formulation of national, regional and
international development policies and international cooperation instruments;
18. Also encourages all Member States, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations
system, relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to give due consideration to
culture and sustainable development in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, in lieu of a
report to its seventieth session, a progress report, in the most efficient and cost-effective manner, on the
implementation of the present resolution, and, in consultation with Member States, relevant United Nations funds
and programmes and the specialized agencies of the United Nations, in particular the United Nations Education,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, to present options for a United Nations consolidated approach on culture and
sustainable development;
20. Requests the President of the General Assembly to hold a one-day special thematic debate at the highest
political level possible, within existing resources, by the end of 2014, to give due consideration to the role of culture
and sustainable development in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda, and to present a Chair’s
summary of the debate;
422

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Globalization and interdependence”, a sub-item entitled “Culture and sustainable development”, on an exceptional
basis, and to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the item entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the sub-item entitled “Culture and sustainable development”, to maintain the biennial nature of
this sub-item.
RESOLUTION 68/224
A/RES/68/224

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/441/Add.1, para. 7)308

68/224. Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Istanbul Declaration309 and the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020,310 adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and
endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution 65/280 of 17 June 2011, in which the Assembly called upon all the
relevant stakeholders to commit to implementing the Istanbul Programme of Action,
Reaffirming the overarching goal of the Istanbul Programme of Action of overcoming the structural challenges
faced by the least developed countries in order to eradicate poverty, achieve internationally agreed development
goals and enable graduation from the least developed country category,
Recalling its resolutions 67/220 and 67/221 of 21 December 2012,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/46 of 26 July 2013 on the Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,
Recalling further the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals,311
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 59/209 of 20 December 2004 and 65/286 of 29 June 2011 on the
importance of a smooth transition for countries graduating from the list of least developed countries, and reaffirming
the aim of enabling half the least developed countries to meet the criteria for graduation by 2020,
Taking note of the ministerial declaration adopted at the Ministerial Meeting of the Least Developed
Countries, held in New York on 27 September 2013,312
Taking note also of the report of the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States on the state of the least developed
countries 2013,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020313 and on a technology bank and science, technology
and innovation supporting mechanism dedicated to the least developed countries;314
2. Expresses serious concern that, after a decade of welcomed steady economic growth, the least
developed countries are facing significant challenges in sustaining their economic growth and that their economies
_______________
308

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. I.
310
Ibid., chap. II.
311
Resolution 68/6.
312
A/C.2/68/3, annex.
313
A/68/88-E/2013/81 and Corr.1.
314
A/68/217.
309

423

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

are estimated to have grown by 3.3 per cent in 2012, which is considerably below the target of 7 per cent per annum
set out in the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020;310
3. Expresses concern that the ongoing impact of the economic and financial crisis demonstrates the need
for the deployment of appropriate regional and international in a timely and targeted manner to complement the
efforts of the least developed countries aimed at building resilience in the face of economic shocks and mitigating
their effects;
4. Expresses its concern that all countries, particularly the least developed countries, are vulnerable to the
adverse impacts of climate change and are already experiencing increased impacts, including persistent drought and
extreme weather events, sea-level rise, coastal erosion, glacial lake outburst floods and ocean acidification, which
further threaten food security and efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development;
5. Underscores that the ownership, leadership and primary responsibility for development in the least
developed countries rests with themselves, and also underscores that good governance, inclusiveness and
transparency, as well as domestic resource mobilization, are central to the development process of the least
developed countries and that these efforts need to be given concrete and substantial international support in a spirit
of shared responsibility and mutual accountability through renewed and strengthened global partnership;
6. Calls upon the least developed countries, their development partners, the United Nations system and all
other actors to fully and effectively implement in a coordinated, coherent and expeditious manner the commitments
made in the Istanbul Programme of Action in its eight priority areas, namely, productive capacity; agriculture, food
security and rural development; trade; commodities; human and social development; multiple crises and other
emerging challenges; mobilizing financial resources for development and capacity-building; and good governance
at all levels, and in this regard calls upon the development partners and invites all organizations of the United
Nations system and other multilateral organizations, including the Bretton Woods institutions and international and
regional financial institutions, to provide, in accordance with their respective mandates, enhanced, predictable and
targeted substantive and technical support to the least developed countries;
7. Calls upon the least developed countries and their development partners to ensure enhanced focus on
policies and means to address productive capacity-building, and in this respect encourages them to give priority to
expanding the access of women, youth and the poor to factors of production such as employability skills, finance,
technology and land;
8. Stresses that the least developed countries should receive a special focus throughout the United Nations
Decade of Sustainable Energy for All (2014–2024), with a view to ensuring the realization of the objective of
ensuring access to energy for all by 2030, as well as other energy goals and targets set out in the Istanbul
Programme of Action, and requests that, in the Secretary-General’s coordination of the Decade, within existing
resources, the least developed countries should receive such special focus throughout, with a view to ensuring the
successful realization of the Decade;
9. Invites the organizations of the United Nations system that have not yet done so to designate specific
focal points or organizational units within their secretariat structures, with a view to ensuring consistent coordination
and monitoring of the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action at the agency level;
10. Calls upon the developing countries, guided by the spirit of solidarity and consistent with their
capabilities, to provide support for the effective implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action in mutually
agreed areas of cooperation within the framework of South-South cooperation, which is a complement to but not a
substitute for North-South cooperation;
11. Invites the private sector, civil society and foundations to contribute to the implementation of the
Istanbul Programme of Action in their respective areas of competence, in line with the national priorities of the least
developed countries;
12. Expresses concern over the fall in official development assistance to the least developed countries by
2 per cent in real terms in 2011 and, according to preliminary estimates of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, a further decline in net bilateral official development assistance of 12.8 per cent in
424

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2012, while noting that official development assistance continues to be the largest source of external financing for
the development of least developed countries and plays an important role in their development, and that progress
has been made during the past decade in increasing the flow of official development assistance to least developed
countries, underlines that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments is crucial, including the
commitments by many developed countries to achieving the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product for
official development assistance to developing countries by 2015, as well as the target of 0.15 per cent to
0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to the least developed countries, and urges
developed countries that have not yet done so to fulfil their commitments for official development assistance to the
least developed countries at the earliest possible time;
13. Recalls the commitment, contained in the Istanbul Programme of Action, that donor countries should
review their official development assistance commitments in 2015 and consider further enhancing the resources for
the least developed countries, and invites donor countries to share with the General Assembly the results of such
reviews at the earliest possible time as an input to the midterm review of the Istanbul Programme of Action;
14. Expresses its serious concern at the fact that the share of expenditure for the operational activities for
development of the United Nations system in the least developed countries is declining, takes note of decisions
2012/1 of 3 February 2012 and 2012/28 of 10 September 2012 of the Executive Board of the United Nations
Development Programme, in which the Executive Board reiterated the allocation to least developed countries of a
minimum of 60 per cent of its target for resource assignment from the core (TRAC-1) resources, and invites the
governing bodies of other organizations of the United Nations development system and other multilateral
organizations to prioritize allocations to least developed countries, as appropriate and in accordance with their
respective mandates;
15. Welcomes steps to improve the effectiveness and quality of aid in the least developed countries, and
underlines the need for enhancing the quality of aid by strengthening national ownership, alignment, harmonization,
predictability, mutual accountability and transparency and results orientation;
16. Stresses the need for the international community to remain vigilant in monitoring the debt situation of
the least developed countries and to continue to take effective measures, preferably within existing frameworks,
when applicable, to address the debt problem of those countries, including through the cancellation of the
multilateral and bilateral debt owed by the least developed countries to creditors, both public and private;
17. Acknowledges that trade has an important role in ensuring the sustainable economic development of the
least developed countries and that the international trade architecture should continue to be supportive of and
responsive to the special needs and priorities of the least developed countries;
18. Reaffirms the commitments made at the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization315 relating to the least developed countries, and encourages developed countries, and developing
countries declaring themselves in a position to do so, to take steps towards the goal of realizing the timely
implementation of duty-free and quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all least developed countries,
consistent with the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration;
19. Underlines the need to ensure the mutual accountability of the least developed countries and their
development partners for delivering the commitments undertaken within the framework of the Istanbul Programme
of Action, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the follow-up to paragraph 145 of the Istanbul
Programme of Action regarding the steps taken to ensure mutual accountability;
20. Also underlines the need for giving particular attention to the issues and concerns of the least developed
countries in all major United Nations conferences and processes;
21. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to include the issues of concern to the least developed
countries in all relevant reports in the economic, social, environmental and related fields in order to support the
implementation of the goals set out in the Istanbul Programme of Action;
_______________
315

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.

425

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

22. Expresses its concern that, although the least developed countries have made some progress in social and
human development, many of the goals and targets of the Millennium Development Goals have yet to be achieved, and
calls upon the international community to give special priority to the least developed countries in order to accelerate the
progress in attaining the Millennium Development Goals in the least developed countries by 2015;
23. Reaffirms the commitment made by the international community in the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,316 to assist the least developed
countries in their efforts to achieve sustainable development, and also reaffirms the agreement to effectively
implement the Istanbul Programme of Action and to fully integrate its priority areas into the framework for action
contained in the outcome document, the broader implementation of which will contribute to the overarching goal of
the Istanbul Programme of Action of enabling half of the least developed countries to meet the criteria for
graduation by 2020;
24. Decides that the special needs and development priorities of the least developed countries, including the
eight priority areas of the Istanbul Programme of Action, such as productive capacity-building, including through
rapid development of infrastructure and energy, should be given appropriate consideration in the processes devoted
to the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
25. Notes with appreciation the offer of Turkey to host a technology bank and science, technology and
innovation supporting mechanism dedicated to the least developed countries under the auspices of the United
Nations and in this regard:
(a) Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of voluntary contributions, to constitute a high-level panel
of experts drawn from the least developed countries and their development partners, the United Nations system and
other relevant stakeholders to carry out a feasibility study, with secretariat support provided, within existing
resources, by the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States, in order to examine its scope, functions, institutional linkage with the
United Nations and organizational aspects, including by:
(i) Assessing the ability of a technology bank to promote scientific research and innovation and facilitate
the diffusion and transfer of technologies to the least developed countries, on voluntary and mutually agreed
terms and conditions, and with necessary protections for intellectual property;
(ii) Considering the current international institutional landscape, synergies and options for cooperation with
relevant international technology initiatives, stakeholders and organizations, both within and outside the
United Nations system, and the need to avoid duplication of efforts;
(iii) Examining and outlining potential functions, activities, working methods, governance mechanisms,
staffing arrangements and costs for a technology bank and science, technology and innovation supporting
mechanism, including possible regional centres in the least developed countries;
(iv) Examining options for facilitating the necessary voluntary financial support to a technology bank for its
establishment and effective and sustained functioning;
(b) Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit the report and the recommendations of the high-level
panel of experts to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session for its consideration, with a view to
operationalizing a technology bank during its seventieth session, if so recommended by the panel;
26. Also notes with appreciation that several least developed countries have expressed their intention to
reach the status of graduation by 2020, invites them to start the preparations for their graduation and transition
strategy, and requests all relevant organizations of the United Nations system, led by the Office of the High
Representative, to extend necessary support in this regard, in a coordinated manner;
27. Recognizes that the activities relating to the least developed countries carried out within the Secretariat
need to be further coordinated and consolidated in order to ensure effective monitoring and follow-up of the Istanbul
Programme of Action, led by the Office of the High Representative, and to provide well-coordinated support to
realizing the goal of enabling half of the least developed countries to meet the criteria for graduation by 2020;
_______________
316

426

Resolution 66/288, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

28. Notes the work of the Inter-Agency Consultative Group for least developed countries led by the Office
of the High Representative, reiterates its invitation to the Secretary-General to appropriately integrate it within the
framework of the High-level Committee on Programmes of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, notes the steps taken by the Chief Executives Board and the High-level Committee in supporting
coordination and follow-up of the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action on a system-wide basis, also
reiterates its invitation to the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the Chief Executives Board, to include
implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action in the agenda of the Board, and requests the Secretary-General
to report on further progress made in this regard;
29. Notes with appreciation that the Office of the High Representative and the United Nations Development
Group have issued operational guidelines for United Nations country teams operating in the least developed
countries to follow up on the Istanbul Programme of Action at the country level, and requests the United Nations
development system to ensure ongoing monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the guidelines;
30. Strongly encourages Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, major
groups and other donors to contribute in a timely manner to the Trust Fund in Support of Activities Undertaken by
the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and
Small Island Developing States to support the implementation, follow-up and monitoring of the Istanbul
Programme of Action and the participation of the representatives from the least developed countries in the annual
review meeting on the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action by the Economic and Social Council as
well as in other relevant forums, and in this regard expresses its appreciation to those countries that have made
voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund;
31. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Benin to host a ministerial conference on new partnerships for
productive capacity-building in the least developed countries during the first half of 2014, and looks forward to its
successful outcome;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a progress
report on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011–2020 and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/225
A/RES/68/225

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/441/Add.2, para. 7)317

68/225. Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries:
outcome of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing
Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on
Transit Transport Cooperation
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Almaty Declaration318 and the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of
Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries,319
Recalling also its resolutions 58/201 of 23 December 2003, 60/208 of 22 December 2005, 61/212 of
20 December 2006, 62/204 of 19 December 2007, 63/228 of 19 December 2008, 64/214 of 21 December 2009,
65/172 of 20 December 2010, 66/214 of 22 December 2011 and 67/222 of 21 December 2012,
_______________
317

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003
(A/CONF.202/3), annex II.
319
Ibid., annex I.
318

427

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 320 the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals and its outcome document321 and the outcome document
of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, held on
25 September 2013,322
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
2012, entitled “The future we want”,323
Taking note of the communiqué of the Twelfth Annual Ministerial Meeting of Landlocked Developing
Countries, held at United Nations Headquarters on 30 September 2013,324
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the sea, aggravated by remoteness from world markets and
high transit costs and risks continue to impose serious constraints on export earnings, private capital inflow and
domestic resource mobilization of landlocked developing countries and therefore adversely affect their overall
growth and socioeconomic development,
Recognizing also that the primary responsibility for establishing effective transit systems rests with landlocked
and transit developing countries,
Reaffirming that the Almaty Programme of Action constitutes a fundamental framework for genuine
partnerships between landlocked and transit developing countries and their development partners at the national,
bilateral, subregional, regional and global levels,
Recalling its resolution 66/214, in which it decided to hold a comprehensive 10-year review conference on the
implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action in 2014, which should be preceded, where necessary, by
regional and global as well as thematic preparations,
Emphasizing that the result of the 10-year Review Conference on the Implementation of the Almaty Programme
of Action should be the basis for further concerted global actions in support of landlocked developing countries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Implementation of the Almaty Programme of
Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for
Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries”;325
2. Reaffirms the right of access of landlocked countries to and from the sea and freedom of transit through the
territory of transit countries by all means of transport, in accordance with the applicable rules of international law;
3. Also reaffirms that transit countries, in the exercise of their full sovereignty over their territory, have the
right to take all measures necessary to ensure that the rights and facilities provided for landlocked countries in no
way infringe upon their legitimate interests;
4. Calls upon landlocked and transit developing countries to take all appropriate measures, as set out in the
declaration of the high-level meeting of the sixty-third session of the General Assembly on the midterm review of
the Almaty Programme of Action, 326 to speed up the implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action:
Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit
Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries,319 and calls upon landlocked developing
countries to take greater ownership of the Almaty Programme of Action by further mainstreaming it into their
national development strategies;
5. Calls upon development partners and multilateral and regional financial and development
institutions to provide landlocked and transit developing countries with appropriate, substantial and better_______________
320

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 65/1.
322
Resolution 68/6.
323
Resolution 66/288, annex.
324
A/C.2/68/4, annex.
325
A/68/157.
326
Resolution 63/2.
321

428

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

coordinated technical and financial assistance, particularly in the form of grants or concessionary loans, for
the implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action;
6. Reaffirms its full commitment to urgently address the special development needs of and the challenges
faced by landlocked developing countries through the full, timely and effective implementation of the Almaty
Programme of Action, as contained in the declaration on the midterm review;
7. Invites Member States, including development partners, organizations of the United Nations system and
other relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, to speed up further the implementation of the
specific actions on the five priorities agreed upon in the Almaty Programme of Action and those contained in the
declaration on the midterm review in a better-coordinated manner, in particular for the construction, maintenance
and improvement of their transport, storage and other transit-related facilities, including alternative routes, the
completion of missing links and improved communications and energy infrastructure, so as to enhance intraregional
connectivity and strengthen analytical capacities to assist in the development and implementation of coherent and
comprehensive transport policies to support the transit corridors needed to facilitate trade, and in this regard
encourages enhanced regional, subregional and bilateral cooperation which offers more appropriate, direct and
effective solutions in addressing landlocked and transit country issues;
8. Expresses concern that the economic growth and social well-being of landlocked developing countries
remain highly vulnerable to external shocks and to the multiple challenges faced by the international community,
and invites the international community to assist landlocked developing countries in strengthening their resilience
and in protecting the advances made towards the realization of the Millennium Development Goals and the
priorities of the Almaty Programme of Action;
9. Encourages the relevant international organizations, including the Office of the High Representative for
the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States and the
United Nations regional commissions, as well as relevant research institutions, to assist the landlocked developing
countries, as appropriate, in undertaking research on the vulnerability of landlocked developing countries to external
shocks through the development of a set of vulnerability indicators that can be used by the landlocked developing
countries for early warning purposes;
10. Underlines the importance of international trade and trade facilitation as one of the priorities of the
Almaty Programme of Action, notes that the ongoing negotiations of the World Trade Organization on trade
facilitation are particularly important in order for landlocked developing countries to gain a more efficient flow of
goods and services, as well as improved international competitiveness, resulting from lower transaction costs, and
calls upon the international community to ensure that the agreement on trade facilitation in the final outcome of the
Doha Round fulfils the objective of lowering transaction costs by, inter alia, reducing transport time and enhancing
certainty in transborder trade;
11. Calls upon development partners to effectively implement the Aid for Trade initiative, giving adequate
consideration to the special needs and requirements of landlocked developing countries, including capacity-building
for the formulation of trade policies, participation in trade negotiations and implementation of trade facilitation
measures, as well as the diversification of export products through private-sector involvement, including the
development of small and medium-sized enterprises, with a view to increasing the competitiveness of the products
of landlocked developing countries in export markets;
12. Recognizes that the economies of many landlocked developing countries are still reliant on a few export
commodities, which often have low value addition, and encourages the international community to enhance efforts
to support landlocked developing countries in diversifying their economic base, to encourage, on mutually agreed
terms, the transfer of technologies related to transit transport systems, including information and communications
technologies, and to enhance value addition to their exports through the development of their productive capacities;
13. Encourages the further strengthening of South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation, as well as
cooperation among subregional and regional organizations, in support of the efforts of landlocked and transit
developing countries towards achieving the full and effective implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action;
14. Underlines the prominent role that foreign direct investment plays in accelerating development and
poverty reduction through employment, the transfer of managerial and technological know-how and non-debtcreating flows of capital, recognizes the considerable role and potential of private sector involvement in
infrastructure development for transport, telecommunications and utilities for landlocked developing countries, and
429

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

in this regard encourages Member States to facilitate foreign direct investment flows to landlocked developing
countries and calls upon landlocked and transit developing countries to promote an enabling environment to attract
foreign direct investment and private sector involvement;
15. Recognizes that broader and more effective cooperation among landlocked developing countries and
between landlocked and transit developing countries is necessary to ensure a harmonized approach to the design,
implementation and monitoring of trade and transport facilitation policy reforms across borders, and in this regard
encourages landlocked and transit developing countries to ratify and effectively implement, as appropriate,
international conventions and agreements and regional and subregional agreements on transport and trade
facilitation;
16. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, and invites other international
organizations, including the World Bank, the regional development banks, the World Customs Organization, the
World Trade Organization, regional economic integration organizations and other relevant regional and subregional
organizations, to further integrate the Almaty Programme of Action into their relevant programmes of work, taking
full account of the declaration on the midterm review, and encourages them to continue, as appropriate, within their
respective mandates, their support to landlocked and transit developing countries, through, inter alia, wellcoordinated and coherent technical assistance programmes in transit transport and trade facilitation;
17. Welcomes the efforts made by Member States, including development partners, and the United Nations
system, including the regional commissions, in providing infrastructure development and connectivity and the
integration of regional rail and road networks and in strengthening the legal frameworks of landlocked and transit
developing countries, encourages them to continue providing their support, and in this regard welcomes the ongoing
efforts made by the Office of the High Representative and the Economic Commission for Africa, in cooperation
with the African Union Commission and other relevant international and regional organizations, towards assisting in
the elaboration of the intergovernmental agreement on the Trans-African Highway;
18. Urges those landlocked developing countries that have not yet done so to accede to or to ratify, at their
earliest convenience, the Multilateral Agreement for the Establishment of an International Think Tank for
Landlocked Developing Countries in order to bring the think tank to full operation, and invites the Office of the
High Representative and relevant organizations of the United Nations system, Member States, including
development partners, and relevant international and regional organizations to support the think tank so that it can
undertake its role;
19. Notes with appreciation the progress being made in the preparatory process for the 10-year Review
Conference on the Implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action in its intergovernmental, inter-agency and
private sector tracks, including the outcomes of the high-level global thematic meeting on international trade, trade
facilitation and aid for trade, held in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 13 and 14 September 2012, and the regional review
meetings on the implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action, namely the Euro-Asia regional review meeting,
held in Vientiane from 5 to 7 March 2013, the Africa regional review meeting, held in Addis Ababa from 16 to 18 July
2013, and the Latin America regional review meeting, held in Asunción on 18 and 19 November 2013;
20. Welcomes the appointment by the United Nations Secretary-General of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States as the
Secretary-General of the 10-year Review Conference;
21. Requests the Office of the High Representative, as the United Nations system-wide focal point for the
preparations for the 10-year Review Conference, pursuant to resolution 66/214, and invites the United Nations
Secretary-General to take necessary measures within existing resources to ensure effective, efficient and timely
preparations for the Conference and to further mobilize and coordinate the active involvement of the organizations
of the United Nations system;
22. Requests the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, and invites other international
organizations, including the World Bank, the regional development banks, the World Customs Organization, the
World Trade Organization, the International Road Transport Union, regional economic integration organizations and
other relevant regional and subregional organizations, within their respective mandates, to provide necessary
support and actively contribute to the preparatory process and to the 10-year Review Conference itself;
23. Reiterates its invitation to Member States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
major groups and other donors to contribute to the trust fund established by the Secretary-General to support the
430

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

activities related to the follow-up to the implementation of the outcome of the Almaty International Ministerial
Conference and the participation of representatives of the landlocked developing countries in both the preparatory
process and the 10-year Review Conference itself;
24. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of concerned organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, including the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in collaboration with the Office
of the High Representative, to take the necessary measures to intensify their public information efforts and other
appropriate initiatives to enhance public awareness in favour of the 10-year review Conference, including by
highlighting its objectives and its significance;
25. Recognizes the special challenges and needs of the landlocked developing countries, and stresses the
need to give appropriate consideration to the landlocked developing countries in the elaboration of the post-2015
development agenda;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the second United Nations conference on landlocked
developing countries a report on the 10-year review of the implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report
on the outcome of the 10-year Review Conference;
28. Decides to reschedule the first and second sessions of the intergovernmental preparatory committee to
later dates, and reaffirms that the sessions of the intergovernmental preparatory committee will be held in New York
in 2014, each for a duration of two working days, in the most cost-effective manner and within the budget allocated,
in line with General Assembly resolution 67/222;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a note on the organizational aspects of the 10-year Review
Conference on the Implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action, including the venue and the specific dates
for the Conference and the two sessions of the intergovernmental preparatory committee, to be held for a duration of
three days in 2014, in the most cost-effective manner and within the budget allocated, in line with General
Assembly resolution 67/222, to be submitted to the Assembly not later than 15 January 2014 for its further
consideration;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Groups of
countries in special situations”, a sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the second United Nations conference on
landlocked developing countries”.
RESOLUTION 68/226
A/RES/68/226

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/442/Add.1, para. 9)327

68/226. Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/224 of 21 December 2012 and all other resolutions related to the eradication of
poverty,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by Heads of State and Government on the
occasion of the Millennium Summit,328 as well as the international commitment to eradicate extreme poverty and to
halve, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income is less than one dollar a day329 and the
proportion of people who suffer from hunger,
_______________
327

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 55/2.
329
Since 2008, United Nations reports on the Millennium Development Goals have been using a poverty line of 1.25 United States dollars
a day.
328

431

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome330 and the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,331
Recalling the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,332 adopted
in May 2011 at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, with a main aim of
enabling half the number of the least developed countries to meet the criteria for graduation by 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006 on the follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005
World Summit, including the Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development
goals, and its resolution 63/303 of 9 July 2009, entitled “Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development”,
Taking note with appreciation of the ministerial declaration adopted at the high-level segment of the
substantive session of 2006 of the Economic and Social Council on creating an environment at the national and
international levels conducive to generating full and productive employment and decent work for all, and its impact
on sustainable development333 and also of Economic and Social Council resolution 2011/37 of 28 July 2011 entitled
“Recovering from the world financial and economic crisis: a Global Jobs Pact”,
Recalling the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development334 and the
Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,335
Recalling also its resolution 68/1 of 20 September 2013 on the review of the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council and its
resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013 on the format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on
sustainable development,
Recalling further the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals, held in 2010, and its outcome document, 336 and the special event to follow up efforts made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals, held on 25 September 2013, and its outcome document,337
Acknowledging the importance of the eradication of poverty as an overarching objective of ongoing follow-up
processes to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, and also acknowledging the central
imperative of poverty eradication in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda,
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts of the global financial and economic crisis on
development, including on the capacity of developing countries to mobilize resources for development, recognizing
that there is a need to promote recovery, and acknowledging that an effective response to the impacts of the crisis
requires the timely implementation of all development commitments, including existing aid commitments,
Concerned that, midway into the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017),
while there has been progress in reducing poverty, especially in some middle-income countries, such progress has
been uneven and the number of people living in poverty in some countries continues to increase, with women and
children constituting the majority of the most affected groups, especially in the least developed countries and
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa,
Recognizing that rates of economic growth vary among countries and that these differences must be addressed
by, among other actions, promoting pro-poor growth and social protection,
_______________
330

Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
332
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
333
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/61/3/Rev.1), chap. III, para. 50.
334
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
335
Resolution 63/239, annex.
336
Resolution 65/1.
337
Resolution 68/6.
331

432

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing also that corruption at all levels, including the illicit transfer of funds and assets, is an obstacle to
development, and stressing the need for the return of these funds and assets to their countries of origin,
Concerned at the global nature of poverty and inequality, and underlining the fact that the eradication of
poverty and hunger is an ethical, social, political and economic imperative of all humankind,
Reaffirming that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge facing the world today, particularly in
Africa, in the least developed countries and in some middle-income countries, and underlining the importance of
accelerating sustainable, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development, including full,
productive employment generation and decent work for all,
Reaffirming also that women make significant contributions to the economy, that women are key contributors
to the economy and to combating poverty and inequality through both remunerated and unremunerated work at
home, in the community and in the workplace and that the empowerment of women is a critical factor in the
eradication of poverty,
Recognizing the importance of supporting countries in their efforts to eradicate poverty and promote
empowerment of the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including women, children and youth, indigenous
peoples, older persons and persons with disabilities,
Recognizing also that the difficult socioeconomic conditions that exist in many developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, have contributed to the feminization of poverty,
Recognizing further that mobilizing financial resources for development at the national and international
levels and the effective use of those resources are central to a global partnership for development in support of the
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Expressing deep concern that aggregate official development assistance fell in 2012 for the second
consecutive year, and calling for the reverse of this decline,
Acknowledging that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for but rather a complement to North-South
cooperation, and recognizing the contributions of South-South and triangular cooperation to the efforts of
developing countries to eradicate poverty and pursue sustainable development,
Acknowledging also that good governance at the national and international levels and sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth, supported by full employment and decent work for all, rising productivity and a
favourable environment, including public and private investment and entrepreneurship, are necessary to eradicate
poverty, achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and
to realize a rise in living standards, and that corporate social responsibility initiatives play an important role in
maximizing the impact of public and private investment,
Underlining the priority and urgency given by Heads of State and Government to the eradication of poverty,
as expressed in the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields,
Recalling the inter-agency system-wide plan of action for poverty eradication involving more than 21 agencies,
funds, programmes and regional commissions,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Second United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017), under the item entitled “Eradication of poverty and other
development issues”;338
2. Reaffirms that the objective of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2008–2017) is to support, in an efficient and coordinated manner, the follow-up to the implementation of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, relating to the eradication
of poverty and to coordinate international support to that end;
3. Also reaffirms that poverty eradication is the greatest global challenge facing the world today and an
indispensable requirement for sustainable development, and in this regard commits itself to freeing humanity from
poverty and hunger as a matter of urgency;
_______________
338

A/68/183.

433

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Further reaffirms that each country must take primary responsibility for its own development and that
the role of national policies and strategies for the achievement of sustainable development and poverty eradication
cannot be overemphasized, and recognizes that increased effective national efforts should be complemented by
concrete, effective and supportive international programmes, measures and policies aimed at expanding the
development opportunities of developing countries, while taking into account national conditions and ensuring
respect for national ownership strategies and sovereignty;
5. Calls upon the international community, including Member States, to urgently take measures to address
the root causes of extreme poverty and hunger because of their negative impacts on sustainable development;
6. Emphasizes the need to accord the highest priority to poverty eradication within the United Nations
development agenda, while stressing the importance of addressing the causes and challenges of poverty through
integrated, coordinated and coherent strategies at the national, intergovernmental and inter-agency levels, in
accordance with the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields;
7. Reiterates the need to strengthen the leadership role of the United Nations in promoting international
cooperation for development and its role at the regional level, which is critical for the eradication of poverty;
8. Emphasizes that the promotion of regional, subregional and interregional cooperation can have a
catalytic impact on poverty eradication efforts and offers many benefits, including the exchange of best policies,
experiences and technical expertise, the mobilization of resources and the expansion of economic opportunities and
conditions favourable to job creation;
9. Calls upon the international community to continue to accord the highest priority to poverty eradication
within the United Nations development agenda, addressing the root causes and challenges of poverty through
integrated, coordinated and coherent strategies at all levels, and calls upon donor countries in a position to do so to
support effective national efforts of developing countries in this regard through adequate, predictable financial
resources on bilateral and multilateral bases;
10. Stresses the importance of public-private partnerships in a wide range of areas, with the aim of
eradicating poverty and promoting full and productive employment and decent work for all and social integration,
as appropriate;
11. Acknowledges the complexity of the challenge of poverty eradication, emphasizes that, in accelerating
poverty eradication, the organizations of the United Nations development system must be driven by national
priorities and be operated in an integrated, coordinated and coherent manner, within their respective mandates,
making full use of the interlinked and mutually reinforcing pillars of the United Nations development system, and
encourages the use of diverse strategies;
12. Recognizes the role of the specialized agencies and United Nations funds and programmes, including the
United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Development Programme, in contributing to international
advocacy for eradicating poverty, including through education and training;
13. Reaffirms the need to fulfil all official development assistance commitments, including the commitments
by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product for official development
assistance to developing countries by 2015 and to reach a level of at least 0.5 per cent of gross national product for
official development assistance by 2010, as well as a target of 0.15 per cent to 0.20 per cent of gross national
product for official development assistance to the least developed countries;
14. Welcomes the increasing efforts to improve the quality of official development assistance and increase its
development impact, recognizes the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council, notes
other initiatives, such as the high-level forums on aid effectiveness, which produced, inter alia, the Paris Declaration
on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action 339 and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation, which make important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made commitments to
them, including through the adoption of the fundamental principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization
and managing for results, and bears in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that will guarantee effective
assistance and that the specific situation of each country needs to be fully considered;
_______________
339

434

A/63/539, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

15. Recognizes the urgent need to address poverty, hunger and food security, and encourages the
international community to enhance international cooperation in support of agricultural and rural development and
food production and productivity, including of smallholder producers, in developing countries, particularly in the
least developed countries;
16. Encourages Member States, international organizations, the private sector, relevant institutions,
foundations and individuals to strengthen United Nations funding for the eradication of poverty through voluntary
contributions to existing poverty-related system-wide funds;
17. Recognizes that sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth is essential for eradicating poverty
and hunger, in particular in developing countries, and stresses that national efforts in this regard should be
complemented by an enabling international environment and by ensuring greater coherence among
macroeconomic, trade and social policies at all levels;
18. Reaffirms the importance of the eradication of poverty as an overarching objective of ongoing follow-up
processes to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development;
19. Also reaffirms that, as the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, poverty eradication shall be central to the post-2015 development agenda;
20. Calls upon Member States to continue their ambitious efforts to strive for more inclusive, equitable,
balanced, stable and development-oriented sustainable socioeconomic approaches to overcoming poverty, and, in
view of the negative impact of inequalities on poverty, emphasizes the importance of improving access to quality
education, health care and social protection;
21. Recognizes that poverty is multidimensional, and invites national Governments, supported by the
international community, to consider developing complementary measures that better reflect this multidimensionality;
22. Acknowledges that the eradication of poverty through the development of national capacities in
developing countries should continue to be a core area of focus for the United Nations development system and that
its development programmes and projects should attempt to address this greatest global challenge as their
underlying objective;
23. Invites all stakeholders, including Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system
and civil society organizations, to share good practices relating to programmes and policies that address inequalities
for the benefit of those living in extreme poverty and promote the active participation of those living in extreme
poverty in the design and implementation of such programmes and policies, with the aim of accelerating progress
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals and informing the discussions on the way forward after
2015, and requests the Secretary-General to include in his annual report on progress in the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals a compilation of such good practices;
24. Reiterates its call upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system to consider activities to
implement the Second Decade, in consultation with Member States and other relevant stakeholders;
25. Reaffirms the need to give the highest priority to its consideration of the question of poverty
eradication, reiterates in this regard its decision, in resolution 63/230 of 19 December 2008, as a contribution to
the Second Decade, to convene at its sixty-eighth session a meeting of the General Assembly, at the highest
appropriate political level, centred on the review process devoted to the theme relating to the issue of poverty
eradication, and stresses that the meeting and the preparatory activities should be carried out within the budget
level proposed by the Secretary-General for the biennium 2012–2013 and should be organized in the most
effective and efficient manner;
26. Notes with concern the continuing high levels of unemployment and underemployment, particularly
among young people, as a consequence of the global financial and economic crisis, recognizes that decent work for
all remains one of the best routes out of poverty, and in this regard invites donor countries, multilateral organizations
and other development partners to continue to assist Member States, in particular developing countries, in adopting
policies consistent with the Global Jobs Pact adopted by the International Labour Conference at its ninety-eighth
session, as a general framework within which each country can formulate policy packages specific to its situation
and national priorities in order to promote a job-intensive recovery and sustainable development;
27. Urges Member States to address the global challenge of youth unemployment by developing and
implementing strategies that give young people everywhere a real chance to find decent and productive work, and in
435

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

this context stresses the need for the development of a global strategy on youth employment, building upon, inter
alia, the Global Jobs Pact and the call for action of the International Labour Organization;
28. Encourages the international community to support developing countries in their efforts to eradicate
poverty and promote empowerment of the poor and people in vulnerable situations, with a view to achieving the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, improving access to
finance, microfinance and credit, removing barriers to opportunity, enhancing productive capacity, developing
sustainable agriculture and promoting full and productive employment and decent work for all, complemented by
national efforts on effective social policies, including social protection floors, and in this regard takes note of
International Labour Organization Recommendation No. 202 concerning national floors of social protection;
29. Encourages Member States to improve existing social protection systems and to continue developing
and implementing social protection floors based on national priorities, paying particular attention to women,
children, older persons and persons with disabilities;
30. Urges the international community, including the United Nations system, to implement the outcome
documents relating to the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
31. Also urges the international community, including the United Nations system, to implement the
Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development340 in
support of the objectives of the Second Decade;
32. Stresses that the impacts of natural disasters and conflicts are severely hampering efforts to achieve
poverty eradication, in particular in developing countries, and calls upon the international community to give
priority to addressing them;
33. Calls upon the organizations of the United Nations development system, including the funds,
programmes and specialized agencies, in accordance with their mandates, to assign the highest priority to poverty
eradication, and stresses that efforts in this area should be scaled up to address the root causes of extreme poverty
and hunger;
34. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to support Member States, at their request, in strengthening their macroeconomic policy capacity and
national development strategies so as to contribute to achieving the objectives of the Second Decade;
35. Encourages greater inter-agency convergence and collaboration within the United Nations system in
sharing knowledge, promoting policy dialogue, facilitating synergies, mobilizing funds, providing technical
assistance in the key policy areas underlying the decent work agenda and strengthening system-wide policy
coherence on employment issues, including by avoiding duplication of efforts;
36. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Eradication of poverty and other development issues”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Second United
Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017)”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/227
A/RES/68/227

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/442/Add.2, para. 9)341

68/227. Women in development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/104 of 20 December 1995, 52/195 of 18 December 1997, 54/210 of 22 December
1999, 56/188 of 21 December 2001, 58/206 of 23 December 2003, 59/248 of 22 December 2004, 60/210 of
22 December 2005, 62/206 of 19 December 2007, 64/217 of 21 December 2009 and 66/216 of 22 December 2011,
_______________
340
341

436

Resolution 63/303, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and all its other resolutions on women in development, and the relevant resolutions and agreed conclusions adopted
by the Commission on the Status of Women, including the Declaration adopted at its forty-ninth session,342
Reaffirming the Beijing Declaration343 and Platform for Action344 and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twentyfirst century”,345
Reaffirming also the commitments to gender equality and the advancement of women made at the Millennium
Summit, 346 at the 2005 World Summit, 347 in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, 348 and at other major United Nations summits,
conferences and special sessions, and reaffirming further that their full, effective and accelerated implementation is
integral to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Reaffirming further the United Nations Millennium Declaration,346 which affirms that the equal rights and
opportunities of women and men must be assured, and calls for, inter alia, the promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of women as being effective in and essential to eradicating poverty and hunger, combating diseases
and stimulating development that is truly sustainable,
Recalling the outcomes of the International Conference on Financing for Development349 and the World
Summit on Sustainable Development,350 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document
of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus,351 the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development352 and the outcomes of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals,353 the high-level meeting on HIV and AIDS,354 the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,355 the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries,356 the high-level meeting on Africa’s development needs,357 the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development Goals and other
internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities: the way forward, a disability-inclusive
development agenda towards 2015 and beyond,358 and the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development,359
Recognizing the agreed conclusions adopted during the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status
of Women,360
_______________
342

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. A.
343
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
344
Ibid., annex II.
345
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
346
See resolution 55/2.
347
See resolution 60/1.
348
See resolution 66/288, annex.
349
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
350
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex, and resolution 2, annex.
351
Resolution 63/239, annex.
352
Resolution 63/303, annex.
353
Resolution 65/1.
354
Resolution 65/277, annex.
355
Resolution 66/2, annex.
356
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chaps. I and II.
357
Resolution 63/1.
358
Resolution 68/3.
359
Resolution 68/4.
360
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.

437

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Welcoming the strengthening of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) in respect of its structures, capacities, the implementation of the regional architecture, and
experience on how to achieve its mandate,
Welcoming also General Assembly resolution 67/226 of 21 December 2012 on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system, which
reaffirms that gender equality is of fundamental importance for achieving sustained and inclusive economic growth,
poverty eradication and sustainable development, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Assembly and
United Nations conferences, and that investing in the development of women and girls has a multiplier effect, in
particular on productivity, efficiency and sustained and inclusive economic growth, in all sectors of the economy,
especially in key areas such as agriculture, industry and services,
Noting the importance of the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular its funds and
programmes, and the specialized agencies in facilitating the advancement of women in development, and in this
context recalling the resolution on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for
development of the United Nations system,
Reaffirming the provisions concerning the pursuit of full and productive employment and access to decent
work and social protection for all in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, and calling upon States to adopt forward-looking macroeconomic policies that promote sustainable
development and lead to sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, increase productive employment
opportunities and promote agricultural and industrial development,
Recognizing that men and women workers should have equal access to education, skills, health care, social
security, fundamental rights at work, social and legal protections, including occupational safety and health, and
decent work opportunities,
Recognizing also that access to basic affordable health care, preventive health-care information and the highest
standard of health, including in the areas of sexual and reproductive health, is critical to women’s economic
advancement, that lack of economic empowerment and independence increases women’s vulnerability to a range of
negative consequences, including the risk of contracting HIV/AIDS, and that the neglect of women’s full enjoyment
of human rights severely limits their opportunities in public and private life, including the opportunities for receiving
an education and for achieving economic and political empowerment,
Reaffirming the need to eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary education by the earliest
possible date and at all levels by 2015, and reaffirming also that equal access to education and training at all levels,
in particular in business, trade, administration, information and communications technologies and other new
technologies, and fulfilment of the need to eliminate gender inequalities at all levels are essential for gender equality,
the empowerment of women and poverty eradication and to allowing women’s full and equal contribution to, and
equal opportunity to benefit from, development,
Reaffirming also that women are key contributors to the economy and to combating poverty and inequalities
through both remunerated and unremunerated work at home, in the community and in the workplace, and that the
empowerment of women is a critical factor in the eradication of poverty,
Recognizing that unremunerated work, including domestic and care work, plays an essential role in improving
well-being in the household and in the functioning of the economy as a whole, and acknowledging the need to
recognize and consider, where appropriate, policies and programmes that would contribute to reducing the unequal
burden of unremunerated work, including care work, for which women and girls continue to carry an unequal level
of responsibility,
Recognizing also that the difficult socioeconomic conditions that exist in many developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, have contributed to the feminization of poverty,
Recognizing further, in this context, the importance of respect for all human rights, including the right to
development, and of a national and international environment that promotes, for women and girls, inter alia, justice,
gender equality, equity, civil and political participation and civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to achieve the advancement and empowerment of women,
Bearing in mind the challenges and obstacles to changing discriminatory attitudes and gender stereotypes,
which perpetuate discrimination against women and girls and stereotypic roles of men and women, and stressing
that challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation of international standards and norms to address the
inequality between men and women,
438

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing that poverty eradication and the achievement and preservation of peace are mutually reinforcing,
and recognizing also that peace is inextricably linked to equality between women and men and to development,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;361

2. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other international and regional
organizations, within their respective mandates, and all sectors of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, as well as all women and men, to fully commit themselves and to intensify their contributions to the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration343 and Platform for Action344 and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly,345 and the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development;362
3. Recognizes the mutually reinforcing links between gender equality and poverty eradication and the
achievement of all of the Millennium Development Goals, as well as the need to elaborate and implement, where
appropriate, in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, comprehensive gender-sensitive poverty eradication
strategies that address social, structural and macroeconomic issues;
4. Emphasizes the need to link policies on economic and social development to ensure that all people,
including those living in poverty and in vulnerable situations, benefit from inclusive economic growth and
development, in accordance with the goals of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development349 and the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the
Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus;351
5. Urges Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations to accelerate their efforts and provide adequate resources to increase the voice and full and equal
participation of women in all decision-making bodies at the highest levels of government and in the governance
structures of international organizations, including through eliminating gender stereotyping in appointments and
promotions, to build women’s capacity as agents of change and to empower them to participate actively and
effectively in the design, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of national development, poverty
eradication and environmental policies, strategies and programmes;
6. Encourages Member States to continue to increase, as appropriate, the participation of civil society,
including women’s organizations, in government decision-making in national development policy areas;
7. Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to ensure systematic attention to, recognition
of and support for the crucial role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict, in mediation and
peacebuilding efforts and in the rebuilding of post-conflict societies, inter alia, through promoting women’s capacity,
leadership and engagement in political and economic decision-making;
8. Expresses deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizing evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, and cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions and
sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, inter alia, for women and girls, including
high volatility in global markets, high unemployment, particularly among youth, indebtedness in some countries
and widespread fiscal strains that pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional
progress towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stresses the need for continuing efforts to address
systemic fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while
implementing the reforms agreed to date, and to address the challenges posed by climate change for women and
girls, and in respect of maintaining adequate levels of funding for the achievement of gender equality and the
empowerment of women;
9. Stresses the importance of the creation by Member States, international organizations, including the
United Nations, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other stakeholders of a
favourable and conducive national and international environment in all areas of life for the effective integration of
_______________
361

A/68/271.
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

362

439

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

women and girls in development, and of their undertaking and disseminating a gender analysis of policies and
programmes related to macroeconomic stability, structural reform, taxation, investments, including foreign direct
investment, and all relevant sectors of the economy;
10. Urges the donor community, Member States, international organizations, including the United Nations,
the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other stakeholders to strengthen the focus and
impact of development assistance targeting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls through
gender mainstreaming, the funding of targeted activities and enhanced dialogue between donors and partners, and to
also strengthen the mechanisms needed to measure effectively the resources allocated to incorporating gender
perspectives in all areas of development assistance;
11. Urges Member States to incorporate a gender perspective, commensurate with gender-equality goals,
into the design, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of national development strategies, to ensure
alignment between national action plans on gender equality and national development strategies and to encourage
the involvement of men and boys in the promotion of gender equality, and in this regard calls upon the United
Nations system to support national efforts to develop methodologies and tools and to promote capacity-building and
evaluation;
12. Encourages Member States to ensure inclusive and more effective participation of national mechanisms
for gender equality and women’s empowerment in the formulation of national development strategies, including
strategies aimed at eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities, and calls upon the United Nations system to
support national efforts in this regard;
13. Also encourages Member States, as appropriate, to strengthen capacities for gender mainstreaming by
allocating adequate financial and human resources to national women’s machineries as well as to and within line
ministries, establishing and/or strengthening dedicated units for gender equality and the empowerment of women,
providing capacity development for technical staff and developing tools and guidelines;
14. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and donor countries to strengthen genderresponsive planning and budgeting processes and to develop and strengthen methodologies and tools for this
purpose, as well as for the monitoring and evaluation of investments for gender-equality results, as appropriate, and
encourages donors to mainstream a gender perspective in their practices, including joint coordination and
accountability mechanisms;
15. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement legislation and policies designed to promote the
reconciliation of work and family responsibilities, including through increased flexibility in working arrangements,
such as part-time work, and the facilitation of breastfeeding for working mothers, to provide care facilities for
children and other dependants and to ensure that both women and men have access to maternity or paternity,
parental and other forms of leave and are not discriminated against when availing themselves of such benefits;
16. Expresses deep concern about the pervasiveness of violence against women and girls, reiterates the need
to further intensify efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls, and recognizes
that violence against women and girls is one of the obstacles to the achievement of the objectives of equality,
development and peace and that women’s poverty and lack of political, social and economic empowerment, as well
as their marginalization, may result from their exclusion from social policies for and the benefits of sustainable
development and can place them at increased risk of violence;
17. Encourages Governments, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other
stakeholders to promote and protect the rights of women workers, to take action to remove structural and legal
barriers to, as well as eliminate stereotypic attitudes towards, gender equality at work and to initiate positive steps
towards promoting equal pay for equal work or for work of equal value and women’s full participation in the formal
economy, in particular in economic decision-making;
18. Encourages the United Nations system and donor countries to support Member States in increasing their
investments in policies and programmes with a gender perspective in order to promote women’s access to decent
work and in delivering gender-responsive social protection and social services;
19. Urges Governments to develop, adequately resource and implement active labour-market policies on
full and productive employment and decent work for all, including the full participation of women and men in both
rural and urban areas;
440

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

20. Urges the United Nations system and other international organizations, upon the request of Member
States, to support and promote innovative programme responses to ensure women’s access to decent work, to
recognize and contribute to reducing the unequal burden of care work, to promote social protection initiatives and
measures for women and girls with a gender perspective, and to support and encourage the scaling-up of existing
good-practice programmes and initiatives;
21. Recognizes that women and girls account for almost half of all international migrants at the global level,
and the need to address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and girls by, inter alia,
incorporating a gender perspective into policies and strengthening national laws, institutions and programmes to
prevent and combat gender-based violence, trafficking in persons and discrimination against women and girls,359
and calls upon Governments to strengthen efforts to protect the rights of, and ensure decent work conditions for,
domestic workers, including migrant women and girls, in relation to, inter alia, working hours, work conditions and
wages, and to promote access to health-care services and other social and economic benefits;
22. Encourages Governments and the United Nations system to recognize unremunerated work, including
domestic and care work, and to provide support through the development of infrastructure and technologies and the
provision of public services, including accessible and quality childcare, incentives such as parental leave, flexible
working arrangements and allowances;
23. Encourages Member States to adopt and/or review and to fully implement gender-sensitive legislation
and policies that reduce, through specifically targeted measures, horizontal and vertical occupational segregation
and gender-based wage gaps;
24. Stresses the importance of improving and systematizing the collection, analysis and dissemination of
data disaggregated by sex and age and of developing gender indicators that are specific and relevant with respect to
supporting policymaking and national systems for monitoring and reporting on progress and impact, and in that
regard encourages developed countries and relevant entities of the United Nations system to provide support and
assistance to developing countries, upon their request, with respect to establishing, developing and strengthening
their databases and information systems;
25. Encourages Governments to collect, analyse and disseminate sex-disaggregated data and statistics on
women’s access to decent work, unremunerated work and social protection and to assess the impact of associated
policy measures, in cooperation with the United Nations system and other international organizations, upon the
request of Governments;
26. Also encourages Governments to consider conducting time-use studies and the use of satellite accounts
to determine the extent of women’s and girls’ unremunerated work, including domestic and care work, and the
impact of associated policy measures, in cooperation with the United Nations system and other international
organizations upon the request of Governments;
27. Urges all Member States to undertake a gender analysis of national labour laws and standards and to
establish gender-sensitive policies and guidelines for employment practices, including for transnational
corporations, with particular attention to export-processing zones, building in this regard on multilateral instruments,
including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women363 and conventions of
the International Labour Organization;
28. Stresses the importance of developing national strategies for the promotion of sustainable and productive
entrepreneurial activities, and encourages Governments to create a climate that is conducive to increasing the
number of women entrepreneurs and the size of their businesses by giving them equal access to financial
instruments, providing them with training and advisory services in business, administration and information and
communications technologies, facilitating networking and information-sharing and increasing their participation on
advisory boards and in other forums so as to enable them to contribute to the formulation and review of policies and
programmes being developed by financial institutions;
29. Urges all Member States to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women
with regard to their access to all types of financial services and products, including bank loans, bank accounts,
_______________
363

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.

441

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

mortgages and other forms of financial credit, regardless of their economic and social status, to support women’s
access to legal assistance and to encourage the financial sector to mainstream gender perspectives in their policies
and programmes;
30. Recognizes the role of microfinance, including microcredit, in the eradication of poverty, the
empowerment of women and the generation of employment, notes in this regard the importance of sound national
financial systems, and encourages the strengthening of existing and emerging microcredit institutions and their
capacities, including through the support of international financial institutions;
31. Urges Governments to ensure that microfinance programmes focus on developing savings products that
are safe, convenient and accessible to women and support women’s efforts to retain control over their savings;
32. Urges all Governments to eliminate discrimination against women and girls in the field of education and
to ensure their equal access to all levels of education;
33. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement, as appropriate, legislation and policies protecting
women’s labour and human rights in the workplace, including with respect to minimum wages, social protection
and equal pay for equal work, promoting collective bargaining and providing for recruitment, retention and
promotion policies targeting women;
34. Reaffirms the commitment to women’s equal rights and opportunities in political and economic
decision-making and resource allocation and to the removal of any barriers that prevent women from being full
participants in the economy, and the resolve to undertake legislative and administrative reforms to give women
equal rights with men to economic resources, including access to ownership and control over land and other forms
of property, credit, inheritance, natural resources and appropriate new technology;
35. Urges Governments to take measures to facilitate equitable access to land and property rights by
providing training designed to make the judicial, legislative and administrative system more responsive to genderequality issues, to provide legal aid for women seeking to claim their rights, to support the efforts of women’s
groups and networks and to carry out awareness campaigns so as to draw attention to the need for women’s equal
rights to land and property;
36. Recognizes the need to enhance employment and income opportunities for all, especially for women and
men living in poverty, and encourages Governments to promote decent work for all segments of society and to
ensure that labour-market regulations and social provisions create a more level playing field for women, including
by enacting and enforcing minimum wage legislation, eliminating discriminatory wage practices and promoting
measures such as public works programmes, in order to enable women to cope with recurrent crises and long-term
unemployment;
37. Also recognizes the need to empower women, particularly poor women and girls, economically and
politically, and in this regard encourages Governments, with the support of their development partners, to invest in
appropriate infrastructure and other projects, including the provision of water and sanitation to rural areas and urban
slums, in order to increase health and well-being, relieve the workloads of women and girls and release their time
and energy for other productive activities, including entrepreneurship;
38. Further recognizes the central role of agriculture in development, and stresses the importance of
reviewing agricultural policies and strategies to ensure that women’s critical role in food security and nutrition is
recognized and addressed as an integral part of both short- and long-term responses to food insecurity, excessive
price volatility and food crises in developing countries;
39. Recognizes the critical role and contribution of rural women, including indigenous women and women
in local communities, and their traditional knowledge in enhancing agricultural and rural development, improving
food security and eradicating rural poverty;
40. Expresses concern at the overall expansion of the HIV and AIDS epidemic and the fact that in some
regions women and girls are still the most affected by HIV and AIDS, that they are more easily infected, that they
bear a disproportionate share of the caregiving burden and that they are more vulnerable to violence, stigmatization
and discrimination, poverty and marginalization from their families and communities as a result of HIV and AIDS,
and taking into account that despite substantial progress, the 2010 deadline of universal access has not been met,
calls upon Governments and the international community to urgently scale up responses towards achieving the goal
of universal access to comprehensive HIV prevention programmes, treatment, care and support and, in line with the
442

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2011 Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS,354 to ensure that
national responses to HIV and AIDS meet the specific needs of women and girls, including those living with and
affected by HIV and AIDS across their lifespan;
41. Reaffirms the commitment to achieve universal access to reproductive health by 2015, as set out in the
targets under Goal 5 of the Millennium Development Goals and as supported at the International Conference on
Population and Development, by integrating this goal into strategies for attaining the internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration346 aimed at reducing
maternal mortality, improving maternal health, reducing child mortality, promoting gender equality, combating HIV
and AIDS and eradicating poverty;
42. Urges Governments and all sectors of society to promote and to pursue gender-based approaches to the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases based on data disaggregated by sex and age in their effort to
address the critical differences in the rapidly growing magnitude of non-communicable diseases, including
cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes, which affect people of all ages, gender,
race and income levels, as noted in the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,355 and notes that poor populations and those living in
vulnerable situations, in particular in developing countries, bear a disproportionate burden and that noncommunicable diseases can affect women and men differently, because, inter alia, women bear a disproportionate
share of the burden of caregiving;
43. Encourages Governments and all sectors of society to take sustainable measures to ensure equal access
to full and productive employment and decent work on an equal basis and without discrimination to persons with
disabilities, including by promoting access to inclusive education systems, skills development and vocational and
entrepreneurial training, in order to enable persons with disabilities to attain and maintain maximum independence,
as noted in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities364 as well as in the outcome
document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development
Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities: the way forward, a
disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond,358 and notes the need to strengthen efforts aimed
at addressing the rights and needs of women and children with disabilities;
44. Expresses deep concern that maternal health remains one area constrained by some of the largest health
inequities in the world, and over the uneven progress in improving child and maternal health, in this context calls
upon States to implement their commitments to preventing and reducing child and maternal mortality and
morbidity, and welcomes in that regard the Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s and Children’s Health
as well as national, regional and international initiatives contributing to the reduction in the number of maternal
deaths and deaths of the newborn and children under age 5;
45. Recognizes that there is a need for all donors to maintain and deliver on their existing bilateral and
multilateral official development assistance commitments and targets, and that the full implementation of those
commitments will substantially boost resources available to push forward the international development agenda;
46. Also recognizes the need to strengthen the capacity of Governments to incorporate a gender perspective
into policies and decision-making, and encourages all Governments, international organizations, including the
organizations of the United Nations system, and other relevant stakeholders to assist and support the efforts of
developing countries in integrating a gender perspective into all aspects of policymaking, including through the
provision of technical assistance and financial resources;
47. Encourages the international community, the United Nations system, the private sector and civil society
to continue to provide the financial resources necessary to assist Governments in their efforts to meet the
development targets and benchmarks agreed upon at the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World
Conference on Women, the International Conference on Population and Development, the Millennium Summit, the
International Conference on Financing for Development, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the
Second World Assembly on Ageing, the twenty-third and twenty-fourth special sessions of the General Assembly,
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and other relevant United Nations conferences and
summits;
_______________
364

Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.

443

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

48. Urges multilateral donors, and invites international financial institutions, within their respective
mandates, and regional development banks to review and implement policies that support national efforts to ensure
that a higher proportion of resources reaches women and girls, in particular in rural and remote areas;
49. Calls upon all organizations of the United Nations system, within their organizational mandates, to
mainstream a gender perspective and to pursue gender equality in their country programmes, planning instruments,
investment frameworks and sector-wide programmes and to articulate specific country-level goals and targets in this
domain in accordance with national development strategies, welcomes the work of UN-Women with United
Nations country teams in assisting Member States, at their request, in integrating a gender perspective into national
development policies and strategies, in accordance with their national priorities, and stresses its important role in
leading, coordinating and promoting the accountability of the United Nations system so as to ensure that the
commitment to gender equality and gender mainstreaming translates into effective action throughout the world;
50. Calls upon the organizations of the United Nations development system, within their organizational
intergovernmentally agreed mandates, to implement their institutional accountability mechanisms, to deliver on
results on gender equality and to report on gender-sensitive indicators in their strategic frameworks;
51. Recalls Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/18 of 24 July 2013, in which the Council decided
that at its fifty-ninth session, in 2015, the Commission on the Status of Women would undertake a review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly, including current challenges that affect the implementation of the
Platform for Action and the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women, as well as
opportunities for strengthening gender equality and the empowerment of women in the post-2015 development
agenda through the integration of a gender perspective;
52. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution, including on integrating a gender perspective into
national development strategies;
53. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the item entitled
“Eradication of poverty and other development issues”, the sub-item entitled “Women in development”.
RESOLUTION 68/228
A/RES/68/228

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/442/Add.3, para. 7)365

68/228. Human resources development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/196 of 18 December 1997, 54/211 of 22 December 1999, 56/189 of 21 December
2001, 58/207 of 23 December 2003, 60/211 of 22 December 2005, 62/207 of 19 December 2007, 64/218 of
21 December 2009 and 66/217 of 22 December 2011,
Stressing that human resources development lies at the heart of economic, social and environmental
development and that health and education are at the core of human resources development,
Stressing also that human resources development is key to the efforts to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and to expand opportunities for people, in
particular for the most vulnerable groups of the population,
Welcoming the considerable efforts made over the years, yet recognizing that many countries continue to face
formidable challenges in developing a sufficient pool of human resources capable of meeting national economic and
social needs and that the formulation and implementation of effective human resources strategies often require
resources and capacities not always available in developing countries, and also recognizing the need for new ways
to address human resources development,
_______________
365

444

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing the potential of science, technological knowledge and innovation to address key challenges to
human resources development, which can lead to positive transformations in people’s lives,
Stressing that human resources development is even more critical in view of the current global challenges,
including, despite evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on
development, of the world financial and economic crisis, in order to tackle the negative effects of the global crisis
and set the basis for sustained, inclusive and equitable growth and recovery,
Recognizing that the benefits of human resources development are best realized in national and international
environments that support equal opportunity, access to education and non-discrimination and maintain an enabling
environment for job creation,
Recognizing also that despite evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, the ongoing adverse impacts,
particularly on development, of the world financial and economic crisis continue to diminish the ability of many
countries, especially developing countries, to cope with and address human resources development challenges and
to formulate and implement effective strategies for poverty eradication and sustainable development,
Acknowledging the important nexus between international migration and development and the need to deal
with the challenges and opportunities that migration presents to countries of origin, transit and destination,
recognizing that migration brings benefits as well as challenges to the global community, and stressing that the brain
drain continues to be a severe problem in many developing and transitioning countries, undermining efforts in the
area of human resources development,
Recognizing that science, technological knowledge and innovation can overcome important physical,
infrastructural and cultural barriers that prevent people, especially in poor and marginalized communities, from
living a healthy and productive life,
Recognizing also the need to align science, technological knowledge and innovation systems with national
development objectives, fully integrated with national human resources development and poverty eradication
strategies and supported by appropriate institutional and policy frameworks,
Acknowledging that science, technological knowledge and innovation policies should take into account the
specific features of the economy in developing countries, including the size of the traditional sector, the importance
of indigenous knowledge, the limited access to skilled labour and capital, weak infrastructure and inadequate
institutional frameworks, in order to generate solutions that address the specific challenges of those countries and to
foster synergies between modern science and technology and indigenous and local knowledge,
Reaffirming that gender equality is of fundamental importance for achieving sustained economic growth,
poverty eradication and sustainable development, in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions and
United Nations conferences, and that investing in the development of women and girls has a multiplier effect, in
particular on productivity, efficiency and sustained economic growth, in all sectors of the economy, especially in key
areas such as agriculture, industry and services,
Recognizing that education is the key to promoting the development of human potential, equality and
understanding among peoples, as well as to sustaining economic growth and eradicating poverty, and recognizing
also that, to achieve those ends, it is essential that quality education be available to all, including indigenous peoples,
girls and women, rural inhabitants and persons with disabilities,
Stressing that Governments have the primary responsibility for defining and implementing appropriate
policies for human resources development, and the need for continued support from the international community for
the national efforts of developing countries,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;366

2. Calls upon Member States to place human resources development at the core of economic and social
development and to develop short-, medium- and long-term strategies to effectively enhance their human resources
capacities, as educated, skilled, healthy, capable, productive and flexible workforces are the foundation for
achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and development;
_______________
366

A/68/228.

445

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Stresses the need for Member States to emphasize and integrate human resources development into
national development strategies, including national development policies and strategies to eradicate poverty and
achieve the Millennium Development Goals, in order to address structural and multidimensional challenges to
enhancing national productive capacities and to ensure that human resources development implications are taken
into account by all national development stakeholders;
4. Recognizes that comprehensive approaches to human resources development that address poverty
eradication and the creation of a skilled workforce are also critical in reducing unemployment and brain drain and in
promoting greater social inclusion;
5. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement comprehensive human resources development
strategies premised on national development objectives that ensure a strong link between education, training and
employment, help to maintain a productive and competitive workforce and are responsive to the needs of the
economy;
6. Stresses that human resources development policies should focus on supporting the emergence of a
sufficiently wide and flexible pool of skilled human resources, especially among women and youth, to support all
sectors of the economy and be matched with present and future workforce needs, which requires well-sequenced
investments in basic education, vocational training, on-the-job training and more advanced managerial, engineering
and scientific education to increase the supply of technological knowledge that can be absorbed by national
innovation systems;
7. Emphasizes the need for Member States to adopt cross-sectoral approaches and mechanisms to identify
human resources development needs in the medium and long term for all sectors of the economy and to formulate
and implement policies and programmes to address those needs;
8. Recognizes that comprehensive and flexible science, technological knowledge and innovation strategies
that encompass all sectors of the economy are critical to ensuring that skills are matched with labour market demand
and ready to adapt to and benefit from a constantly evolving technology landscape;
9. Emphasizes that when science, technological knowledge and innovation and human resources
development approaches are mutually reinforcing they can lead to a virtuous circle of economic growth, human
progress and sustainable development;
10. Stresses that investment in human resources development should be an integral part of national
development policies and strategies, and in this regard calls for the adoption of policies to facilitate investment
focused on physical and social infrastructure, including education, in particular skills upgrading and vocational
training in areas such as science and technology, including information and communications technology, as well as
in capacity development, health and sustainable development;
11. Encourages Member States, as appropriate, to continue to strengthen comprehensive social protection
systems, to adopt policies that strengthen existing safety nets and protect vulnerable groups and to take other
appropriate actions, including boosting domestic consumption and production, recognizes that social protection
floors, defined according to national priorities and the individual circumstances of Member States, can provide
systemic approaches to address poverty and vulnerability and can contribute significantly to successful human
resources development strategies, acknowledges in this regard that many developing countries lack the necessary
financial resources and capacity to implement such countercyclical measures, and in this regard recognizes the need
for continued mobilization of additional domestic and international resources, as appropriate;
12. Encourages Member States in a position to do so to consider implementing, and the States members of
the International Labour Organization to implement, policies consistent with the International Labour Organization
Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and their obligations under all relevant ratified
conventions of the International Labour Organization, and recalls the importance of promoting decent work for all
and of increasing quality jobs, including through measures aimed at ensuring occupational health and safety and
through working relationships based on effective social dialogue;
13. Stresses that human resources development strategies should include measures aimed at reducing
unemployment and underemployment among young men and women and the long-term unemployed, who have
been disproportionately affected by slow growth in jobs recovery, and to integrate underutilized human resources
into the labour market through policies that promote skills development and productivity and reduce barriers to
employment, including gender barriers, including by providing incentives as appropriate for recruiting, retaining and
446

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

retooling, assistance in job-finding and job-matching and vocational and on-the-job training, and by promoting, inter
alia, youth entrepreneurship, noting in this regard the call for action by the International Labour Conference;
14. Also stresses the need for Member States to retain and further enhance national human resources by
boosting job-rich recovery and promoting decent work, including by adopting policies and incentives that enhance
labour productivity and stimulate private investment and entrepreneurship and strengthen the role of labour
administration and institutions in order to foster job creation and increase the participation of vulnerable groups,
including workers in informal sectors;
15. Emphasizes the need to address the interlinkages among human resources development, energy and
food security, agriculture and rural development, and encourages Member States to strengthen capacity in
agriculture and rural development;
16. Stresses that sustainable development is dependent, inter alia, on healthy human resources, calls upon
Member States to continue their efforts to strengthen national health systems, urges the further strengthening of
international cooperation in the area of health, inter alia, by considering promoting universal health coverage and
through the exchange of best practices in the areas of strengthening health systems, access to medicines, training of
health personnel, transfer of technology and production of affordable, safe, effective and good-quality medicine, and
in this regard stresses that international cooperation and assistance, in particular external funding, need to become
more predictable and to be better aligned with national priorities and channelled to recipient countries in ways that
strengthen national health systems;
17. Calls upon the international community, including the entities of the United Nations system, to support
the efforts of developing countries to address the adverse effects of HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other
infectious diseases, in particular in Africa, as well as the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
which is a challenge of epidemic proportions, and their effects on human resources;
18. Calls upon relevant United Nations entities to support national efforts to build institutional capacities to
address long-term national human resources development needs in addition to providing training to individuals;
19. Stresses that building national capacity for innovation should be a key priority for the international
development cooperation agenda, given the importance of human resources development and science, technological
knowledge and innovation for countries’ future prosperity, including the capacity of enterprises to innovate;
20. Calls upon the international community to assist developing countries in the implementation of national
human resources development strategies, and encourages the international community, including the private sector
and relevant civil society actors, to provide and mobilize financial resources, capacity-building, technical assistance
and technology transfer on mutually agreed terms and to supply expertise from all sources, as available;
21. Calls for steps to integrate gender perspectives into human resources development, including through
policies, strategies and targeted actions aimed at promoting women’s capacities and access to productive activities,
and in this regard emphasizes the need to ensure the full participation of women in the formulation and
implementation of such policies, strategies and actions;
22. Stresses the important contributions of the public and private sectors, respectively, in meeting national
training and education needs to support the efficient functioning of enterprises and matching the needs of a rapidly
changing economy, and encourages the integration of those contributions, including through the greater use of
public-private partnerships and incentives;
23. Calls for actions at the national, regional and international levels that will give high priority to improving
and expanding literacy, as well as science proficiency, including by providing tertiary, technical-vocational and adult
education, and stresses the need to ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to
complete a full course of primary schooling and will have equal access to all levels of education;
24. Encourages Governments to consider appropriate measures at the national level, such as upgrading
human skills, better aligning educational and training systems to labour market needs and strengthening labour
institutions and regulations to respond to economic downturns;
25. Encourages countries in a position to do so to maintain or consider enhancing measures to boost job-rich
recovery, such as policies and incentives to enhance labour productivity and stimulate private investment, in
addition to efforts to reduce budget deficits in the long term, as appropriate;
447

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

26. Encourages efforts by Member States and the international community to promote a balanced, coherent
and comprehensive approach to international migration and development, in particular by building partnerships and
ensuring coordinated action to develop capacities, including for the management of migration, and in this regard
reiterates the need to consider innovative measures to maximize the benefits of migration while minimizing the
negative effects of the migration of both highly skilled and low-skilled workers from developing countries;
27. Also encourages giving appropriate consideration to human resources development strategies in the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session, under the item entitled
“Eradication of poverty and other development issues”, the sub-item entitled “Human resources development”, and
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/229
A/RES/68/229

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/443/Add.1, para. 9)367

68/229. Operational activities for development of the United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/226 of 21 December 2012 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system and Economic and Social Council resolution
2013/5 of 12 July 2013 on progress in the implementation of resolution 67/226,
Recalling also the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals and its outcome document,368 and the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,369
Reaffirming the importance of the comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development,
through which the General Assembly establishes key system-wide policy orientations for development cooperation
and country-level modalities of the United Nations system,
Recalling the role of the Economic and Social Council in providing coordination and guidance to the United
Nations system so as to ensure that policy orientations established by the General Assembly are implemented on a
system-wide basis in accordance with Assembly resolutions 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 61/16 of 20 November
2006, 67/226 and 68/1 of 20 September 2013 and other relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the Economic and Social Council at the
operational activities segment of its substantive session of 2013,370
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the analysis of funding of operational activities for
development of the United Nations system for 2011;371
2. Also takes note of the report of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation on its
seventeenth session372 and the decisions taken at that session,373 as well as the decisions taken at its intersessional
meeting held on 4 June 2013;
_______________
367

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 65/1.
369
Resolution 68/6.
370
E/2013/94 and A/68/97-E/2013/87.
371
A/68/97-E/2013/87.
372
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/67/39).
373
Ibid., chap. I.
368

448

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Reaffirms the importance of the contribution of operational activities for development to national
capacity development and development effectiveness of the United Nations development system in addressing the
key areas identified in the quadrennial comprehensive policy review;
4. Notes with appreciation the work undertaken by those entities of the United Nations development
system that have made efforts to align their strategic plans, frameworks and budgets with the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review, and encourages all entities of the United Nations development system to take further
steps in this regard;
5. Recalls the concern expressed by the General Assembly in its resolution 67/226 over the lack of progress
by the governing bodies in the development and operationalization of the concept of the “critical mass” of core
resources, which was reiterated by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2013/5, notes that the funds
and programmes have not presented specific proposals on the matter to their governing bodies, as requested in 2013,
and requests the funds and programmes to take necessary actions in order to take a decision on the matter in 2014,
as mandated in resolution 67/226;
6. Recognizes the importance of continuing to strengthen and improve the results-focused delivery of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system in order to maximize their support for
accelerating progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015, especially in the least
developed countries and other developing countries that are lagging behind in meeting the targets, as well as their
support for the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
7. Recalls Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/5 on operational activities for development, and
expresses appreciation for the guidance provided by the Council on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 67/226;
8. Takes note of the policy for independent system-wide evaluation of United Nations operational activities
for development prepared by the interim coordination mechanism for system-wide evaluation of operational
activities for development of the United Nations system,374 decides in this regard that two pilot independent systemwide evaluations shall be conducted in 2014, subject to the provision and availability of extrabudgetary resources, as
outlined in the policy, and that the themes of these two evaluations shall be “Meta-evaluation and synthesis of
United Nations Development Assistance Framework evaluations, with a particular focus on poverty eradication”
and “Evaluation of the contribution of the United Nations development system to strengthening national capacities
for statistical analysis and data collection to support the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and
other internationally agreed development goals”, invites countries in a position to do so to contribute extrabudgetary
resources for the effective implementation of the pilot independent system-wide evaluations, and requests the
interim coordination mechanism to provide an update on progress in the implementation of the pilot independent
system-wide evaluations to the Economic and Social Council at the operational activities segment of its substantive
session of 2015;
9. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council, at the operational activities segment of its substantive
session of 2015, to discuss the implications for the United Nations development system of the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 68/1, while stressing the need to minimize transaction costs associated with reporting
and to avoid new or additional formal reporting requirements.
RESOLUTION 68/230
A/RES/68/230

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/443/Add.2, para. 8)375

68/230. South-South cooperation
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 64/222 of 21 December 2009, in which it endorsed the Nairobi outcome document
of the High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation,
_______________
374
375

A/68/658-E/2014/7.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

449

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming also its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of
Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,376
Recalling its resolutions 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 60/212 of 22 December 2005, 62/209 of 19 December
2007, 63/233 of 19 December 2008, 64/1 of 6 October 2009, 66/219 of 22 December 2011, 67/227 of 21 December
2012 and other resolutions relevant to South-South cooperation,
1. Takes note of the report of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation on its seventeenth
session,377 the decisions taken at that session378 and the decisions taken at the intersessional meeting of 4 June 2013;
2.

Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of South-South cooperation;379

3. Further takes note of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on South-South and triangular cooperation
in the United Nations system,380 including its recommendations, and the related note by the Secretary-General;381
4. Recognizes the importance and different history and particularities of South-South cooperation, and
reaffirms its view of South-South cooperation as a manifestation of solidarity among peoples and countries of the
South that contributes to their national well-being, national and collective self-reliance and the attainment of
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals; South-South cooperation
and its agenda have to be set by countries of the South and should continue to be guided by the principles of respect
for national sovereignty, national ownership and independence, equality, non-conditionality, non-interference in
domestic affairs and mutual benefit;
5. Also recognizes that South-South cooperation is a partnership among equals based on solidarity and
should not be seen as official development assistance, and, in this regard, acknowledges the need to enhance the
development effectiveness of South-South cooperation by continuing to increase its mutual accountability and
transparency, as well as coordinating its initiatives with other development projects and programmes on the ground,
in accordance with national development plans and priorities, and further recognizes that the impact of South-South
cooperation should be assessed with a view to improving, as appropriate, its quality in a results-oriented manner;
6. Encourages the funds, programmes, specialized agencies and other entities of the United Nations system
to take concrete measures to effectively mainstream support to South-South and triangular cooperation in their
policy and regular programming work, and in this context requests those organizations and the United Nations
Office for South-South Cooperation to leverage each other’s institutional and technical capacities;
7. Recognizes the need to continue to mutually enrich South-South cooperation based on the diverse
experiences of and good practices from South-South cooperation, triangular cooperation and North-South
cooperation, and to further explore complementarities and synergies between them;
8. Invites developing country Member States to improve the impact of South-South cooperation initiatives
on sustainable development and to exchange best practices in planning, implementation, data collection and
information management;
9. Stresses that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South
cooperation;
10. Recognizes the importance of considering South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation in the
context of the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
11. Reaffirms the mandate and the central role of the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation as
the focal point for promoting and facilitating South-South and triangular cooperation for development on a global
and United Nations system-wide basis, recalls decision 17/1 of the High-level Committee on South-South
_______________
376

Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires,
30 August–12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and corrigendum), chap. I.
377
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/67/39).
378
Ibid., chap. I.
379
A/68/212.
380
A/66/717.
381
A/66/717/Add.1.

450

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Cooperation,378 and in this regard, requests the Secretary-General, noting the idea of separating the Office for SouthSouth Cooperation as operationally autonomous from the United Nations Development Programme, to present, as
part of his comprehensive report to the High-level Committee at its eighteenth session and, in consultation with
Member States, the Office for South-South Cooperation and the United Nations Development Programme, a
comprehensive proposal evaluating the feasibility and financial, human and budgetary implications of separating
this Office, at the same time clarifying contributions of the United Nations Development Programme under such a
change, and presenting all options, including the continuation of all existing arrangements and financing options for
the Office, including through voluntary contributions as well as core contributions from the United Nations
Development Programme;
12. Calls upon the Office for South-South Cooperation to explore and undertake intensive, innovative and
additional resource mobilization initiatives to attract more resources, both financial and in-kind, to supplement
regular resources and other funds for activities involving South-South cooperation in order to enable it to respond
effectively and efficiently to the South-South cooperation needs of Member States and the United Nations system;
13. Acknowledges and encourages the initiatives and arrangements, including public-private mechanisms,
undertaken in the efforts to enhance cooperation among developing countries, including in the areas of eradication
of poverty and hunger, gender equality, the empowerment of women, access to information and communications
technologies, science and technology, environment, culture, health, education and human development;
14. Requests the United Nations development system to further assess, within the report of the SecretaryGeneral, progress made in its support, particularly with regard to the provision of adequate resources and the
mobilization of technical and financial resources for South-South cooperation, as well as mainstreaming SouthSouth cooperation in the work of the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies in the
field;
15. Also requests the United Nations development system to continue improving coordination among its
agencies in order to enhance its support to South-South and triangular cooperation and monitor progress at the
global and regional levels and to continue evaluating the support of the United Nations development system for
those activities;
16. Further requests the United Nations development system to accord a high priority to facilitating
programmes and projects of South-South and triangular cooperation and to assist countries of the South, upon their
request, in implementing them to ensure that sustainability is a key component of those projects;
17. Recognizes the need to mobilize adequate resources for enhancing South-South and triangular
cooperation, and in this context invites all countries in a position to do so to contribute in support of such
cooperation to the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation and also to the Pérez-Guerrero Trust Fund for
South-South Cooperation, in accordance with its resolution 57/263 of 20 December 2002, and to support other
initiatives for all developing countries, including technology transfers among developing countries;
18. Also recognizes that South-South and triangular cooperation are mutually supportive in terms of both
technical and financial assistance, emphasizes in this regard the importance of further invigorating South-South
cooperation, and invites all Member States to enhance South-South and triangular cooperation, focusing on shared
development priorities with the involvement of all relevant stakeholders in governments, civil society and the
private sector;
19. Invites the regional commissions, where relevant, to further harness the knowledge network, partnerships,
technical and research capacity in support of an enhanced subregional, regional and interregional South-South
cooperation and to use the meetings of the regional coordination mechanism, as appropriate, as a tool for advancing
system-wide cooperation and coordination in support of South-South cooperation at the regional level;
20. Requests all Member States and the United Nations development system to foster complementarities
among North-South and South-South and triangular cooperation through greater evidence-based policy dialogue on
strategic cross-cutting issues, in particular for the application of science, technology and innovation and the
integration of a gender perspective into the pursuit of sustainable development;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Operational activities for development”, the sub-item entitled “South-South cooperation for development”, and
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a comprehensive report
451

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

on the state of South-South cooperation, focusing on how the United Nations development system can improve its
support to South-South cooperation and the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/231
A/RES/68/231

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/444, para. 22)382

68/231. International Year of Pulses, 2016
The General Assembly,
Noting that pulses are annual leguminous crops yielding between 1 and 12 grains or seeds of variable size, shape
and colour within a pod, used for both food and feed, and that the term “pulses” is limited to crops harvested solely for
dry grain, thereby excluding crops harvested green for food, which are classified as vegetable crops, as well as those
crops used mainly for oil extraction and leguminous crops that are used exclusively for sowing purposes,383
Noting also that pulse crops such as lentils, beans, peas and chickpeas are a critical source of plant-based
proteins and amino acids for people around the globe, as well as a source of plant-based protein for animals,
Recalling that the World Food Programme and other food aid initiatives use pulses as a critical part of the
general food basket,
Desiring to focus attention on the role that pulses play as part of sustainable food production aimed towards
food security and nutrition,
Recognizing that pulses are leguminous plants that have nitrogen-fixing properties which can contribute to
increasing soil fertility and have a positive impact on the environment,
Recognizing also that health organizations around the world recommend eating pulses as part of a healthy diet
to address obesity, as well as to prevent and help manage chronic diseases such as diabetes, coronary conditions and
cancer,
Believing that such a celebration would create a unique opportunity to encourage connections throughout the
food chain that would better utilize pulse-based proteins, further global production of pulses, better utilize crop
rotations and address the challenges in the trade of pulses,
Affirming the need to heighten public awareness of the nutritional benefits of pulses and to further sustainable
agriculture,
Reaffirming that, pursuant to paragraphs 13 and 14 of the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/67 of 25 July 1980, a year should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and
financing have been made,
Welcoming resolution 6/2013 of 22 June 2013 of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations,
1.

Decides to declare 2016 the International Year of Pulses;

2. Reaffirms Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 on international years and anniversaries and
General Assembly resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the proclamation
of international years;
3. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, mindful of provisions
contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to facilitate the implementation of
the Year in collaboration with Governments, relevant organizations, non-governmental organizations and all
other relevant stakeholders;

_______________
382

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Dominican
Republic, Ethiopia, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritius, Niger, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Togo, Turkey and Ukraine.
383
Based on the definition of “pulses and derived products” of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

452

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session a focused
and concise report, bearing in mind paragraphs 23 to 27 of the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/67, on activities resulting from the implementation of the present resolution, which elaborates on, inter alia, the
evaluation of the Year;
5. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to keep the General Assembly
informed of progress in this regard;
6. Stresses that the costs of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
above and beyond activities currently within the mandate of the lead agency should be met through voluntary
contributions, including from the private sector;
7.
the Year.

Invites all relevant stakeholders to make voluntary contributions and to provide other forms of support to

RESOLUTION 68/232
A/RES/68/232

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/444, para. 22)384

68/232. World Soil Day and International Year of Soils
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming General Assembly resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on
the proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of its annex on the agreed criteria for their
proclamation, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, stating that an international day or year should not be proclaimed
before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Noting that soils constitute the foundation for agricultural development, essential ecosystem functions and
food security and hence are key to sustaining life on Earth,
Recognizing that the sustainability of soils is key to addressing the pressures of a growing population and that
recognition, advocacy and support for promoting sustainable management of soils can contribute to healthy soils
and thus to a food-secure world and to stable and sustainably used ecosystems,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,385 Agenda 21,386 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,387 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development,388 the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)389 and
the commitments made therein and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”,390
Recognizing the economic and social significance of good land management, including soil, particularly its
contribution to economic growth, biodiversity, sustainable agriculture and food security, eradicating poverty,
women’s empowerment, addressing climate change and improving water availability, and stressing that
desertification, land degradation and drought are challenges of a global dimension and that they continue to pose
serious challenges to the sustainable development of all countries, in particular developing countries,
_______________
384

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
386
Ibid., annex II.
387
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
388
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
389
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
390
Resolution 66/288, annex.
385

453

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing also the urgent need, at all levels, to raise awareness and to promote sustainability of the limited
soil resources, using the best available scientific information and building on all dimensions of sustainable
development,
Noting that World Soil Day and the International Year of Soils can contribute to raising awareness of
desertification, land degradation and drought, in line with the objective of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,391
Recognizing that, for these reasons, an international year and world day on the same issue on soil could
exceptionally be proclaimed at the same time without constituting a precedent,
Recalling resolutions 4/2013 and 5/2013 adopted on 22 June 2013 by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its thirty-eighth session,392
1.

Decides to designate 5 December as World Soil Day and to declare 2015 the International Year of Soils;

2. Invites all Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and other international and
regional organizations, as well as civil society, non-governmental organizations and individuals, to observe the Day
and the Year, as appropriate;
3. Invites Governments, relevant regional and international organizations, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector and other relevant stakeholders to make voluntary contributions for the observance of the Day and
the Year;
4. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, mindful of the provisions
contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, and within the framework of the Global
Soil Partnership, to facilitate the implementation of the Day and the Year, in collaboration with Governments, the
secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa391 and other relevant regional and international organizations,
civil society and the general public, and also invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
keep the General Assembly informed of the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution,
including on the evaluation of the Day and the Year;
5. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions, subject to the availability and provision of voluntary contributions;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States in
order to encourage them to carry out activities to commemorate World Soil Day and the International Year of Soils.
RESOLUTION 68/233
A/RES/68/233

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/444, para. 22)393

68/233. Agriculture development, food security and nutrition
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 65/178 of 20 December 2010, 66/220 of 22 December 2011 and 67/228 of
21 December 2012,
Recalling also the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security, 394 particularly the Five Rome
Principles for Sustainable Global Food Security,
_______________
391
392
393
394

454

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2013/REP.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling further the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,395 Agenda 21,396 the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,397 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development398 and the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),399 the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,400
the 2005 World Summit Outcome,401 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of
the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus,402 the outcome document of the 2010 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
on the Millennium Development Goals,403 the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020404 and the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals, convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013,405
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,406
Noting the processes agreed upon at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, which are
now under way, in particular the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals and the
Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing, as well as the process to develop
options for a technology facilitation mechanism,
Recalling its resolutions 66/221 of 22 December 2011 on the International Year of Quinoa, 2013, and 66/222
of 22 December 2011 on the International Year of Family Farming, 2014,
Expressing concern that the multiple and complex causes of the food crises that occur in different regions
of the world, affecting developing countries, especially net food importers, and their consequences for food
security and nutrition require a comprehensive and coordinated response in the short, medium and long term by
national Governments, civil society and the international community, reiterating that the root causes of food
insecurity and undernutrition are poverty and inequity, and remaining concerned that excessively volatile food
prices pose a serious challenge to the fight against poverty and hunger and to the efforts of developing countries
to attain food security and improved nutrition and to achieve the objective of reducing by half the proportion of
undernourished people no later than 2015, as well as other internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals,
Recalling the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the Plan of Action of the World Food Summit,
the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later,407 including the goal of achieving food security for all
through an ongoing effort to eradicate hunger in all countries, with an immediate view to reducing by half the
proportion of undernourished people no later than 2015, as well as the commitment to achieving the goals set out in
paragraph 19 of the United Nations Millennium Declaration,408
_______________
395

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
396
Ibid., annex II.
397
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
398
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
399
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
400
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
401
Resolution 60/1.
402
Resolution 63/239, annex.
403
Resolution 65/1.
404
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
405
Resolution 68/6.
406
Resolution 66/288, annex.
407
A/57/499, annex.
408
Resolution 55/2.

455

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with appreciation the work undertaken by relevant international bodies and organizations, including
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development
and the World Food Programme, on agricultural development and on enhancing food security and improving
nutrition outcomes,
Welcoming national, regional and international initiatives and commitments aimed at improving agriculture
development, food security and nutrition,
Recalling the commitments made to achieve global food security, to reduce undernutrition and to provide
adequate and predictable resources through bilateral and multilateral channels, including the financial and policy
commitments set out in the L’Aquila Food Security Initiative, and acknowledging the progress made in
implementing the commitments under the New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition in support of the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme,
Recalling also the adoption on 10 March 2010 of the Abuja Declaration on Development of Agribusiness and
Agro-industries in Africa by the High-level Conference on the Development of Agribusiness and Agro-industries in
Africa, endorsed by the Executive Council of the African Union at its eighteenth ordinary session, in which a call
was made for, inter alia, renewed commitment to increasing allocations in national budgets to the agricultural sector
and for the adoption of programmes to accelerate the development of value chains for strategic food commodities,
build competitive food supply systems and reduce reliance on food imports,
Reaffirming that agriculture remains a fundamental and key sector for developing countries, and noting the
importance of working towards eliminating all forms of protectionism and the commitments to comprehensive
negotiations aimed at substantial improvement in market access, substantial reduction in trade-distorting national
support and the parallel elimination of all forms of export subsidies and disciplines on all export measures with
equivalent effect as provided in the mandate from the Doha Work Programme,409 the framework adopted by the
General Council of the World Trade Organization on 1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration
adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005,
Reaffirming also the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food, consistent with the
right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully
develop and maintain his or her physical and mental capacities, and underlining the need to make special efforts to
meet the nutritional needs, especially of women, children, older persons, indigenous peoples and persons with
disabilities, as well as those living in vulnerable situations,
Stressing the importance of the preservation and sustainable use of the natural resource base for food security
and nutrition, including through the sustainable use of agricultural biodiversity,
Remaining deeply concerned that, according to the most recent estimates of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, 842 million people, or one in eight people in the world, suffer from
chronic hunger and that 98 per cent of all hungry people live in developing countries, noting with concern that
this number remains particularly high, and noting also that stunting is an important challenge to be addressed
by Member States,
Remaining deeply concerned also about the continuing food insecurity and undernutrition being faced by
millions of people in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel,
Reiterating the urgent need for action to address the adverse effects of climate change on food security, as well
as the root causes of food insecurity and malnutrition,
Acknowledging that food losses and waste, estimated at 1.3 billion tons annually, occur in lower- and higherincome countries at all stages of the food supply chain, as well as the consumption stage, and recognizing the need
to take urgent measures to reduce pre- and post-harvest losses and waste of food,
Reiterating the importance of empowering rural women as critical agents for enhancing agricultural and rural
development, food security and improved nutrition outcomes,
_______________
409

456

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing that farmers, including small-scale farmers and fisherfolk, pastoralists and foresters, can make
important contributions to sustainable development through production activities that are environmentally sound,
enhance food security and nutrition outcomes, improve the livelihoods of the poor and invigorate production and
sustained economic growth,
Recognizing also the importance of smallholder and family farmers, including women, cooperatives,
indigenous peoples and local communities in developing countries, and their knowledge and practices, in the
conservation and sustainable use of traditional crops and biodiversity, as well as livestock management, which play
a positive role in contributing to the achievement of food security and improved nutrition outcomes, as well as in the
implementation of development goals in such fields as employment policy, social integration, regional and rural
development, agriculture and environmental protection,
Welcoming the outcome of the thirty-eighth session of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, held in Rome from 15 to 22 June 2013,410 in particular the decision to modify
the Organization’s first global goal from reducing to eradicating hunger,
Highlighting the importance of the five strategic objectives of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations,
Welcoming the outcome of the fortieth session of the Committee on World Food Security, held in Rome from
7 to 11 October 2013,
Recognizing the endorsement of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security411 by the Committee on World Food Security
in 2012,
Recognizing also the ongoing inclusive consultative process within the Committee on World Food Security to
develop voluntary and non-binding principles for responsible agricultural investments intended for all stakeholders
that are involved in, benefit from or are affected by those principles,
Noting with appreciation the progress made in the consultative process, based on a twin-track approach, at the
Committee on World Food Security to develop a programme of action for addressing food insecurity in protracted
crises at the global, regional and national levels and for advancing greater understanding of the multidimensional
causes of protracted crises through sharing effective analytical tools to identify the root causes of food insecurity in
such crises,
Taking note of the reports of the High-level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee
on World Food Security on biofuels and food security and on investing in smallholder agriculture for food security,
Taking note also of the results of the global thematic consultation on hunger, food security and nutrition,
jointly led by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme, and
presented at the global consultation in Madrid in April 2013,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;412

2. Reiterates the need to adequately and urgently address agriculture development, food security and
nutrition in the context of national, regional and international development policies, taking into account the
importance of enhancing synergies between sustainable agriculture practices, biodiversity, food security, nutrition
and development policies;
3. Also reiterates the importance of developing countries’ determining their own food security strategies,
that improving food security and nutrition is a global challenge and a national policy responsibility and that any
plans for addressing this challenge in the context of eradicating poverty must be nationally articulated, designed,
owned, led and built in consultation with all key stakeholders at the national level, as appropriate, and urges
Member States, especially those affected, to make food security and nutrition a high priority and to reflect this in
their national programmes and budgets;
_______________
410

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2013/REP.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations., document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.
412
A/68/311.
411

457

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Calls upon the international community to support Africa in the implementation of the various
programmes under the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, 413 especially the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme;
5. Welcomes the Secretary-General’s Zero Hunger Challenge, and the aim of a world free from hunger, and
takes note of the progress made in improving cooperation, coordination and coherence by all stakeholders to
overcome the challenges of hunger and malnutrition;
6.

Also welcomes the six global targets set by the World Health Assembly to address global malnutrition;

7. Takes note of the Global Nutrition for Growth Compact, signed by more than 100 countries, companies
and civil society organizations, to reduce the number of stunted children by 20 million by 2020 and the financial
commitments made to support this goal;
8. Also takes note of the report of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations on its thirty-eighth session,410 which highlights, inter alia, the importance of the development of measures to
protect Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems;
9. Welcomes the increased political commitment by Member States to tackle hunger and undernutrition, in
this regard welcomes the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement, and encourages Member States to engage in the
SUN Movement at the global and country levels to further reduce global hunger and undernutrition, in particular in
women, especially pregnant and lactating women, and children under age 2;
10. Recognizes the need to strengthen national information systems, as appropriate, in addressing the
challenges of malnutrition and in assessing progress in order to stimulate coordinated and informed action at
national, regional and global levels;
11. Welcomes the activities of the International Year of Quinoa, 2013, which have focused attention on the
important role of quinoa, its biodiversity and nutritional value, as a way of promoting the traditional knowledge of
the Andean and other indigenous peoples, contributing to the achievement of food security, improved nutrition and
poverty eradication, raising awareness of their contribution to social, economic and environmental development and
sharing good practices in the implementation of the International Year;
12. Stresses the need to address the root causes of excessive food price volatility, including its structural causes,
at all levels, and the need to manage the risks linked to excessively volatile prices in agriculture commodities and their
consequences for global food security and nutrition, as well as for smallholder farmers and poor urban dwellers;
13. Also stresses the need to increase sustainable agricultural production and productivity globally, noting
the diversity of agricultural conditions and systems, including through improving the functioning of markets and
trading systems and strengthening international cooperation, particularly for developing countries, and by increasing
public and private investment in sustainable agriculture, land management and rural development, and notes the
benefit of such public and private investment and engagement to local smallholders with regard to promoting food
security and improving nutrition outcomes;
14. Encourages all stakeholders to take part in the inclusive consultation and negotiation processes within
the Committee on World Food Security for the development and broader ownership of principles for responsible
agricultural investment that enhances food security and nutrition, which are to be submitted for endorsement by the
Committee on World Food Security at its forty-first session in October 2014, taking into account existing
frameworks, such as the Principles for Responsible Agricultural Investment developed by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the World Bank;
15. Recognizes the need to increase the resilience of food and agricultural production to climate change, and
encourages efforts at all levels to support climate-sensitive agricultural practices, including agroforestry,
conservation agriculture, water management schemes, drought- and flood-resistant seeds and sustainable livestock
management, including measures to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable groups and food systems, which can also
have a wider positive impact, emphasizing adaptation to climate change as a major concern and objective for all
farmers and food producers, especially small-scale producers;
_______________
413

458

A/57/304, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Reaffirms the necessity to promote, enhance and support more sustainable agriculture, including crops,
livestock, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture, that improves food security, eradicates hunger and is economically
viable, while conserving land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, biodiversity and ecosystems and enhancing
resilience to climate change and natural disasters, and further recognizes the need to maintain natural ecological
processes that support food production systems;
17. Stresses the need to enhance sustainable livestock production systems, including through improving
pasture land and irrigation schemes, in line with national policies, legislation, rules and regulations, enhanced
sustainable water management systems and efforts to eradicate and prevent the spread of animal diseases,
recognizing that the livelihoods of farmers, including pastoralists, and the health of livestock are intertwined;
18. Also stresses the crucial role of healthy marine ecosystems, sustainable fisheries and sustainable
aquaculture for food security and nutrition and in providing for the livelihoods of millions of people;
19. Reaffirms the need to strive for a comprehensive twin-track approach to food security and nutrition that
consists of direct action to immediately tackle hunger for the most vulnerable and medium- and long-term
sustainable agriculture, food security and nutrition, and rural development programmes to eliminate the root causes
of hunger and poverty, including through the progressive realization of the right to adequate food in the context of
national food security;
20. Encourages efforts at all levels to establish and strengthen social protection measures and programmes,
including national safety nets and protection programmes for the needy and vulnerable, such as food and cash-forwork, cash transfer and voucher programmes, school feeding programmes and mother-and-child nutrition
programmes, and in this regard underlines the importance of increasing investment, capacity-building and systems
development;
21. Reaffirms the need to promote a significant expansion of research on food, nutrition and agriculture,
extension services, training and education, and of their funding, from all sources, to improve agricultural
productivity and sustainability in order to strengthen agriculture as a key sector to promote development and to build
up resilience to support better recovery from crisis and shock, including by strengthening the work of the reformed
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research so as to enhance its development impact, supporting
national research systems, public universities and research institutions and promoting technology transfer on
mutually agreed terms, the voluntary sharing of knowledge and practices and research to adapt to and mitigate
climate change and improve equitable access to research results and technologies on mutually agreed terms at the
national, regional and international levels, while giving due consideration to the preservation of genetic resources;
22. Calls for closing the gender gap in access to productive resources in agriculture, noting with concern that
the gender gap persists for many assets, inputs and services, and stresses the need to invest in and strengthen efforts
to empower women, in particular rural women, as well as to address their own food and nutritional needs and those
of their families, and to promote adequate standards of living for them, as well as decent conditions for work and
access to local, regional and global markets;
23. Invites Governments and international organizations, in collaboration with cooperatives and cooperative
organizations, to promote, as appropriate, the growth of agricultural cooperatives and farmers’ networks by
providing easy access to affordable finance, promoting the adoption of sustainable production techniques and
investment in rural infrastructure and irrigation and strengthening marketing mechanisms and support for the
participation of women in economic activities;
24. Remains deeply concerned about the recurring food insecurity and undernutrition in different regions of
the world and their ongoing negative impact on health and nutrition, especially in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel,
and in this regard underlines the urgent need for joint efforts at all levels to respond to the situation in a coherent and
effective manner;
25. Welcomes the launch of the Regional Road Map under the Global Alliance for Resilience Initiative,
Sahel, and emphasizes the need to improve the synergy, coherence and effectiveness of resilience initiatives in the
region, including the need to link emergency and relief actions and longer-term strategies and programmes aimed at
addressing the root causes of food crises, to build resilience among vulnerable populations in the Sahel;
26. Notes the challenges faced by indigenous peoples in the context of food security and nutrition, and in
this regard calls upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the disproportionately high level of
hunger and malnutrition among indigenous peoples;
459

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

27. Recognizes the role of indigenous peoples and small farmers and their traditional seed supply systems in
the conservation of biodiversity and food security;
28. Also recognizes the contribution made thus far by early warning systems, and underlines that the
reliability and timeliness of such systems should be strengthened at the national, regional and international levels,
with a focus on countries that are particularly vulnerable to price shocks and food emergencies;
29. Further recognizes the importance of timely, accurate and transparent information in helping to address
excessive food price volatility, notes global and regional initiatives, including the Agricultural Market Information
System and its Rapid Response Forum, hosted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
Food Security Information System of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Asia-Pacific Information
Platform on Food Security, and urges international organizations, private sector actors and Governments to
participate and ensure the public dissemination of timely and quality food market information products;
30. Recognizes the importance of concrete initiatives aimed at improving protection for the most vulnerable
against excessive price volatility through risk management strategies, tools and instruments, such as the pilot project led
by the Economic Community of West African States for a targeted regional emergency humanitarian food reserve;
31. Emphasizes the need to revitalize the agriculture and rural development sectors, notably in developing
countries, in an economically, socially and environmentally sustainable manner, and underlines the importance of
taking the necessary actions to better address the needs of rural communities through, inter alia, enhancing access by
agricultural producers, in particular small producers, women, indigenous peoples and people living in vulnerable
situations, to credit and other financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health care, social services, education,
training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable technologies, including for efficient irrigation, reuse of treated
wastewater and water harvesting and storage;
32. Urges Member States and international organizations to pursue policies and strategies that improve the
functioning of national, regional and international markets and ensure equitable access for all to those markets,
especially smallholder and women farmers in developing countries, notes the importance of non-trade-distorting
special measures that are consistent with the rules of the World Trade Organization aimed at creating incentives for
smallholder farmers in developing countries to enable them to increase their productivity and to compete on a more
equal footing in world food markets, and urges Member States to refrain from taking measures that are inconsistent
with the rules of the World Trade Organization and that have adverse impacts on global, regional and national food
security;
33. Stresses that a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system
will promote agriculture and rural development in developing countries and contribute to world food security, and
urges national, regional and international strategies to promote the participation of farmers, especially smallholder
farmers, including women, in community, national, regional and international markets;
34. Welcomes the convening of the Ninth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization, in Bali,
Indonesia, in the first week of December 2013;
35. Stresses the need to remove food export restrictions or extraordinary taxes on food purchased for noncommercial humanitarian purposes by the World Food Programme, and not to impose them in the future;
36. Also stresses the need to continue to strengthen cooperation among the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food
Programme, the regional commissions and all other relevant entities of the United Nations system and other
intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions and international trade and economic
institutions, in accordance with their respective mandates, in order to increase their effectiveness, as well as to
strengthen cooperation with non-governmental organizations and the public and private sectors in promoting and
strengthening efforts towards sustainable agriculture development, food security and nutrition;
37. Further stresses the need to significantly reduce post-harvest and other food losses and waste throughout
the food supply chain through, inter alia, increased promotion of appropriate harvesting practices, agro-food
processing, appropriate facilities for the storage and packaging of food and encouraging sustainable consumption
patterns;
38. Recognizes the important role and inclusive nature of the Committee on World Food Security as a key
organ in addressing the issue of global food security and nutrition;
460

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

39. Encourages international, regional and national efforts to strengthen the productive capacity of
developing countries, in particular their small-scale producers, by, inter alia, improving the proper functioning of
markets, storage, rural infrastructure, research and pre-harvest and post-harvest practices, in order to enhance the
production, productivity and nutritional quality of food crops and promote sustainable practices in pre-harvest and
post-harvest agricultural activities;
40. Also encourages countries to give due consideration to the dissemination, promotion and
implementation of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and
Forests in the Context of National Food Security,411 as endorsed by the Committee on World Food Security on
11 May 2012;
41. Looks forward to the implementation of the International Year of Family Farming, 2014, recognizes the
important contribution that family farming and smallholder farming can play in providing food security, reducing
malnutrition and eradicating poverty in the attainment of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, stresses the importance of development strategies for family farming and
smallholder farming, as appropriate, and invites Member States, United Nations agencies, farmers’ organizations
and other partners to join efforts to successfully observe the International Year;
42. Reaffirms the commitments to making every effort to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by
2015 in support of developing countries, in particular those countries that are lagging most behind and those Goals
that are most off track, thus improving the lives of the poorest people;
43. Encourages Member States and all stakeholders to give appropriate consideration to agriculture
development, food security and nutrition in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
44. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on
developments related to issues highlighted in the present resolution;
45. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Agriculture
development, food security and nutrition”.
RESOLUTION 68/234
A/RES/68/234

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/445, para. 10)414

68/234. Towards global partnerships: a principle-based approach to enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations and all relevant partners
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/215 of 21 December 2000, 56/76 of 11 December 2001, 58/129 of 19 December
2003, 60/215 of 22 December 2005, 62/211 of 19 December 2007, 64/223 of 21 December 2009 and 66/223 of
22 December 2011,
Recalling also the outcome documents of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,415 and of the special event of the
President of the General Assembly to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals, held on 25 September 2013,416
_______________
414
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
415
Resolution 66/288, annex.
416
Resolution 68/6.

461

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling further the objectives formulated in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,417 notably the
Millennium Development Goals, and the reaffirmation they received in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,418 and
the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals in 2010,419 particularly in regard to developing partnerships through the provision of greater opportunities to
the private sector, non-governmental organizations and civil society in general so as to enable them to contribute to
the realization of the goals and programmes of the Organization, in particular in the pursuit of development and the
eradication of poverty,
Underlining the fact that cooperation between the United Nations and all relevant partners, including the
private sector, shall serve the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and shall be
undertaken in a manner that maintains and promotes the integrity, impartiality and independence of the Organization,
Welcoming the contribution of all relevant partners, including the private sector, non-governmental
organizations, philanthropic organizations and civil society, which respect and support, as appropriate, the core
values and principles of the United Nations, to the implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations
conferences and summits and their reviews in the economic, social, environmental and related fields, as well as the
realization of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Emphasizing that cooperation between the United Nations and all relevant partners, in particular the private
sector, can contribute to addressing the obstacles confronted by developing countries through responsible business
practices, such as respecting the principles of the United Nations Global Compact and taking action, including by
mobilizing the resources needed to finance their sustainable development, and to realizing the internationally agreed
development goals in developing countries,
Welcoming the efforts and encouraging further efforts by all relevant partners, including the private sector, to
engage as reliable and consistent partners in the development process and to take into account not only the
economic and financial but also the developmental, social, human rights, gender and environmental implications of
their undertakings, and, in general, towards implementing corporate social and environmental responsibility, that is,
bringing such values and responsibilities to bear on their conduct and policies premised on profit incentives, in
conformity with national laws and regulations,
Recalling that the 2005 World Summit welcomed the positive contributions of the private sector and civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, foundations and academia, in the promotion and
implementation of development and human rights programmes, and recalling also that the 2005 World Summit
resolved to enhance the contribution of non-governmental organizations, civil society, the private sector and other
stakeholders in national development efforts, as well as in the promotion of the global partnership for development,
and encouraged public-private partnerships in a wide range of areas, with the aim of eradicating poverty and
promoting full employment and social integration,
Recalling also the recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his report to the Human Rights
Council420 that the Guidelines on Cooperation between the United Nations and the Business Sector be updated to
ensure their full alignment with the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United
Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,421
Recalling further that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in 2012,
acknowledged the roles and contributions of civil society, the scientific and technological community and nongovernmental organizations, as well as other relevant international organizations, including international financial
institutions and multilateral development banks, in advancing sustainable development,
Recalling that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development also acknowledged that the
implementation of sustainable development would depend on the active engagement of both the public and private
sectors, and recognizing that the active participation of the private sector can contribute to the achievement of
sustainable development,
_______________
417

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
419
Resolution 65/1.
420
A/HRC/21/21 and Corr.1.
421
A/HRC/17/31, annex.
418

462

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling also that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development supported national regulatory
and policy frameworks that enable business and industry to advance sustainable development initiatives, including
the important tool of public-private partnerships,
Recognizing the contributions of all relevant partners, including the private sector, in fostering stability and
supporting recovery by creating job opportunities, advancing economic development, as well as infrastructure
development, and, as appropriate, contributing to trust, reconciliation and security,
Noting that the financial and economic crisis, inter alia, has demonstrated the need for values and principles in
business, including for sustainable business practices, social protection floors and the promotion of full and
productive employment and decent work for all,
Reaffirming the principles of sustainable development, and underlining the need for a global consensus on the
key values and principles that will promote sustainable, fair, equitable and sustained economic development, and
that corporate social and environmental responsibility are important elements of such a consensus,
Recognizing that a socially responsible private sector can contribute to the promotion of children’s rights and
education through relevant initiatives such as the Children’s Rights and Business Principles and the Framework for
Business Engagement in Education,
Recognizing also the progress achieved in the work of the United Nations on partnerships, notably in the
framework of various United Nations organizations, agencies, funds, programmes, task forces, commissions and
initiatives, and noting the establishment of partnerships at the field level entered into by various United Nations
agencies, non-public partners and Member States, as well as multi-stakeholder partnerships,
Recognizing further the unique position of the United Nations as a builder of bridges among Member States
and all stakeholders, and stressing that the inputs from other stakeholders should be given due consideration in the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda,
Recognizing the vital role that the United Nations Global Compact Office continues to play with regard to
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to partner strategically with the private sector, in accordance with
its mandate from the General Assembly, to advance United Nations values and responsible business practices within
the United Nations system and among the global business community,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on enhanced cooperation between the United Nations
and all relevant partners, in particular the private sector;422
2. Stresses that partnerships are voluntary and collaborative relationships between various parties, both
public and non-public, in which all participants agree to work together to achieve a common purpose or undertake a
specific task and, as mutually agreed, to share risks and responsibilities, resources and benefits;
3. Also stresses the importance of the contribution of voluntary partnerships to the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, while reiterating that they
are a complement to, but not intended to substitute for, the commitment made by Governments with a view to
achieving those goals;
4. Further stresses that partnerships should be consistent with national laws and national development
strategies and plans, as well as the priorities of countries where they are implemented, bearing in mind the relevant
guidance provided by Governments;
5. Emphasizes the vital role played by Governments in promoting responsible business practices, including
providing and ensuring enforcement of the necessary legal and regulatory frameworks in accordance with national
legislation and development priorities, and invites them to continue to provide support to United Nations efforts to
engage with the private sector, as appropriate;
6. Recognizes the vital role that the private sector plays in development, including through engaging
in various partnership models and by generating decent employment and investment, giving access to and
developing new technologies, offering technical vocational training activities and stimulating sustained,
inclusive and equitable economic growth, with due consideration for non-discrimination, gender equality and
_______________
422

A/68/326.

463

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

women’s empowerment, while bearing in mind the need to ensure that their activities conform fully with the
principle of national ownership of development strategies;
7. Also recognizes the importance of giving due consideration to the various contributions of all relevant
stakeholders, including the private sector, to the intergovernmental process of elaborating the post-2015
development agenda, and in this regard takes note of the important role that the Global Compact Local Networks
have played in gathering input from businesses on a post-2015 development framework and promoting poverty
eradication and sustainable development through, inter alia, the exercise of corporate social responsibility;
8. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to improve collaboration of the United Nations with all
relevant partners, including the private sector, and to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations system, with a
view to enhancing the results achieved through partnerships, and acknowledges the importance of continued
consultations with Member States;
9. Also welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to continuing to retain the integrity and unique
role of the United Nations Global Compact;
10. Notes with appreciation the initiatives of the Secretary-General, including the Sustainable Energy for All
initiative, the Every Woman, Every Child initiative, the Global Education First Initiative, the Zero Hunger
Challenge initiative and the Global Pulse initiative;
11. Invites the United Nations system, when considering partnerships, to seek to engage in a more coherent
manner with private sector entities, including small and medium-sized enterprises, that support the core values of
the United Nations, as reflected in the Charter and other relevant conventions and treaties, and that commit to the
principles of the United Nations Global Compact by translating them into operational corporate policies, codes of
conduct and management, monitoring and reporting systems;
12. Encourages the United Nations system to continue to develop, for those partnerships in which it
participates, a common and systemic approach which places greater emphasis on transparency, coherence, impact,
accountability and due diligence, without imposing undue rigidity in partnership agreements;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, in collaboration with funds and programmes, specialized
agencies and other relevant United Nations entities and mechanisms, as appropriate:
(a) To improve the Guidelines on Cooperation between the United Nations and the Business Sector,
including from a gender perspective;
(b) To disclose the partners, contributions and matching funds for all relevant partnerships, including at the
country level;
(c) To strengthen due diligence measures that can safeguard the reputation of the Organization and ensure
confidence-building;
(d)

To ensure that these elements are coherently reflected in relevant system-wide reports;

14. Underlines, in this context, the importance of integrity measures as taken and advocated by the United
Nations Global Compact;
15. Requests the United Nations Global Compact to promote the Women’s Empowerment Principles and to
encourage the Global Compact Local Networks to create awareness of the many ways in which business can
promote gender equality in the workplace, marketplace and community;
16. Acknowledges the importance of corporate sustainability reporting, encourages companies, where
appropriate, especially publicly listed and large companies, to consider integrating sustainability information into
their reporting cycle, encourages industry, interested Governments and relevant stakeholders, with the support of the
United Nations system, as appropriate, to develop models for best practice and to facilitate action for the integration
of sustainability reporting, taking into account experiences from already existing frameworks and paying particular
attention to the needs of developing countries, including for capacity-building, and welcomes in this context the
collaboration of the United Nations Global Compact with the Global Reporting Initiative and the World Business
Council for Sustainable Development;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote effective implementation of the Guidelines on
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Business Sector;
464

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

18. Encourages the international community to strengthen global partnerships for the integration and
implementation in partnerships of the Global Jobs Pact of the International Labour Organization and the call for
action on youth employment, in accordance with national plans and priorities;
19. Stresses the importance of developing national strategies for the promotion of sustainable and productive
entrepreneurial activities through partnerships, and encourages Governments to create a climate that is conducive to
increasing the number of women entrepreneurs and the size of their businesses;
20. Encourages the private sector and the Global Compact Local Networks to join the United Nations
Global Compact “Business for Peace” platform and to seek to maximize the beneficial contributions to peace and
development while minimizing the risks of negative impacts on both business and society in conflict-affected
countries;
21. Notes with appreciation the convening of the annual United Nations Private Sector Forum, which, in
2013, focused on unique opportunities and challenges in Africa;
22. Also notes with appreciation the introduction of the private sector track at the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in Istanbul, Turkey, from 9 to 13 May 2011;
23. Further notes with appreciation the Corporate Sustainability Forum, which was held during the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012;
24. Recognizes the work of the Global Compact Local Networks, as well as the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations system at the local level and the Global Compact Local Networks, to support, as
appropriate and in a manner complementary to existing networks, the coordination and application of global
partnerships locally;
25. Also recognizes that the Global Compact Local Networks provide an avenue for diffusing United
Nations values and principles and facilitating partnerships with business on a broad scale;
26. Acknowledges the establishment of the United Nations private sector focal points network, promoting
greater coherence and capacity-building within the Organization on activities involving business and disseminating
innovations in engagement across the system, as well as the holding of annual meetings of United Nations system
private sector focal points, which remain important forums for the exchange of best practices, lessons learned and
innovations in partnerships with the private sector;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a concise
report, in the most cost-efficient and effective manner, on the implementation of the present resolution and on
specific progress, including from a gender perspective, on integrity measures, on transparency, on the strengthening
of due diligence measures, on the improvement and implementation of the Guidelines on Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Business Sector, on disclosure of partners, contributions and matching funds, including at
the country level, and on the strengthening of the Global Compact Local Networks.
RESOLUTION 68/235
A/RES/68/235

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/446,
para. 10),423 by a recorded vote of 168 to 6, with 9 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,

_______________
423

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe and State of Palestine.

465

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Honduras, Kiribati, Malawi, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Tonga

68/235. Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/229 of 21 December 2012, and taking note of Economic and Social Council
resolution 2013/8 of 19 July 2013,
Recalling also its resolutions 58/292 of 6 May 2004 and 59/251 of 22 December 2004,
Reaffirming the principle of the permanent sovereignty of peoples under foreign occupation over their natural
resources,
Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, affirming the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by force, and recalling relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967, 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980 and 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
Recalling its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949,424 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
Recalling, in this regard, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights425 and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,425and affirming that these human rights instruments must be
respected in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, as well as in the occupied Syrian Golan,
Recalling also the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 426 and recalling further its
resolutions ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Expressing its concern about the exploitation by Israel, the occupying Power, of the natural resources of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
Expressing its grave concern about the extensive destruction by Israel, the occupying Power, of agricultural land
and orchards in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including the uprooting of a vast number of fruit-bearing trees and
the destruction of farms and greenhouses, and the grave environmental and economic impact in this regard,
Expressing its concern about the widespread destruction caused by Israel, the occupying Power, to vital
infrastructure, including water pipelines and sewage networks, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, in particular in
_______________
424

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
426
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
425

466

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

the Gaza Strip, which, inter alia, pollutes the environment and negatively affects the water supply and other natural
resources of the Palestinian people, and stressing the urgency of the reconstruction and development of water
infrastructure, including the project for the desalination facility for the Gaza Strip,
Taking note, in this regard, of the 2009 report by the United Nations Environment Programme regarding the
grave environmental situation in the Gaza Strip, and of the 2012 report, “Gaza in 2020: A liveable place?”, by the
United Nations country team in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, and stressing the need for follow-up to the
recommendations contained therein,
Aware of the detrimental impact of the Israeli settlements on Palestinian and other Arab natural resources,
especially as a result of the confiscation of land and the forced diversion of water resources, including the
destruction of orchards and crops and the seizure of water wells by Israeli settlers, and of the dire socioeconomic
consequences in this regard,
Taking note of the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the implications
of the Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people
throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,427
Aware of the detrimental impact on Palestinian natural resources being caused by the unlawful construction of
the wall by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem, and of its grave effect as well on the economic and social conditions of the Palestinian people,
Welcoming the resumption of negotiations within the Middle East peace process, on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 and 1397 (2002) of
12 March 2002, the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative428 and the Quartet performance-based road
map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,429 as endorsed by the Security Council in
its resolution 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003 and supported by the Council in its resolution 1850 (2008) of
16 December 2008, for the achievement of a final peace settlement on all tracks,
Stressing, in this regard, the need for respect for the obligation upon Israel under the road map to freeze settlement
activity, including so-called “natural growth”, and to dismantle all settlement outposts erected since March 2001,
Stressing also the need for respect and preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Recalling the need to end all acts of violence, including acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction,
Taking note of the report prepared by the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on the economic
and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan, as
transmitted by the Secretary-General,430
1. Reaffirms the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and of the population of the occupied Syrian
Golan over their natural resources, including land, water and energy resources;
2. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease the exploitation, damage, cause of loss or depletion
and endangerment of the natural resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in
the occupied Syrian Golan;
3. Recognizes the right of the Palestinian people to claim restitution as a result of any exploitation, damage,
loss or depletion, or endangerment of their natural resources resulting from illegal measures taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, and Israeli settlers in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and expresses
the hope that this issue will be dealt with within the framework of the final status negotiations between the
Palestinian and Israeli sides;
_______________
427

A/HRC/22/63.
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
429
S/2003/529, annex.
430
A/68/77-E/2013/13.
428

467

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Stresses that the wall and settlements being constructed by Israel in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, are contrary to international law and are seriously depriving the Palestinian
people of their natural resources, and calls in this regard for full compliance with the legal obligations affirmed in
the 9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice426 and in relevant United Nations resolutions,
including General Assembly resolution ES-10/15;
5. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply strictly with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law, with respect to the alteration of the character and status of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
6. Also calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to bring a halt to all actions, including those perpetrated by
Israeli settlers, harming the environment, including the dumping of all kinds of waste materials, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan, which gravely threaten their
natural resources, namely water and land resources, and which pose an environmental, sanitation and health threat to
the civilian populations;
7. Further calls upon Israel to cease its destruction of vital infrastructure, including water pipelines and
sewage networks, which, inter alia, has a negative impact on the natural resources of the Palestinian people, and
stresses the need to advance reconstruction and development projects in this regard, including in the Gaza Strip;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including with regard to the cumulative impact of the exploitation,
damage and depletion by Israel of natural resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and in the occupied Syrian Golan, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item
entitled “Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources”.
RESOLUTION 68/236
A/RES/68/236

Adopted at the 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/602, para. 9)431

68/236. Amendments to the Charter of the United Nations University
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations University, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, by which it adopted the Charter of the United Nations
University, and 64/225 of 21 December 2009, by which it approved amendments to the Charter of the United
Nations University,
Taking note of the decision taken by the Council of the United Nations University at its fifty-ninth session,
held from 22 to 24 April 2013, in which the Council requested the Secretary-General, in accordance with article XII
of the Charter of the United Nations University, to propose to the General Assembly, at its sixty-eighth session,
amendments to article IV of the Charter of the United Nations University to reduce the number of appointed
members of the Council from 24 to 12,
Taking note also of the decision on the proposal to amend the Charter of the United Nations University
adopted by the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its
192nd session, held in Paris from 23 September to 11 October 2013,
_______________
431

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

468

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note further of the proposal of the Secretary-General to amend the Charter of the United Nations
University in accordance with article XII thereof, made at the request of the Council of the United Nations
University and after consultation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
1.

Approves the following amendments to the Charter of the United Nations University:

(a)

Article IV, paragraph 1, shall be amended to read as follows:

“1. There shall be a Council of the University (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Council’), to be
established on a broad geographical basis with due regard to major academic, scientific, educational and
cultural trends in the world, taking into account the various fields of study, with appropriate representation of
young scholars. The Council shall have 12 members serving in their individual capacity, who shall be
appointed jointly by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General of UNESCO, in
consultation with the agencies and programmes concerned, including the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research* (hereinafter referred to as ‘UNITAR’), and taking into account the views of appropriate
representative bodies. The Rector shall be a member of the University Council.”
* Established in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1934 (XVIII).

(b)

Article IV, paragraph 3, shall be amended to read as follows:

“3. The term of office shall be six years, provided that, of the members first appointed pursuant to
paragraph 1 of this article, the terms of six shall expire at the end of three years and the terms of the remaining
six at the end of six years. No appointed member of the Council may serve continuously for more than six
years. The Council shall be consulted in regard to the replacement of retiring members.”
2. Decides that these amendments shall enter into force upon the expiration of the present term of those
appointed members currently serving on the Council of the United Nations University;
3. Acknowledges that the Council of the United Nations University shall continue to operate with the
current appointed membership, and without the appointment of additional members, until the terms of the current
appointed members expire;
4. Also acknowledges the intention of the Secretary-General to apply article IV, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations University, as amended, when he next appoints new members to the Council of the United
Nations University.
RESOLUTION 68/238
A/RES/68/238

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/438/Add.2, para. 9)432

68/238. Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration of Barbados433 and the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, 434 the Mauritius Declaration 435 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States436

_______________
432

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
434
Ibid., annex II.
435
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
436
Ibid., annex II.
433

469

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),437 including chapter VII on the sustainable development of small island developing States,
Recalling the outcome document of the high-level review meeting on the implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, held in New York on 24 and 25 September 2010,438
Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,439 including the call for the
convening in 2014 of a third international conference on small island developing States,
Recalling its resolutions 67/207 of 21 December 2012, 67/290 of 9 July 2013, 68/1 of 20 September 2013 and
68/6 of 9 October 2013, and its decision 67/558 of 17 May 2013, in which it decided on the dates of the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing States, to be held in the Independent State of Samoa,
Recalling also its resolution 67/206 of 21 December 2012, in which the General Assembly declared 2014 the
International Year of Small Island Developing States,
Recalling further the need to fully mainstream a gender perspective into all United Nations summits,
conferences and special sessions and their follow-up processes,
Taking note of the Leaders’ Declaration adopted at the meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the
Alliance of Small Island States, held in New York on 27 September 2012,
Welcoming the inaugural meeting of the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development held in
New York on 24 September 2013, and looking forward to the future meetings of the Forum, at which adequate time
shall be devoted to the discussion of the sustainable development challenges facing small island developing States,
Welcoming also the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals, held in New York on 25 September 2013,440
Recognizing the special challenges and needs of small island developing States, many of which are not on
track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015,
Acknowledging with appreciation those Member States that have made voluntary contributions to the trust
fund in support of preparations for the Conference and to support the participation of representatives of small island
developing States in the regional and interregional preparatory processes,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;441

2. Recalls that the Commission on Sustainable Development was the primary intergovernmental forum for
monitoring the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy, also recalls its
resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013 and 68/1 of 20 September 2013, and notes the need to devote adequate time to the
discussion of the sustainable development challenges of developing countries, including small island developing
States;
3. Reaffirms the commitment to take urgent and concrete action to address the vulnerability of small island
developing States, including through the sustained implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States434 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,436 and underlines the
urgency of finding additional solutions to the major challenges facing small island developing States in a concerted
_______________
437

Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
438
Resolution 65/2.
439
Resolution 66/288, annex.
440
Resolution 68/6.
441
A/68/316.

470

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

manner so as to support them in sustaining the momentum realized in implementing the Barbados Programme of
Action and the Mauritius Strategy and achieving sustainable development;
4. Acknowledges that small island developing States have demonstrated their commitment to promoting
sustainable development and, to that effect, have mobilized resources at the national and regional levels despite their
limited resource base, and welcomes the long-standing cooperation and support provided by the international
community, which has played an important role in helping small island developing States to make progress in
addressing their vulnerabilities and in supporting their sustainable development efforts;
5. Calls for continued and enhanced efforts to assist small island developing States in implementing the
Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy and for a strengthening of United Nations system
support to small island developing States, in keeping with the multiple ongoing and emerging challenges faced by
those States in achieving sustainable development;
6. Decides that the overarching theme of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing
States in 2014 shall be “The sustainable development of small island developing States through genuine and durable
partnerships”, and also decides that the Conference shall serve as a forum to build on existing successful
partnerships as well as to launch innovative and concrete new ones to advance the sustainable development of small
island developing States;
7. Reaffirms its decision that the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States will
result in a concise, focused, forward-looking and action-oriented political document;
8. Takes note of the outcomes of the 2013 regional preparatory meetings for the third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, held from 2 to 4 July in Kingston, from 10 to 12 July in Nadi, Fiji,
and from 17 to 19 July in Mahé, Seychelles, as well as the outcome of the interregional meeting held from 26 to
28 August 2013 in Bridgetown;442
9. Decides to establish the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee, consisting of two members of each
regional group, and that the Independent State of Samoa will serve as an ex officio member of the Bureau;
10. Also decides that the Bureau will be co-chaired by two Member States, comprising one developed State
and one developing State;
11.

Invites regional groups to nominate their candidates for the Bureau no later than early January 2014;

12. Decides that discussions at the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee will be based on, inter alia,
the outcome document of the interregional preparatory meeting for the Conference;
13. Invites participants in the meetings of the Preparatory Committee to send written inputs on the objectives
and substantive theme of the Conference to the Secretariat in advance of the first meeting of the Committee, and
invites the Secretariat to make them available electronically;
14. Decides to organize the meetings of the Preparatory Committee in the most efficient and effective
manner, as follows:
(a) The first meeting of the Preparatory Committee will be held over three days, from 24 to 26 February
2014, to discuss the objectives and substantive theme of the Conference and organizational and procedural matters,
including the rules of procedure, and to elect the members of the Bureau;
(b) The final meeting of the Preparatory Committee will be held over five days, from 23 to 27 June 2014, to
finalize the preparatory work for the Conference, including the outcome document;
15. Also decides that all meetings of the Preparatory Committee will be held at United Nations Headquarters
in New York;
16. Invites the co-chairs to prepare the draft outcome document, to be circulated no later than 14 March 2014;
_______________
442

A/C.2/68/7, annex II.

471

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

17. Decides that an intersessional meeting will be held over five days, with interpretation services on an “as
available” basis, from 21 to 25 April 2014, to discuss the thematic areas of the outcome document of the
Conference, and invites the Bureau to convene further informal meetings in New York, as required and in the most
efficient and effective manner;
18. Reiterates that the Conference will be convened at the highest possible level;
19. Recommends the provisional agenda set forth in annex I to the present resolution for adoption by the
Conference;
20. Decides that the Conference shall be organized in accordance with the organization of work set forth in
annex II to the present resolution;
21. Strongly encourages Member States to conclude negotiations on the draft outcome document at the final
meeting of the Preparatory Committee;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all appropriate support to the work of the intergovernmental
committee process of the Conference and to the Conference itself and to ensure inter-agency cooperation and
effective participation and coherence within the United Nations system, as well as the efficient use of resources, so
that the objectives of the Conference can be addressed;
23. Urges international and bilateral donors, as well as the private sector, financial institutions, foundations
and other donors in a position to do so, to support the preparations for the Conference through voluntary
contributions to the trust fund in support of preparations for the Conference and to support the participation of
representatives of developing countries, priority being given to representatives of small island developing States,
including coverage of economy-class air tickets, daily subsistence allowances and terminal expenses, in the
meetings of the Preparatory Committee and in the Conference itself;
24. Stresses the need for the effective participation of civil society, in particular non-governmental
organizations and other major groups, and invites voluntary contributions to the trust fund to support the
participation of major groups of developing countries, in particular small island developing States, in the meetings
of the Preparatory Committee and in the Conference itself;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for
the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States”;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
Annex I
Provisional agenda of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States
Apia, 1 to 4 September 2014

472

1.

Opening of the Conference.

2.

Election of the President.

3.

Adoption of the rules of procedure.

4.

Adoption of the agenda of the Conference.

5.

Election of officers other than the President.

6.

Organization of work, including the establishment of subsidiary bodies, and other organizational matters.

7.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference:
(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

8.

General debate.

9.

Report of the multi-stakeholder partnership dialogues.

10. Outcome of the Conference.
11.

Adoption of the report of the Conference.

12. Closure of the Conference.
Annex II
Proposed organization of work of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States
Apia, 1 to 4 September 2014
1. The arrangements set out below have been formulated pursuant to General Assembly resolution 67/207 of
21 December 2012.
2. The third International Conference on Small Island Developing States will be held in Apia from 1 to
4 September 2014.
I.

Organization of work

A.

Plenary meetings

3. The third International Conference on Small Island Developing States will consist of an opening and a closing
and a total of six plenary meetings, to be held as follows:
Monday, 1 September 2014: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Tuesday, 2 September 2014: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Wednesday, 3 September 2014: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 4 September 2014: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
4.

The six plenary meetings will be devoted to statements.

5.

All plenary meetings will be held at the Faleata Sports Complex in Apia.

6. The list of speakers for the plenary meetings will be established on a first-come first-served basis, with the
customary protocol that ensures that Heads of State or Government speak first followed by other heads of
delegation. The European Union, in its capacity as observer, will be included in the list of speakers. Detailed
arrangements will be communicated in a timely manner through a note by the Secretariat, prepared in close
consultations with the host country and the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee.
7. At the formal opening of the Conference, to take place during the plenary meeting to be held in the morning of
Monday, 1 September 2014, consideration will be given to all procedural and organizational matters, including the
adoption of the rules of procedure and the agenda, the election of the President of the Conference, the election of
officers, the establishment of a Main Committee, the appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee,
arrangements for the preparation of the report of the Conference and other matters. At the opening, statements will
be made by the President of the Conference, the President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, the Chair of the Alliance of Small Island States and the Secretary-General of the Conference. The
plenary meeting will also hear statements from other major groups in accordance with the practice of the General
Assembly.
8. The closing plenary meeting, to be held in the afternoon of Thursday, 4 September, is expected to conclude
with reporting on multi-stakeholder partnership dialogues, to be followed by the adoption of the outcome document
and the report of the Conference.
9. The plenary meetings will run in parallel with the multi-stakeholder partnership dialogues, except for the
opening and closing.
473

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

B.

Multi-stakeholder partnership dialogues

10. The third International Conference on Small Island Developing States will include six multi-stakeholder
partnership dialogues, held in parallel with the plenary meetings, as follows:
Monday, 1 September 2014: from 3 to 6 p.m.
Tuesday, 2 September 2014: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Wednesday, 3 September 2014: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 4 September 2014: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
11.

The six high-level multi-stakeholder partnership dialogues are expected to provide, inter alia, an opportunity for:

(a) Recognizing successful partnerships and initiatives in support of the implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Development States, the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States and the outcomes of the Conference;
(b) Launching innovative and concrete partnerships and initiatives between Governments, international and
regional organizations, multilateral institutions, major groups, the organizations of the United Nations system, nongovernmental organizations, the private sector and civil society to support the advancement of the sustainable
development of small island developing States;
(c)

Interactive and focused discussions on key priorities related to small island developing States.

12. The outcomes of the multi-stakeholder partnership dialogues should be reported to the closing plenary
meeting of the Conference and included in the final report of the Conference.
C.

Main Committee

13. A Main Committee, established in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Conference, will meet if
necessary in parallel with plenary meetings, except during the opening and closing meetings. The Main Committee
will be responsible for finalizing any outstanding matters.
II.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference: appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee

14. A Credentials Committee will be appointed according to the rules of procedure of the Conference.
III. Accreditation: institutional stakeholders
15. Other relevant intergovernmental organizations that were accredited to the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, the high-level review meeting on the implementation
of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States and the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
as well as relevant organizations of the United Nations system, including associate members of the regional
commissions, may participate in the deliberations of the Conference, as appropriate, in accordance with the rules of
procedure of the Conference.
16. In addition, interested intergovernmental organizations that were not accredited to the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, the high-level review meeting on the
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States or the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development may apply to the Preparatory Committee for accreditation following the established accreditation
procedure. Information on accreditation will be available on the Conference website (www.sids2014.org).
IV.

Secretariat

17. The Secretary-General of the Conference will serve as focal point within the Secretariat of the United Nations
for providing support to the organization of the Conference, in cooperation with the host country authorities.
474

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

V.

Documentation

18. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations conferences, the official documentation
of the Conference will include documents issued before, during and after the Conference.
19. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations conferences, it is recommended that the
report of the Conference consist of the decisions of the Conference, a brief account of the proceedings and a
reportorial account of the work of the Conference and the action taken at the plenary meetings.
20. Summaries of the plenary meetings and multi-stakeholder partnership dialogues should also be included in the
report of the Conference.
VI. Organization of parallel meetings and other events of the Conference
21. Parallel meetings and other events, including those of major groups, will be held during the same hours as the
plenary meetings and the partnership dialogues, space permitting. Interpretation services will be provided for such
meetings, as available.
VII. Side events
22. Special events, including briefings, seminars, workshops and panel discussions on issues related to the
sustainable development of small island developing States, will be organized by participants in the Conference.
Guidelines for organizing special events and the calendar of those events will be made available on the Conference
website.
VIII. Media coverage
23. Press materials will be prepared by the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat for journalists
covering the Conference. In addition, regular press releases will be issued on the results of plenary meetings and
other events. All relevant documentation will be made available on the Conference website.
24. The plenary meetings, multi-stakeholder partnership dialogues and press conferences will be broadcast live to
the media area. A programme of special media briefings and press conferences will be announced.
RESOLUTION 68/239
A/RES/68/239

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/439, para. 12)443

68/239. Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)
and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
The General Assembly,
Recalling the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements444 and of the second United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II),445
Recalling also relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on the implementation of the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), as well as relevant decisions and resolutions of the Economic and Social
Council on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/22 of 24 July 2013 on human settlements,
adopted by the Council at its substantive session of 2013,
_______________
443

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
See Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, Vancouver, 31 May–11 June 1976 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum).
445
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6).
444

475

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling its resolutions 64/207 of 21 December 2009, 65/165 of 20 December 2010, 66/207 of 22 December
2011 and 67/216 of 21 December 2012, which addressed the convening in 2016 of a United Nations conference on
housing and sustainable urban development (Habitat III),
Reaffirming the outcome document, entitled “The future we want”, of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,446 in particular paragraphs 134 to
137 on sustainable cities and human settlements, in which, inter alia, it is recognized that cities are engines of
economic growth which, if well planned and developed, including through integrated planning and management
approaches, can promote economically, socially and environmentally sustainable societies,
Recognizing that, while significant progress has been made in implementing the Istanbul Declaration on
Human Settlements447 and the Habitat Agenda,448 challenges remain, such as, inter alia, the rapid urbanization
process in large parts of the developing world, the continuing increase in the number of urban slum dwellers in the
world, the negative impact of environmental degradation on human settlements, including climate change,
desertification and loss of biodiversity, and the increasing vulnerability of urban settlements to natural and humanmade disasters,
Reiterating its support for the World Urban Forum as the foremost global arena for interaction among
policymakers, local government leaders, non-governmental stakeholders and expert practitioners in the field of
human settlements, and expressing its appreciation to the Government of Colombia and the city of Medellin for
offering to host the seventh session of the Forum from 5 to 11 April 2014,
Recalling paragraph 14 of resolution 67/216, in which the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General
of the conference to prepare, using the expertise of the United Nations system, a proposal, for consideration by the
Governing Council of UN-Habitat at its twenty-fourth session, on how best to provide inputs for and support to the
preparatory process of the conference in the most inclusive, efficient, effective and improved manner, and to
proceed accordingly,
Taking note of the report of the Governing Council of UN-Habitat on its twenty-fourth session, held from
15 to 19 April 2013,449 and its resolutions contained therein, in particular resolutions 24/1 on World Cities Day, 24/4
on gender equality and women’s empowerment to contribute to sustainable urban development, 24/5 on pursuing
sustainable development through national urban policies, 24/7, entitled “Making slums history: a worldwide
challenge”, 24/10 on urbanization and sustainable urban development in the post-2015 development agenda, and
24/14 on inputs for and support to the preparatory process of the United Nations conference on housing and
sustainable urban development (Habitat III), all of 19 April 2013,
Recalling its resolution 67/148 of 20 December 2012, in which it called upon the United Nations system,
including the funds, programmes and specialized agencies, to increase efforts to fully mainstream a gender
perspective into all issues under their consideration and within their mandates, as well as all United Nations
summits, conferences and special sessions and their follow-up processes,
Reaffirming Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years and
anniversaries and General Assembly resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on
the proclamation of international years,
Emphasizing the importance of the wide participation of all relevant stakeholders, including local authorities,
in the promotion of sustainable urbanization and settlements,
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat
Agenda450 and the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat);451
_______________
446

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
448
Ibid., annex II.
449
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/68/8).
450
A/68/328.
451
A/68/332.
447

476

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to sustainable urbanization in the elaboration of the
post-2015 development agenda;
3. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring consistency and coherence in the deliberations of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council on agenda items related to the work of UN-Habitat;
4. Affirms Governing Council of UN-Habitat resolution 24/14 on the inputs and support required for the
preparatory process of the United Nations conference on housing and sustainable urban development (Habitat III) to
be met by regular budget and voluntary contributions, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to seek
voluntary support for this purpose and calls upon Member States to provide such support;
5.

Welcomes the offer by the Government of Ecuador to host the conference in Quito in 2016;

6. Urges international and bilateral donors, and also the private sector, financial institutions and
foundations, to support the national, regional and global preparations for Habitat III through voluntary contributions
to the Habitat III trust fund and to support the participation of representatives of developing countries in meetings of
the preparatory committee and in the conference itself, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 13 of
resolution 67/216;
7. Invites Member States to facilitate participatory processes and wide stakeholder participation, including
local authorities and their associations, when developing, revising and implementing national urban policies, where
appropriate, in particular through national urban forums also as a means for the preparation of Habitat III;
8. Encourages stakeholders gathering at the seventh session of the World Urban Forum, as well as at the
regular ministerial conferences on housing and urban development and other relevant expert group meetings, to
provide inputs and to contribute as appropriate to the process leading to the conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General of the conference to mobilize the expertise of the United Nations system
as a whole, including the regional commissions, and of other relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, for the Habitat III preparatory process;
10. Encourages all organizations of the United Nations system to support, as appropriate and at the request
of Member States, the Habitat III preparatory process at the country level, including the establishment or
strengthening of national habitat committees and the preparation of Habitat III national reports, considering the
support that could be provided by the private sector, non-governmental organizations and academia, in accordance
with national legislation and practices, as appropriate;
11. Welcomes the strategic plan of UN-Habitat for the period 2014–2019 and its focus areas, as approved by
the Governing Council of UN-Habitat at its twenty-fourth session;449
12. Invites the international donor community and financial institutions to contribute generously to
UN-Habitat through increased voluntary financial contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human
Settlements Foundation, including the Urban Basic Services Trust Fund and the technical cooperation trust funds,
and invites Governments in a position to do so and other stakeholders to provide predictable multi-year funding and
increased non-earmarked contributions to support the implementation of the strategic plan for the period 2014–2019;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the Nairobi headquarters location of UN-Habitat, and requests the
Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of UN-Habitat and the United Nations Office at Nairobi under review
so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary services to UN-Habitat and other United Nations
organs and organizations in Nairobi;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of UN-Habitat under review so as to continue
efforts to improve its efficiency, effectiveness, transparency and accountability in supporting the implementation of
its mandate;
15. Takes note of the governance review process of UN-Habitat, and encourages the Committee of
Permanent Representatives to continue its consideration of proposals, including recommendations and options for
reform, with a view to reaching a consensus on how to proceed with the governance review;
16. Decides to designate 31 October, beginning in 2014, as World Cities Day, invites States, the United
Nations system, in particular UN-Habitat, relevant international organizations, civil society and all other relevant
stakeholders to observe and raise awareness of the Day, and stresses that the costs of all activities that may arise
from observing the Day should be met from voluntary contributions;
477

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

17. Welcomes the commitments of Member States and the efforts of other stakeholders to promote an
integrated approach to planning and building sustainable cities and urban settlements;
18. Encourages Governments and Habitat Agenda partners to use planned city extension methodologies to
guide the sustainable development of cities experiencing rapid urban growth, in order to prevent slum proliferation,
enhance access to urban basic services, support inclusive housing, enhance job opportunities and create a safe and
healthy living environment;
19. Recognizes the significance of equitable and adequate access to urban basic services as a foundation for
sustainable urbanization and therefore to overall social and economic development;
20. Reaffirms Governing Council of UN-Habitat resolution 24/4 on gender equality and women’s
empowerment to contribute to sustainable urban development, and in this regard urges Member States, UN-Habitat
and all relevant stakeholders to take appropriate measures to implement the decision contained therein;
21. Recalls the international conference on the theme “Making slums history: a worldwide challenge for
2020”, held in Rabat from 26 to 28 November 2012, to review and share global progress in improving the living
conditions of slum dwellers between 2000 and 2010 and to devise a strategy for inclusive, sustainable and
prosperous cities;
22. Welcomes the hosting by the Government of South Africa of the UN-Habitat conference on the theme
“Leading change in the city” in Johannesburg in 2014;
23. Invites Member States and Habitat Agenda partners to formulate and implement sustainable urban
development policies that promote just, resilient and inclusive cities, considering the contributions of all relevant
stakeholders, and with a particular focus on the needs of women and those who are most vulnerable, including
children and youth, older persons, persons with disabilities, rural to urban migrants, internally displaced people and
indigenous peoples;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, including an update on progress made in the preparations for the
United Nations conference on housing and sustainable urban development (Habitat III), and to include in his report
to the Assembly at its seventy-first session an evaluation of World Cities Day, mindful of the provisions of the annex
to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Implementation
of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)”.

478

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/130.

Policies and programmes involving youth .............................................................................................................. 482

68/131.

Promoting social integration through social inclusion.............................................................................................. 485

68/132.

Literacy for life: shaping future agendas................................................................................................................. 488

68/133.

Cooperatives in social development ....................................................................................................................... 490

68/134.

Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing............................................................................................. 491

68/135.

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special
session of the General Assembly ........................................................................................................................... 496

68/136.

Preparations for and observance of the twentieth anniversary of the International Year of the Family......................... 504

68/137.

Violence against women migrant workers.............................................................................................................. 506

68/138.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women ....................................................... 512

68/139.

Improvement of the situation of women in rural areas ............................................................................................. 513

68/140.

Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly............................. 517

68/141.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees............................................................................... 522

68/142.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.............................................................................................................................................................. 527

68/143.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa............................................................................. 527

68/144.

Report of the Human Rights Council ..................................................................................................................... 532

68/145.

Strengthening collaboration on child protection within the United Nations system .................................................... 533

68/146.

The girl child........................................................................................................................................................ 534

68/147.

Rights of the child................................................................................................................................................. 543

68/148.

Child, early and forced marriage............................................................................................................................ 557

68/149.

Rights of indigenous peoples................................................................................................................................. 558

68/150.

Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance ........................................................................................ 561

68/151.

Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action................ 566

68/152.

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination ............................................................................................................................................. 571

68/153.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination ............................................................................ 574

68/154.

The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.......................................................................................... 575

68/155.

International Covenants on Human Rights ............................................................................................................. 577

68/156.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .................................................................. 577

68/157.

The human right to safe drinking water and sanitation............................................................................................. 583

68/158.

The right to development ...................................................................................................................................... 586
479

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/159.

Human rights and cultural diversity........................................................................................................................ 593

68/160.

Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights ..................................................................... 596

68/161.

Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights treaty bodies ...................... 598

68/162.

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures....................................................................................................... 600

68/163.

The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity .................................................................................................. 604

68/164.

Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization .................................................................................................................................................... 606

68/165.

Right to the truth................................................................................................................................................... 610

68/166.

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance ......................................... 613

68/167.

The right to privacy in the digital age ..................................................................................................................... 615

68/168.

Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights ..................................................................... 617

68/169.

Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and
violence against persons, based on religion or belief................................................................................................ 621

68/170.

Freedom of religion or belief ................................................................................................................................. 624

68/171.

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights..................................................................... 628

68/172.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities............................................................................................................................................. 632

68/173.

Follow-up to the International Year of Human Rights Learning............................................................................... 637

68/174.

Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa.................................................................. 638

68/175.

Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order.................................................................................... 640

68/176.

Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity......................................................... 644

68/177.

The right to food................................................................................................................................................... 646

68/178.

Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism .................................................... 651

68/179.

Protection of migrants........................................................................................................................................... 657

68/180.

Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons ..................................................................................... 663

68/181.

Promotion of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to
Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms: protecting women
human rights defenders ......................................................................................................................................... 669

68/182.

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic ............................................................................................ 674

68/183.

Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea ................................................................. 678

68/184.

Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran......................................................................................... 682

68/185.

Follow-up to the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations
for the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice ............................................. 686

68/186.

Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice responses to protect cultural property, especially with
regard to its trafficking .......................................................................................................................................... 689

68/187.

Technical assistance for implementing the international conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism.......... 692

480

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/188.

The rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice in the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015......... 694

68/189.

Model strategies and practical measures on the elimination of violence against children in the field of crime
prevention and criminal justice .............................................................................................................................. 697

68/190.

Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners ........................................................................................ 700

68/191.

Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls .............................................................................. 703

68/192.

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons ......................................................................... 706

68/193.

Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity ............................................................................................................................................. 711

68/194.

United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders.................................... 720

68/195.

Preventing and combating corrupt practices and the transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset
recovery and returning such assets to legitimate owners, in particular to countries of origin, in accordance with
the United Nations Convention against Corruption ................................................................................................. 722

68/196.

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development.............................................................................. 728

68/197.

International cooperation against the world drug problem........................................................................................ 735

68/240.

Human Rights Committee..................................................................................................................................... 744

68/241.

United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region.......... 745

68/242.

Situation of human rights in Myanmar ................................................................................................................... 746

481

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/130
A/RE S/68 /130

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/448, para. 34)1

68/130. Policies and programmes involving youth
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Programme of Action for Youth, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolutions
50/81 of 14 December 1995 and 62/126 of 18 December 2007,
Recalling also the outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on Youth: Dialogue
and Mutual Understanding, adopted by the General Assembly on 26 July 2011,2
Welcoming the participation of young representatives in national delegations at the General Assembly,
Affirming that generating decent work for youth is one of the biggest challenges that needs to be tackled,
emphasizing the priority areas of the World Programme of Action for Youth linked to the employability of youth,
including education, health and access to information and technology, and bearing in mind that over 73 million
young people are unemployed,
Taking note of the resolution and conclusions of the International Labour Conference, at its 101st session, held
in Geneva in 2012, on the theme “The youth employment crisis: a call for action”, which focused on employment
and economic policies for youth employment; employability, education, training and skills and the school-to-work
transition; labour market policies; youth entrepreneurship and self-employment; rights of young people; and the
importance of mobilizing resources to address the youth employment crisis,
Recalling that Member States have an important role in meeting the needs and aspirations of youth, and
recognizing that the ways in which young people are able to fulfil their potential will influence social and economic
conditions and the well-being and livelihood of future generations, and that States have an important role in
addressing the needs of youth, including youth with disabilities,
Acknowledging that the current generation of youth is the largest one ever, and in this context reaffirming the
importance of involving youth and youth organizations in the work of the United Nations at the national, regional
and international levels, in all matters of concern to them, including the implementation of the World Programme of
Action for Youth and the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals,
Welcoming the five-year action agenda of the Secretary-General, which identifies working with and for
women and young people as one of the five generational imperatives and opportunities and includes the
appointment of an Envoy of the Secretary-General on Youth, the development of the United Nations System-wide
Action Plan on Youth and the creation of the United Nations youth volunteering modality,
Welcoming also the initiative of the Government of Sri Lanka to host in 2014 a world conference on youth in
Colombo, taking note of the “BYND 2015” Global Youth Summit hosted by Costa Rica in September 2013, with a
focus on the participation and involvement of youth in achieving the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and acknowledging the positive contribution of youth, as agents and
beneficiaries of development, to the initiatives and discussions on sustainable development in the post-2015
development agenda, as well as to the general well-being, progress and diversity of society,
_______________
1
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay.
2
Resolution 65/312.

482

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Reaffirms the World Programme of Action for Youth, and emphasizes that all 15 priority areas of the
World Programme of Action for Youth are interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
2. Reiterates that the primary responsibility for implementing the World Programme of Action for Youth
lies with Member States, and urges Governments, in consultation with youth and youth-led organizations and other
relevant stakeholders, to develop holistic and integrated youth policies based on the Programme of Action and to
evaluate them regularly as part of the follow-up action on and implementation of the Programme of Action at
all levels;
3. Calls upon Member States to consider, on a voluntary basis, the indicators proposed in the report of the
Secretary-General3 for their selection and adaptation in monitoring and assessing the implementation of the World
Programme of Action for Youth, giving particular attention to young women and marginalized groups, including
indigenous youth, youth in rural areas, youth with disabilities and young migrants, taking into account the national
social and economic circumstances in each country;
4. Urges Member States to promote equal opportunities for all, to eliminate all forms of discrimination
against young people, including discrimination based on race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status, and to foster social integration for social groups
such as young persons with disabilities, young migrants and indigenous youth on an equal basis with others;
5. Also urges Member States to address the challenges faced by girls and young women and to address
gender stereotypes that perpetuate discrimination and violence against girls and young women and the stereotypical
roles of men and women that hinder social development by reaffirming the commitment to the empowerment of
women and gender equality, to engage, educate, encourage and support men and boys to take responsibility for their
behaviour, including their sexual and reproductive behaviour, to mainstream a gender perspective into all
development efforts, recognizing that such actions are critical for achieving sustainable development and for efforts
to combat hunger, poverty and disease, and to strengthen policies and programmes that improve, ensure and
broaden the full participation of young women in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life, as equal
partners, and improve their access to all resources needed for the full exercise of all their human rights and
fundamental freedoms by removing persistent barriers, including ensuring equal access to full and productive
employment and decent work and strengthening their economic independence;
6. Emphasizes the role of education and health literacy in improving health outcomes over a lifetime, and
in this regard encourages Member States to promote health education and health literacy among young people,
including through evidence-based education and information strategies and programmes, both in and out of school,
and through public campaigns, and to increase the access of youth to affordable, safe, effective and sustainable
health-care services and social services by paying special attention to, and raising awareness regarding, nutrition,
including eating disorders and obesity, the effects of non-communicable and communicable diseases and sexual and
reproductive health;
7. Also emphasizes that addressing the specific needs of young people in the response to HIV and AIDS is
a key element in efforts to achieve an AIDS-free generation, and urges Member States to strengthen efforts in this
regard, including by ensuring the active involvement of young people living with or affected by HIV in the
response;
8. Reiterates that access to quality formal and non-formal education, including, as appropriate, catch-up
and literacy education, including in information and communications technologies for those who did not receive
formal education, information and communications technologies and volunteerism are important factors that enable
young people to acquire the relevant skills and to build their capacities for employability and entrepreneurial
development and gain decent and productive work, and calls upon Member States to take necessary actions to
ensure that young people have access to such services and opportunities;
9. Urges Member States to address high rates of youth unemployment, underemployment, vulnerable
employment and informal employment by developing and implementing targeted and integrated local and national
youth employment policies for inclusive, sustainable and innovative job creation, improved employability, skills
_______________
3

E/CN.5/2013/8.

483

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

development and vocational training to improve the chances of integrating youth into sustainable labour markets
and increased entrepreneurship, including the development of networks of young entrepreneurs at the local,
national, regional and global levels that foster knowledge among young people about their rights and responsibilities
in society, and in this regard requests donors, specialized United Nations entities and the private sector to continue to
provide assistance to Member States, including technical and funding support, as appropriate;
10. Recognizes that youth participation is important for development, and urges Member States and entities
of the United Nations system, in consultation with youth-led organizations, to explore new avenues to promote full,
effective, structured and sustainable participation of young people and youth-led organizations in relevant decisionmaking processes, including in the design and implementation of policies, programmes and initiatives and in the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
11. Reiterates that the eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition, particularly as they affect
children and youth, is crucial for accelerating progress towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015, recalls the commitment to eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic
growth, sustainable development and global prosperity for all, including the strengthening of international
cooperation through the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments and the transfer of
appropriate technology and capacity-building with regard to youth, and the need for urgent action on all sides,
including more ambitious national development strategies and efforts backed by increased international
support, and calls for the increased participation of youth and youth-led organizations in the development of
such national development strategies;
12. Emphasizes the importance of the impact of a fair globalization, and encourages Member States to take
measures that minimize the negative effects of globalization and maximize its benefits, such as offering relevant
education and training for young people in order to enable their access to decent jobs and better employment
opportunities and to meet the needs of changing labour markets, and that enable young migrants to enjoy their
human rights;
13. Calls upon Member States to take concrete measures to further assist youth in armed conflict situations,
in accordance with the World Programme of Action for Youth, and encourages the involvement of young people,
where appropriate, in activities concerning the protection of children and youth affected by armed conflict situations,
including in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and post-conflict processes;
14. Urges Member States to take concerted actions in conformity with international law to remove the
obstacles to the full realization of the rights of young people living under foreign occupation in order to promote the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
15. Also urges Member States to take effective measures in conformity with international law to protect
young people affected or exploited by terrorism and incitement;
16. Invites Member States to strengthen or establish, in collaboration with young people and youth-led
organizations, programmes and policies to address all forms of violence, including gender-based violence,
trafficking in persons, bullying and cyberbullying, as well as the involvement and manipulation of youth in criminal
activities such as drug-related crimes, and recognizes the need to develop safe and youth-friendly counselling and
substance abuse prevention programmes;
17. Recognizes the importance of strengthening intergenerational partnerships and solidarity among
generations, and in this regard calls upon Member States to promote opportunities for voluntary, constructive and
regular interaction between young people and older generations in the family, the workplace and society at large;
18. Urges Member States to consider including youth delegates in their delegations at all relevant
discussions in the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions and relevant
United Nations conferences, as appropriate, bearing in mind the principles of gender balance and nondiscrimination, and emphasizes that such youth representatives should be selected through a transparent process that
ensures that they have a suitable mandate to represent young people in their countries;
19. Acknowledges the increased collaboration through the Inter-Agency Network on Youth
Development in developing the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Youth, requests the United
Nations entities, within existing resources, to continue their coordination towards a more coherent,
484

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

comprehensive and integrated approach to youth development, calls upon entities of the United Nations
system and relevant partners to support national, regional and international efforts to address challenges
hindering youth development, and in this regard encourages close collaboration with Member States as well as
other relevant stakeholders, including civil society;
20. Calls upon the United Nations Programme on Youth to continue to act as the focal point within the
United Nations system for promoting further collaboration and coordination on youth-related matters;
21. Calls upon donors, including Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to actively contribute to the United Nations Youth Fund in order to facilitate the participation of youth
representatives from developing countries in the activities of the United Nations, taking into account the need for
greater geographical balance in youth representation, as well as to accelerate the implementation of the World
Programme of Action for Youth and to support the production of the World Youth Report, and in this regard requests
the Secretary-General to take appropriate action to encourage contributions to the Fund;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session
on the implementation of the present resolution, including on ways to promote effective, structured and
sustainable youth participation in designing, implementing and assessing United Nations youth policies,
programmes and initiatives, to be prepared in consultation with Member States as well as the relevant
specialized agencies, funds and programmes, and regional commissions, taking into account the work done by
the United Nations system, and also encourages the Secretariat to consult, as appropriate, with youth-led and
youth-focused organizations.
RESOLUTION 68/131
A/RE S/68 /131

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/448, para. 34)4

68/131. Promoting social integration through social inclusion
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that, in order to leave no one behind and bring everyone forward, actions are needed to promote
equality of opportunity so that no person is denied basic economic opportunities and the enjoyment of all
human rights,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March 1995, and the
twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly entitled “World Summit for Social Development and
beyond: achieving social development for all in a globalizing world”, held in Geneva from 26 June to 1 July 2000,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2010/12 of 22 July 2010 on promoting social
integration and General Assembly resolution 66/122 of 19 December 2011 on promoting social integration through
social inclusion,
Recalling further the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals,5 in which Heads of State and Government acknowledged the great importance of
promoting comprehensive systems of social protection that provide universal access to essential social services,
consistent with national priorities and circumstances, to meet internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals,
_______________
4
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, India, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain,
Suriname, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
5
Resolution 65/1.

485

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note with appreciation of the commitment of several United Nations entities to mainstream social
inclusion in their work and encouraging others to do the same,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to realizing the universal right to work and the
right to an adequate standard of living, including by promoting access to employment opportunities, social services
and social security programmes,
Stressing that the promotion of sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth that promotes full,
productive and inclusive employment and decent work for all is necessary to eradicate poverty, including extreme
poverty, and reduce inequality, and should be complemented, as appropriate, by effective social protection policies,
including social inclusion policies,
Recognizing that the gains of economic growth should also benefit those in vulnerable or marginalized groups
or situations,
Recognizing also that social inclusion and equity are intrinsically linked and that focusing on and investing in
the most disadvantaged and excluded populations, such as women, children and persons with disabilities, is
critically important for the acceleration of progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and should be given due consideration in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda,
Recognizing further that social inclusion policies and systems play a critical role in promoting an inclusive
society, and are also crucial for fostering stable, safe, harmonious, peaceful and just societies and for improving
social cohesion and inclusion so as to create an environment for development and progress,
Reaffirming the important role of corporate social responsibility and accountability in contributing to an
enabling environment to promote inclusive economic growth and social integration,
Recognizing that social inclusion policies also strengthen the democratic process,
Stressing that social inclusion policies should promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and
equal access to opportunities and social protection for all, in particular for those in vulnerable or marginalized
groups or situations, including women who experience multiple forms of discrimination,
Acknowledging that the participation of persons in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations is crucial to
formulating and implementing social inclusion policies that effectively achieve social integration, as appropriate,
Recognizing the important role played by civil society, including non-governmental organizations, in
promoting social integration, inter alia, through social programmes and support for the development of socially
inclusive policies,
Stressing the importance of an enabling international environment, in particular enhanced international
cooperation to support national efforts towards promoting social integration through social inclusion in every
country, including the fulfilment of all commitments on official development assistance, debt relief, market access,
financial and technical support and capacity-building,
Expressing concern that, in times of economic and financial crisis and ongoing concern about energy and food
insecurity, social exclusion can be exacerbated, and stressing in this regard that sustainable and reliable social
inclusion policies and programmes can play a positive role,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;6

2. Stresses that Member States, which bear the main responsibility for social integration and social
inclusion, should prioritize the creation of a “society for all” based on respect for all human rights and the
principles of equality among individuals, access to basic social services and promotion of the active
participation of every member of society, in particular those in vulnerable or marginalized groups or
situations, in all aspects of life, including civic, social, economic and political activities, as well as
participation in decision-making processes;
_______________
6

486

A/68/169.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Reaffirms that social integration policies should seek to reduce inequalities and that equity and social
inclusion are important for achieving sustainable development, ensuring that individuals can participate without
discrimination and contribute to its social, economic and environmental dimensions;
4. Stresses the importance of eradicating illiteracy and promoting equal access to and opportunities for
quality education for all, inclusive education, especially for persons with disabilities, skills development and quality
training as essential means for inclusive participation and integration in society;
5. Calls upon Member States to promote a more equitable participation in and access to economic growth
gains, through inter alia, policies that ensure inclusive labour markets and by implementing socially responsive
macroeconomic policies in which employment has a key role and social inclusion strategies that promote social
integration, ensuring social protection floors for those who are in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations, as
defined by each country in accordance with its individual circumstances, including on a demand-driven basis, and
the promotion and protection of their social and economic rights;
6. Encourages Member States to consider, when appropriate, the creation of national institutions or
agencies for promoting, implementing and evaluating social inclusion programmes and mechanisms at the national
and local levels;
7. Encourages Member States, together with relevant United Nations entities, to continue monitoring
progress towards the relevant Millennium Development Goals, in particular regarding their indicators, as their
achievement is an essential element in order to shape and promote national policies for social inclusion;
8. Encourages Member States to promote social inclusion as a matter of social justice in order to build the
resilience of vulnerable populations and to help them adapt to the negative impacts of economic crises, humanitarian
emergencies and climate change, and in this regard invites relevant United Nations entities and international
institutions to support these efforts;
9. Invites Member States, and encourages regional organizations, to support national efforts to achieve
inclusive societies, in particular in developing countries, upon their request, by providing, inter alia, financial and
technical cooperation for the design and implementation of sound social inclusion policies;
10. Encourages Member States to mainstream social integration objectives into social inclusion policies,
promoting the participation of persons in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations in planning, implementing
and monitoring processes, in collaboration, as appropriate, with relevant organizations of the United Nations
development system, regional organizations, international and regional financial institutions, development and
social partners, the private sector and civil society organizations;
11. Invites Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, regional organizations,
international and regional financial institutions, development and social partners, the private sector and civil
society organizations to provide information on their activities promoting social inclusion and social
integration and to exchange views and share good practices and data on the development of social inclusion
policies;
12. Invites Member States to give due consideration to advancing social integration and non-discrimination
as an integral part of addressing inequality in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda, and encourages
Member States, in cooperation with civil society, to make every possible effort to address the needs of the most
vulnerable and promote their participation in decision-making processes;
13. Encourages Member States to improve the collection and use of data disaggregated by age, sex and
other relevant criteria for the formulation of policies and programmes aimed at achieving social inclusion, and
stresses the importance of international cooperation in this regard;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report, taking into account the information provided by
Member States and relevant actors of the United Nations system, on the implementation of the present resolution to
the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
15. Decides to consider the question further at its seventieth session under the item entitled “Social
development”.
487

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/132
A/RE S/68 /132

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/448, para. 34)7

68/132. Literacy for life: shaping future agendas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/116 of 19 December 2001, by which it proclaimed the 10-year period
beginning on 1 January 2003 the United Nations Literacy Decade, its resolution 57/166 of 18 December 2002,
in which it welcomed the International Plan of Action for the United Nations Literacy Decade, 8 and its
resolutions 59/149 of 20 December 2004, 61/140 of 19 December 2006, 63/154 of 18 December 2008 and
65/183 of 21 December 2010,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration,9 in which Member States resolved to ensure that,
by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling and
that girls and boys will have equal access to all levels of education, which requires a renewed commitment to
promote literacy for all,
Reaffirming the Education for All goals, in particular goal 3, on ensuring that the learning needs of all young
people and adults are met through equitable access to appropriate learning and life-skills programmes, and goal 4,
on achieving a 50 per cent improvement in levels of adult literacy by 2015, especially for women, and equitable
access to basic and continuing education for all adults,
Convinced that literacy is crucial to the acquisition by every child, young person and adult of the essential life
skills that will enable them to address the challenges that they may face in life and represents an essential condition
of lifelong learning, which is an indispensable means for effective participation in the knowledge societies and
economies of the twenty-first century,
Reaffirming the right of indigenous peoples to have non-discriminatory access to all levels and forms of
education provided by States, and recognizing the importance of effective measures to promote access for
indigenous individuals, in particular children, to education in their own language, when possible, as addressed in the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,10
Noting with deep concern that, according to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, 774 million adults do not have basic literacy skills and 57 million children of primary school age
remain out of school, that millions more young people leave school without a level of literacy adequate for
productive and active participation in their societies, that the issue of literacy may not be sufficiently high on
national agendas to generate the kind of political and economic support required to address global literacy
challenges and that the world is unlikely to meet those challenges if present trends continue,
Affirming that the realization of the right to education, especially for girls, contributes to the promotion of
human rights, gender equality and the eradication of poverty,
Recognizing the importance of continuing to implement national programmes and measures to eliminate
illiteracy worldwide as reflected in the Dakar Framework for Action on Education for All, adopted on 28 April 2000
_______________
7

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Yemen.
8
See A/57/218 and Corr.1.
9
Resolution 55/2.
10
Resolution 61/295, annex.

488

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

at the World Education Forum,11 and in the Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard also recognizing the
important contribution of South-South and triangular cooperation through, inter alia, innovative pedagogical
methods in literacy,
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the gender gap in education, which is reflected by the fact that,
according to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, nearly two thirds of the world’s
non-literate adults are women,
Concerned that, according to United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization estimates, one
third of the children not attending school are children with disabilities and that the literacy rate among adults with
disabilities is as low as 3 per cent in some countries,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on the final evaluation of the implementation of the International Plan of
Action for the United Nations Literacy Decade;12
2. Commends the efforts made by Member States, their development partners, the international donor
community, the private sector, civil society and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, including the lead organization for the Decade, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, in making progress on the goals of the Decade;
3. Recognizes the importance of continuing to implement national programmes and measures to eliminate
illiteracy worldwide, enhancing further political and financial commitments, in particular for youth and adult
literacy and non-formal education, intensifying collective efforts through enhanced education systems and
interventions, and building a robust knowledge and technical base through improved literacy monitoring,
assessment and research;
4. Calls upon all Governments to develop reliable measures of literacy and generate data that are
comparable across time and disaggregated by age, sex, disability, socioeconomic status and other relevant factors;
5. Encourages Member States, their development partners and the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system, as appropriate, to sustain and expand the gains achieved during the
Decade through additional technical and financial support and to promote literacy and literate environments through
multi-pronged approaches, with a focus on marginalized groups or those in vulnerable situations, in particular girls
and women, people living in rural areas and persons with disabilities, including by utilizing innovative information
and communications technology solutions, bearing in mind that the target date of 2015 for the achievement of the
Education for All goals and the Millennium Development Goals is approaching;
6. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to reinforce its
coordinating and catalysing role in the fight against illiteracy, and encourages its Director-General to continue the
process of elaborating a literacy vision and agenda for the period subsequent to the United Nations Literacy Decade,
in consultation with Member States and development partners, in order to ensure a successful global multistakeholder partnership;
7. Recognizes the need to give appropriate consideration to the issue of literacy in the discussions on the
post-2015 development agenda;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Social
development”, a sub-item entitled “Literacy for life: shaping future agendas”.
_______________
11

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal,
26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
12
See A/68/201.

489

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/133
A/RE S/68 /133

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/448, para. 34)13

68/133. Cooperatives in social development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/90 of 16 December 1992, 49/155 of 23 December 1994, 51/58 of 12 December
1996, 54/123 of 17 December 1999, 56/114 of 19 December 2001, 58/131 of 22 December 2003, 60/132 of
16 December 2005, 62/128 of 18 December 2007, 64/136 of 18 December 2009, 65/184 of 21 December 2010 and
66/123 of 19 December 2011 concerning cooperatives in social development,
Recognizing that cooperatives, in their various forms, promote the fullest possible participation in the
economic and social development of all people, including women, youth, older persons, persons with disabilities
and indigenous peoples, are becoming a significant factor of economic and social development and contribute to the
eradication of poverty and hunger,
Recognizing also the important contribution and potential of all forms of cooperatives to the follow-up to the
World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on Women and the second United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), including their five-year reviews, the World Food Summit, the
Second World Assembly on Ageing, the International Conference on Financing for Development, the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and the 2005 World Summit,
Noting with appreciation the potential role of cooperative development in the improvement of the social and
economic conditions of indigenous peoples and rural communities,
Welcoming the efforts of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to showcase the role of
agricultural cooperatives, including in improving food security, particularly in rural areas, promoting sustainable
agricultural practices, improving the agricultural productivity of farmers and facilitating access to markets, savings,
credit, insurance and technology,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;14

2.

Notes with appreciation the celebration of the International Year of Cooperatives, in 2012;

3. Encourages all Member States, as well as the United Nations and all other relevant stakeholders, to
share best practices identified through activities implemented during the International Year of Cooperatives and to
continue these activities, as appropriate;
4. Takes note of the draft plan of action on cooperatives for 2012 and beyond, based on the outcome
document of the expert group meeting held in Ulaanbaatar in 2011 for the promotion of cooperatives for sustainable
socioeconomic development, so as to promote focused and effective follow-up to the activities of the Year, within
existing resources;
5. Draws the attention of Governments to the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral to focus support on cooperatives as sustainable and successful business enterprises that contribute directly
to employment generation, poverty and hunger eradication, and social protection, across a variety of economic
sectors in urban and rural areas, to review the prevailing policies, laws and regulations affecting cooperatives and to
identify strategies for legislative frameworks in support of cooperative growth;
_______________
13

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
14
A/68/168.

490

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Invites Governments and international organizations, in partnership with cooperatives and cooperative
organizations, to strengthen and build the capacity of all forms of cooperatives, especially those run by the poor,
young people, women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups, so that they can empower people to
transform their lives and communities positively and build inclusive societies;
7. Encourages Governments to promote access to information and communication technologies as a vital
channel for collaboration and the expansion of cooperatives, especially in rural areas;
8. Also encourages Governments to intensify and expand the availability and accessibility of research on
the operations and contribution of cooperatives and to establish methodologies for the collection and dissemination
of comparable global data on and the best practices of cooperative enterprises, in collaboration with all stakeholders,
and to raise public awareness of the nature of cooperatives, their strengths, their values and principles and their
contributions to sustainable development;
9. Invites Governments, relevant international organizations, the specialized agencies and local, national
and international cooperative organizations to continue to observe the International Day of Cooperatives annually,
on the first Saturday of July, as proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/90;
10. Invites Governments, in collaboration with the cooperative movement, to develop programmes aimed at
enhancing the capacity-building of cooperatives, including by strengthening the organizational, management and
financial skills of their members, while respecting the principles of gender equality and the empowerment of
women, and to introduce and support programmes to improve the access of cooperatives to new technologies;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the relevant United Nations and other international
organizations and national, regional and international cooperative organizations, to continue rendering support to
Member States, as appropriate, in their efforts to create a supportive environment for the development of
cooperatives, providing assistance for human resources development, technical advice and training and promoting
an exchange of experience and best practices through, inter alia, conferences, workshops and seminars at the
national and regional levels, within existing resources;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/134
A/RE S/68 /134

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/448, para. 34)15

68/134. Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/167 of 18 December 2002, in which it endorsed the Political Declaration16 and the
Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002,17 its resolution 58/134 of 22 December 2003, in which it took
note, inter alia, of the road map for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and its resolutions 60/135 of
16 December 2005, 61/142 of 19 December 2006, 62/130 of 18 December 2007, 63/151 of 18 December 2008,
64/132 of 18 December 2009, 65/182 of 21 December 2010, 66/127 of 19 December 2011, 67/139 of 20 December
2012 and 67/143 of 20 December 2012,
Recognizing that, in many parts of the world, awareness of the Madrid Plan of Action remains limited or nonexistent, which limits the scope of implementation efforts,
_______________
15

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Fiji
(on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine.
16
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex I.
17
Ibid., annex II.

491

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,18
Welcoming the important opportunity provided by the ongoing dialogue on the issues of ageing, inter alia, in
the context of the discussions on the post-2015 development agenda,
Recognizing that, by 2050, more than 20 per cent of the world’s population will be 60 years of age or older,
and recognizing also that the increase in the number of older people will be the greatest and the most rapid in the
developing world,
Recalling World Health Assembly resolution 58.16 of 25 May 2005 on strengthening active and healthy
ageing, which stressed the important role of public health policies and programmes in enabling the rapidly growing
number of older persons in both developed and developing countries to remain in good health and maintain their
many vital contributions to the well-being of their families, communities and societies,
Recalling also World Health Assembly resolution 65.3 of 25 May 2012 on strengthening non-communicable
disease policies to promote active ageing, which recognizes that population ageing is among the major factors
contributing to the rising incidence and prevalence of non-communicable diseases,
Concerned that many health systems are not sufficiently prepared to respond to the needs of the rapidly ageing
population, including the need for preventative, curative, palliative and specialized care,
Deeply concerned that the situation of older persons in many parts of the world has been negatively affected
by the world financial and economic crisis,
Recognizing the essential contribution that the majority of older men and women can continue to make to the
functioning of society if adequate guarantees are in place,
Noting that older women outnumber older men, and noting with concern that older women often face multiple
forms of discrimination resulting from their gender-based roles in society, compounded by their age or disability or
on other grounds, which affect the enjoyment of their human rights,
1.

Reaffirms the Political Declaration16 and the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002;17

2. Recognizes the successful conclusion of the second review and appraisal of the Madrid Plan of Action
and its results at the international, regional and national levels, and acknowledges the recommendations of the
Commission for Social Development at its fifty-first session, in that regard, as endorsed by the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 2013/29 of 25 July 2013;
3. Also recognizes that major challenges faced by older persons which undermine their social, economic
and cultural participation remain;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the decision of the Human Rights Council in its resolution 24/20 of
27 September 201319 to appoint an independent expert on the enjoyment of all human rights by older persons, and
invites Member States to cooperate with the independent expert in carrying out his or her mandate;
5. Invites Member States to continue to share their national experiences in developing and implementing
policies and programmes aimed at strengthening the promotion and protection of the human rights of older persons,
including within the framework of the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing;
6. Stresses the importance for the independent expert and the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing
to work in close coordination, while avoiding unnecessary duplication of each other’s mandates and those of
other special procedures and subsidiary organs of the Human Rights Council, relevant United Nations bodies
and treaties;
7. Encourages all Member States to be mindful of the reports of the independent expert, including the
comprehensive report to be brought to the attention of the Working Group;
_______________
18
19

492

A/68/167.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. II.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

8. Invites Member States to adopt and implement non-discriminatory policies and to systematically review
and amend, where appropriate, existing practices and regulations that discriminate against older persons, in order to
promote an enabling environment for older persons;
9. Encourages Governments to ensure that the social integration of older persons and the promotion and
protection of their rights form an integral part of development policies at all levels;
10. Also encourages Governments to pay greater attention to building capacity to eradicate poverty among
older persons, in particular older women, by mainstreaming ageing issues into poverty eradication strategies and
national development plans, and to include both ageing-specific policies and ageing-mainstreaming efforts in their
national strategies;
11. Encourages Member States to strengthen their efforts to develop national capacity to address their
national implementation priorities identified during the reviews and appraisals of the Madrid Plan of Action, and
invites Member States that have not done so to consider a step-by-step approach to developing capacity that
includes the setting of national priorities, the strengthening of institutional mechanisms, research, data collection and
analysis and the training of necessary personnel in the field of ageing;
12. Also encourages Member States to overcome obstacles to the implementation of the Madrid Plan of
Action by devising strategies that take into account the entirety of the human life course and foster intergenerational
solidarity in order to increase the likelihood of greater success in the years ahead;
13. Further encourages Member States to place particular emphasis on choosing national priorities that are
realistic, sustainable and feasible and have the greatest likelihood of being achieved in the years ahead and to
develop targets and indicators to measure progress in the implementation process;
14. Invites Member States to identify key priority areas for implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action,
including empowering older persons and promoting their rights, raising awareness of ageing issues and building
national capacity to address the issue of ageing;
15. Recommends that Member States increase their efforts to raise awareness of the Madrid Plan of Action,
including by promoting and supporting initiatives to advance a positive public image of older persons and their
multiple contributions to their families, communities and societies and by working with the regional commissions
and enlisting the help of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat in seeking increased attention for
ageing issues;
16. Encourages Governments that have not done so to designate focal points for handling the follow-up of
domestic plans of action on ageing, and also encourages Governments to strengthen existing networks of national
focal points on ageing;
17. Invites Governments to conduct their ageing-related policies through inclusive and participatory
consultations with relevant stakeholders and social development partners, in the interest of developing effective
policies that create national policy ownership and consensus-building;
18. Recommends that Member States enhance their capacity to more effectively collect data, statistics and
qualitative information, disaggregated when necessary by relevant factors, including sex and disability, in order to
better assess the situation of older persons and to set adequate monitoring mechanisms for programmes and policies
geared towards protecting the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by older
persons;
19. Recommends that States parties to existing international human rights instruments, where appropriate,
address the situation of older persons more explicitly in their reports, and encourages treaty body monitoring
mechanisms and special procedures mandate holders, in accordance with their mandates, to pay more attention to
the situation of older persons in their dialogue with Member States, in their consideration of reports or in their
country missions;
20. Encourages Governments to continue their efforts to implement the Madrid Plan of Action and to
mainstream the concerns of older persons into their policy agendas, bearing in mind the crucial importance of
intergenerational family interdependence, solidarity and reciprocity for social development and the realization of all
human rights for older persons, and to prevent age discrimination and provide social integration;
493

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

21. Recognizes the importance of strengthening intergenerational partnerships and solidarity among
generations, and in this regard calls upon Member States to promote opportunities for voluntary, constructive
and regular interaction between young people and older generations in the family, the workplace and society
at large;
22. Encourages Member States to adopt social policies that promote the development of community
services for older persons, taking into account the psychological and physical aspects of ageing and the special
needs of older women;
23. Also encourages Member States to ensure that older persons have access to information about their
rights so as to enable them to participate fully and justly in their societies and to claim full enjoyment of all
human rights;
24. Calls upon Member States to develop their national capacity for monitoring and enforcing the rights of
older persons, in consultation with all sectors of society, including organizations of older persons, through, inter alia,
national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, where applicable;
25. Also calls upon Member States to strengthen and incorporate a gender and disability perspective into all
policy actions on ageing, as well as to address and eliminate discrimination on the basis of age, gender or disability,
and recommends that Member States engage with all sectors of society, in particular with relevant organizations
with an interest in the matter, including organizations of older persons, of women and of persons with disabilities, in
changing negative stereotypes about older persons, in particular older women and older persons with disabilities,
and promote positive images of older persons;
26. Acknowledges that universal health coverage implies that all people, including older persons, have
access, without discrimination, to nationally determined sets of the needed promotive, preventive, curative and
rehabilitative basic health services and essential, safe, affordable, effective and quality medicines, while ensuring
that the use of these services does not expose the users to financial hardship, with a special emphasis on the poor,
vulnerable and marginalized segments of the population;
27. Urges Member States to develop, implement and evaluate policies and programmes that promote
healthy and active ageing and the highest attainable standard of health and well-being for older persons, and to
develop health care for older persons as part of primary care in the existing national health systems;
28. Recognizes the importance of training, education and capacity-building of the health workforce,
including for home-based care;
29. Urges Member States to strengthen intersectoral policy frameworks and institutional mechanisms, as
appropriate, for the integrated management of the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, including
health promotion, health care and social welfare services, in order to address the needs of older persons;
30. Calls upon Member States to address the issue of the well-being and adequate health care of older
persons, as well as any cases of neglect, abuse and violence against older persons, by designing and implementing
more effective prevention strategies and stronger laws and policies to address these problems and their underlying
factors;
31. Also calls upon Member States to take concrete measures to further protect and assist older persons in
emergency situations, in accordance with the Madrid Plan of Action;
32. Stresses that, in order to complement national development efforts, enhanced international cooperation is
essential to support developing countries in implementing the Madrid Plan of Action, while recognizing the
importance of assistance and the provision of financial assistance;
33. Encourages Member States to ensure that the principle of non-discrimination on the basis of age is
incorporated and upheld in health policies and programmes and that the implementation of such policies and
programmes is regularly monitored;
34. Also encourages Member States to adopt and enforce guidelines that establish standards for the
provision of long-term support and assistance to older persons;
494

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

35. Recommends that Governments involve older persons and their organizations in the formulation,
implementation and monitoring of policies and programmes that affect them;
36. Encourages the international community, including international and bilateral donors, to enhance
international cooperation to support national efforts to eradicate poverty, in keeping with internationally agreed
goals, in order to achieve sustainable and adequate social and economic support for older persons, while bearing in
mind that countries have the primary responsibility for their own economic and social development;
37. Encourages the international community to support national efforts to forge stronger partnerships with
civil society, including organizations of older persons, academia, research foundations, community-based
organizations, including caregivers, and the private sector, in an effort to help to build capacity on ageing issues;
38. Encourages the international community and the relevant agencies of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates, to support national efforts to provide funding for research and data-collection initiatives
on ageing, as appropriate, in order to better understand the challenges and opportunities presented by population
ageing and to provide policymakers with more accurate and more specific information on gender and ageing;
39. Recognizes the important role of various international and regional organizations that deal with training,
capacity-building, policy design and monitoring at the national and regional levels in promoting and facilitating the
implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and acknowledges the work that is undertaken in various parts of the
world, as well as regional initiatives, and by institutes such as the International Institute on Ageing in Malta and the
European Centre for Social Welfare Policy and Research in Vienna;
40. Recommends that Member States reaffirm the role of United Nations focal points on ageing, increase
technical cooperation efforts, expand the role of the regional commissions on ageing issues, continue to provide
resources for those efforts, facilitate the coordination of national and international non-governmental organizations
on ageing and enhance cooperation with academia on a research agenda on ageing;
41. Reiterates the need for additional capacity-building at the national level in order to promote and facilitate
further implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, as well as the results of its review and appraisal cycle, and in
this regard encourages Governments to support the United Nations Trust Fund for Ageing to enable the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat to provide expanded assistance to countries, upon their request;
42. Requests the United Nations system to strengthen its capacity to support, in an efficient and coordinated
manner, national implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, where appropriate;
43. Recommends that the situation of older persons be taken into account in the ongoing efforts to achieve
the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,20 and be given due consideration in the elaboration of the development agenda beyond 2015;
44. Notes with appreciation the work of the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing, established by the
General Assembly in paragraph 28 of its resolution 65/182, and recognizes the positive contributions of Member
States, as well as relevant bodies and organizations of the United Nations, intergovernmental and relevant
non-governmental organizations, national human rights institutions and invited panellists, during the four working
sessions of the Working Group;
45. Invites States and relevant bodies and organizations of the United Nations system, including relevant
human rights mandate holders and treaty bodies and the regional commissions, as well as intergovernmental and
relevant non-governmental organizations with an interest in the matter, to continue to make contributions to the
work entrusted to the Working Group, as appropriate;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide all necessary support to the Working Group,
within existing resources, for organizing, in 2014, a fifth working session;
47. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
_______________
20

Resolution 55/2.

495

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/135
A/RE S/68 /135

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/448, para. 34)21

68/135. Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twentyfourth special session of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March 1995, and
the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly, entitled “World Summit for Social Development
and beyond: achieving social development for all in a globalizing world”, held in Geneva from 26 June to
1 July 2000,
Reaffirming that the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of Action of the
World Summit for Social Development22 and the further initiatives for social development adopted by the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth special session,23 as well as a continued global dialogue on social development issues,
constitute the basic framework for the promotion of social development for all at the national and international
levels,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration24 and the development goals contained therein, as well
as the commitments made at major United Nations summits, conferences and special sessions, including the
commitments made at the 2005 World Summit25 and at the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on
the Millennium Development Goals,26 and the outcome of the 2013 special event to follow up efforts made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals,27
Recalling also its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social
fields,
Recalling further its resolution 63/303 of 9 July 2009 entitled “Outcome of the Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development”,
Welcoming the decision that the Commission for Social Development should consider “Promoting
empowerment of people in achieving poverty eradication, social integration and full employment and decent work
for all” as the priority theme for the 2013–2014 review and policy cycle,28
Recalling the ministerial declaration adopted at the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2012 of
the Economic and Social Council, entitled “Promoting productive capacity, employment and decent work to
eradicate poverty in the context of inclusive, sustainable and equitable economic growth at all levels for achieving
the Millennium Development Goals”,29
Noting that the decent work agenda of the International Labour Organization, with its four strategic objectives,
has an important role to play in achieving the objective of full and productive employment and decent work for all,
including its objective of social protection, as reaffirmed in the International Labour Organization Declaration on
_______________
21

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Fiji (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Mexico, Republic of Korea and Turkey.
22
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
23
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
24
Resolution 55/2.
25
Resolution 60/1.
26
Resolution 65/1.
27
Resolution 68/6.
28
See Economic and Social Council resolution 2012/7.
29
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/67/3/Rev.1), chap. IV, sect. F.

496

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Social Justice for a Fair Globalization, 30 in which the particular role of the Organization in promoting fair
globalization and its responsibility to assist its members in their efforts were acknowledged, as well as in the Global
Jobs Pact,
Emphasizing the need to enhance the role of the Commission for Social Development in the follow-up to and
review of the World Summit for Social Development and the outcome of the twenty-fourth special session of the
General Assembly, and welcoming the views of the Commission in the elaboration of the post-2015 development
agenda,
Recognizing that the three core themes of social development, namely, poverty eradication, full and productive
employment and decent work for all and social integration, are interrelated and mutually reinforcing, and that an
enabling environment therefore needs to be created so that all three objectives can be pursued simultaneously,
Recognizing also that a people-centred approach must be at the centre of economic and social development,
Expressing deep concern that attainment of the social development objectives is being hindered by the
ongoing adverse impact of the world financial and economic crisis, volatile energy and food prices and the
challenges posed by climate change,
Recognizing the complex character of the ongoing food insecurity situation, including food price volatility, as
a combination of several major factors, both structural and conjunctural, which is also negatively affected by, inter
alia, environmental degradation, drought and desertification, global climate change, natural disasters and the lack of
the necessary technology, and recognizing also that a strong commitment from national Governments and the
international community as a whole is required to confront the major threats to food security and to ensure that
policies in the area of agriculture do not distort trade and worsen food insecurity,
Acknowledging the need to further mainstream sustainable development at all levels, integrating economic,
social and environmental aspects and recognizing their interlinkages, so as to achieve sustainable development in all
its dimensions,
Reaffirming the need to achieve sustainable development by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all, reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living,
fostering equitable and inclusive social development and promoting the integrated and sustainable management of
natural resources,
Deeply concerned that extreme poverty persists in all countries of the world, regardless of their economic,
social and cultural situation, and that its extent and its manifestations, such as hunger and malnutrition, trafficking in
human beings, disease, lack of adequate shelter and illiteracy, are particularly severe in developing countries, while
acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the world in combating extreme poverty,
Recognizing the importance of the international community in supporting national capacity-building efforts in
the area of social development, while recognizing the primary responsibility of national Governments in this regard,
Affirming its strong support for fair globalization and the need to translate growth into eradication of poverty
and commitment to strategies and policies that aim to promote full, freely chosen and productive employment and
decent work for all and that these should constitute a fundamental component of relevant national and international
policies and national development strategies, including poverty reduction strategies, and reaffirming that
employment creation and decent work for all should be incorporated into macroeconomic policies, taking fully into
account the impact and social dimension of globalization, the benefits and costs of which are often unevenly shared
and distributed,
Recognizing the need to enhance access to the benefits of trade, including agricultural trade, for developing
countries in order to foster social development,
Recognizing also that social inclusion is a means for achieving social integration and is crucial for fostering
stable, safe, harmonious, peaceful and just societies and for improving social cohesion so as to create an
environment for development and progress,
_______________
30

A/63/538-E/2009/4, annex.

497

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;31

2. Welcomes the reaffirmation by Governments of their will and commitment to continue implementing the
Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social
Development,22 in particular to eradicate poverty, promote full and productive employment and decent work for all
and foster social integration to achieve stable, safe and just societies for all;
3. Recognizes that the implementation of the Copenhagen commitments and the attainment of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, are mutually reinforcing
and that the Copenhagen commitments are crucial to a coherent people-centred approach to development;
4. Reaffirms that the Commission for Social Development continues to have the primary responsibility for
the follow-up to and review of the World Summit for Social Development and the outcome of the twenty-fourth
special session of the General Assembly and that it serves as the main United Nations forum for an intensified
global dialogue on social development issues, and calls upon Member States, the relevant specialized agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations system and civil society to enhance their support for its work;
5. Expresses deep concern that the ongoing adverse impact of the world financial and economic crisis,
volatile energy and food prices and food insecurity and the challenges posed by climate change, as well as the lack
of results so far in the multilateral trade negotiations, have negative implications for social development;
6. Stresses the importance of the policy space of national Governments, in particular in the areas of social
expenditure and social protection programmes, and calls upon international financial institutions and donors to
support developing countries in achieving their social development, in line with their national priorities and
strategies by, among other things, providing debt relief;
7. Recognizes that the broad concept of social development affirmed by the World Summit for Social
Development and the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly has not been fully implemented in
national and international policymaking and that, although poverty eradication is a central part of development
policy and discourse, further attention should be given to the other commitments agreed to at the Summit, in
particular those concerning employment and decent work and social integration, which have also suffered from a
general disconnect between economic and social policymaking;
8. Acknowledges that the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997–2006),
launched after the World Summit for Social Development, has provided the long-term vision for sustained and
concerted efforts at the national and international levels to eradicate poverty;
9. Recognizes that the implementation of the commitments made by Governments during the first Decade
has fallen short of expectations, and welcomes the proclamation of the Second United Nations Decade for the
Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017) by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/205 of
19 December 2007 in order to support, in an efficient and coordinated manner, the internationally agreed
development goals related to poverty eradication, including the Millennium Development Goals;
10. Emphasizes that the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the Millennium Summit,
the 2005 World Summit, the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals, the 2013 special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, the
International Conference on Financing for Development, in its Monterrey Consensus,32 and the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, have reinforced
the priority and urgency of poverty eradication within the United Nations development agenda;
11. Also emphasizes that poverty eradication policies should tackle poverty by addressing its root and
structural causes and manifestations, and that equity, inclusivity, the reduction of inequalities and the empowerment
of the poor need to be incorporated into those policies;

_______________
31

A/68/174.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

32

498

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Reaffirms that each country has the primary responsibility for its own economic and social development
and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized, and underlines the
importance of adopting effective measures, including new financial mechanisms, as appropriate, to support the
efforts of developing countries to achieve sustained economic growth, sustainable development, poverty eradication
and the strengthening of their democratic systems;
13. Stresses that an enabling environment is a critical precondition for achieving equity and social
development and that, while economic growth is essential, entrenched inequality and marginalization are an
obstacle to the broad-based and sustained growth required for sustainable, inclusive and people-centred
development, and recognizes the need to balance and ensure complementarity between measures to achieve growth
and measures to achieve economic and social equity and inclusion in order for there to be an impact on overall
poverty levels;
14. Also stresses that stability in global financial systems and corporate social responsibility and
accountability, as well as national economic policies that have an impact on other stakeholders, are essential in
creating an enabling international environment to promote economic growth and social development;
15. Recognizes the need to promote respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms in order to
address the most pressing social needs of people living in poverty, including through the design and development of
appropriate mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
16. Reaffirms the commitment to gender equality and the empowerment of women, as well as to the
mainstreaming of a gender perspective into all development efforts, recognizing that they are critical for achieving
sustainable development and for efforts to combat hunger and malnutrition, poverty and disease and to strengthen
policies and programmes that improve, ensure and broaden the full participation of women in all spheres of
political, economic, social and cultural life, as equal partners, and to improve their access to all resources needed for
the full exercise of all their human rights and fundamental freedoms by removing persistent barriers, including
ensuring equal access to full and productive employment and decent work for all, as well as strengthening their
economic independence;
17. Encourages Governments to promote effective participation of people in civic, social, economic and
political activities, as well as in the planning and implementation of social integration policies and strategies, in
order to better achieve the goals of poverty eradication, full employment and decent work and social integration;
18. Reaffirms the commitment to promote opportunities for full, freely chosen and productive employment,
including for the most disadvantaged, as well as decent work for all, including respect for fundamental principles
and rights at work, also reaffirms that there is an urgent need to create an environment at the national and
international levels that is conducive to the attainment of full and productive employment and decent work for all as
a foundation for sustainable development, that an environment that supports investment, growth and
entrepreneurship is essential to the creation of new job opportunities and that human resources development
strategies should be premised on national development objectives that ensure a strong link between education,
health, training and employment, help to maintain a productive and competitive workforce and are responsive to the
needs of the economy, and further reaffirms that opportunities for men and women to obtain productive work in
conditions of freedom, equity, security and human dignity are essential to ensuring the eradication of hunger and
poverty, the improvement of economic and social well-being for all, the achievement of sustained economic growth
and sustainable development of all nations and a fully inclusive and equitable globalization;
19. Stresses the importance of removing obstacles to the realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination, in particular of peoples living under colonial or other forms of alien domination or foreign
occupation, which adversely affect their social and economic development, including their exclusion from labour
markets;
20. Reaffirms the need to address all forms of violence in its many manifestations, including domestic
violence, particularly against women, children, older persons and persons with disabilities, and discrimination,
including xenophobia, recognizes that violence increases challenges to States and societies in the achievement of
poverty eradication, full and productive employment and decent work for all and social integration, and further
recognizes that terrorism, trafficking in arms, organized crime, trafficking in persons, money-laundering, ethnic and
religious conflict, civil war, politically motivated killing and genocide present fundamental threats to societies and
pose increasing challenges to States and societies in the attainment of conditions conducive to social development,
499

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and that they further present urgent and compelling reasons for action by Governments individually and, as
appropriate, jointly to foster social cohesion while recognizing, protecting and valuing diversity;
21. Requests the United Nations funds, programmes and agencies to mainstream the goal of full and
productive employment and decent work for all into their policies, programmes and activities, as well as to support
efforts of Member States aimed at achieving this objective, and invites financial institutions to support efforts in
this regard;
22. Recognizes that promoting full employment and decent work for all also requires investing in education,
training and skills development for women and men, and girls and boys, strengthening social protection and health
systems and applying international labour standards, and urges States and, as appropriate, the relevant entities of the
United Nations system and international and regional organizations, within their respective mandates, as well as
civil society, the private sector, employer organizations, trade unions, the media and other relevant actors, to
continue to develop and strengthen policies, strategies and programmes to enhance, in particular, the employability
of women and youth and to ensure their access to full and productive employment and decent work for all,
including by improving access to formal and non-formal education, skills development and vocational training,
lifelong learning and retraining and long-distance education, inter alia, in information and communications
technology and entrepreneurial skills, particularly in developing countries, including with a view to supporting the
economic empowerment of women in the different stages of their lives;
23. Also recognizes that full and productive employment and decent work for all, which encompass social
protection, fundamental principles and rights at work, tripartism and social dialogue, are key elements of sustainable
development for all countries and are therefore an important objective of international cooperation, and supports the
promotion of innovative approaches in the design and implementation of employment policies and programmes for
all, including the long-term unemployed;
24. Encourages States to design and implement policies and strategies for poverty eradication, full
employment and decent work for all, including the creation of full and productive employment that is appropriately
and adequately remunerated, as well as policies and strategies for social integration that promote gender equality
and the empowerment of women and address the specific needs of social groups such as young people, persons with
disabilities, older persons, migrants and indigenous peoples, taking into account the concerns of those groups in the
planning, implementation and evaluation of development programmes and policies;
25. Stresses the need to allocate adequate resources for the elimination of all forms of discrimination against
women in the workplace, including unequal access to labour market participation and wage inequalities, as well as
reconciliation of work and private life for both women and men;
26. Acknowledges the important nexus between international migration and social development, and stresses
the importance of effectively enforcing labour laws with regard to migrant workers’ labour relations and working
conditions, inter alia, those related to their remuneration and conditions of health, safety at work and the right to
freedom of association;
27. Recognizes the responsibility of Governments to urgently and significantly scale up efforts to accelerate
the transition towards universal access to affordable and quality health-care services;
28. Acknowledges that universal health coverage implies that all people have access, without discrimination,
to nationally determined sets of needed promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative basic health services and
essential, safe, affordable, effective and quality medicines, while ensuring that the use of these services does not
expose the users to financial hardship;
29. Recognizes that, since the convening of the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen in
1995, advances have been made in addressing and promoting social integration, including through the adoption of
the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002,33 the World Programme of Action for Youth,34 the
_______________
33
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex II.
34
Resolution 50/81, annex, and resolution 62/126, annex.

500

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,35 the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples36 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action;37
30. Stresses that the benefits of economic growth should be inclusive and distributed more equitably and
that, in order to close the gap of inequality and avoid any further deepening of inequality, comprehensive social
policies and programmes, including appropriate social transfer and job creation programmes and social protection
systems, are needed;
31. Recognizes the importance of providing social protection schemes for the formal and informal economy
as instruments for achieving equity, inclusion and stability and cohesion of societies, and emphasizes the importance
of supporting national efforts aimed at bringing informal workers into the formal economy;
32. Stresses that poverty eradication policies should, inter alia, ensure that people living in poverty have
access to education, health, water and sanitation and other public and social services, as well as access to productive
resources, including credit, land, training, technology, knowledge and information, and ensure that citizens and local
communities participate in decision-making on social development policies and programmes in this regard;
33. Recognizes that the social integration of people living in poverty should encompass addressing and
meeting their basic human needs, including nutrition, health, water, sanitation, housing and access to education and
employment, through integrated development strategies;
34. Reaffirms that social integration policies should seek to reduce inequalities, promote access to basic
social services, education for all and health care, eliminate discrimination, increase the participation and integration
of social groups, particularly young people, older persons and persons with disabilities, and address the challenges
posed to social development by globalization and market driven reforms in order for all people in all countries to
benefit from globalization;
35. Urges Governments, with the cooperation of relevant entities, to develop systems of social protection
that support labour market participation and address and reduce inequality and social exclusion and to extend or
broaden, as appropriate, their effectiveness and coverage, including for workers in the informal economy, invites the
International Labour Organization to strengthen its social protection strategies and policies on extending social
security coverage, urges Governments, while taking account of national circumstances, to focus on the needs of
those living in, or vulnerable to, poverty and to give particular consideration to universal access to basic social
security systems, including the implementation of social protection floors, which can provide a systemic base upon
which to address poverty and vulnerability, and in this regard takes note of the International Labour Organization
recommendation on social protection floors;
36. Requests the United Nations system to continue to support national efforts of Member States to achieve
inclusive social development in a coherent and coordinated manner;
37. Reaffirms the commitment to promote the rights of indigenous peoples in the areas of education,
employment, housing, sanitation, health and social security, and notes the attention paid to those areas in the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples;
38. Recognizes the need to formulate social development policies in an integral, articulated and participative
manner, recognizing poverty as a multidimensional phenomenon, calls for interlinked public policies on this matter,
and underlines the need for public policies to be included in a comprehensive development and well-being strategy;
39. Acknowledges the role that the public sector can play as an employer and its importance in developing
an environment that enables the effective generation of full and productive employment and decent work for all;
40. Also acknowledges the vital role that the private sector can play in generating new investments,
employment and financing for development and in advancing efforts towards full employment and decent work for
all, and encourages the private sector, including small and medium-sized enterprises and cooperatives, to contribute
_______________
35

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
Resolution 61/295, annex.
37
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
36

501

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to decent work for all and job creation for both women and men, and particularly for young people, including
through partnerships with Governments, the United Nations system, civil society and academia;
41. Recognizes that steps should be taken to anticipate and offset the negative social and economic
consequences of globalization, giving priority to agricultural and non-farm sectors, and to maximize its benefits for
poor people living and working in rural areas, while paying special attention to the development of microenterprises
and small and medium-sized enterprises, particularly in rural areas, as well as subsistence economies, to secure their
safe interaction with larger economies;
42. Stresses that more concerted efforts are required to boost smallholder productivity in a sustainable
manner, including scaling up public investments in agriculture, attracting responsible private investment in
agriculture, improving the quality and quantity of rural extension services and ensuring that smallholder farmers, in
particular women, have access to the necessary resources, assets and markets;
43. Recognizes the need to pay necessary attention to the social development of people in urban areas,
especially the urban poor;
44. Also recognizes the need to give priority to investing in and further contributing to sustainable
development, including sustainable agricultural development, and a financial infrastructure that provides access to a
variety of sustainable products and services for microenterprises, small and medium-sized enterprises and
entrepreneurship cooperatives and other forms of social enterprises, and the participation and entrepreneurship of
women as means to promote full and productive employment and decent work for all;
45. Reaffirms the commitments made in respect of meeting the special needs of Africa at the 2005 World
Summit,38 underlines the call of the Economic and Social Council for enhanced coordination within the United
Nations system and the ongoing efforts to harmonize the current initiatives on Africa, and requests the Commission
for Social Development to continue to give due prominence in its work to the social dimensions of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development;39
46. Also reaffirms, in this context, that international cooperation has an essential role in assisting developing
countries, including the least developed countries, in strengthening their human, institutional and technological
capacity;
47. Stresses that the international community shall enhance its efforts to create an enabling environment for
social development and poverty eradication through increasing market access for developing countries, technology
transfer on mutually agreed terms, financial aid and a comprehensive solution to the external debt problem;
48. Also stresses that international trade and stable financial systems can be effective tools to create
favourable conditions for the development of all countries and that trade barriers and some trading practices
continue to have negative effects on employment growth, particularly in developing countries;
49. Acknowledges that good governance and the rule of law at the national and international levels are
essential for sustained economic growth, sustainable development and the eradication of poverty, hunger and
malnutrition;
50. Underlines the fact that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments is crucial,
including the commitments by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national
product for official development assistance to developing countries by 2015 and the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of
gross national product for official development assistance to the least developed countries, and urges developed
countries that have not yet done so to fulfil their commitments for official development assistance to developing
countries;
51. Stresses the essential role that official development assistance plays in complementing, leveraging and
sustaining financing for development efforts in developing countries and in facilitating the achievement of
development objectives, including the internationally agreed development goals, in particular the Millennium
_______________
38
39

502

Resolution 60/1, para. 68.
A/57/304, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Development Goals, and welcomes steps to improve the effectiveness and quality of aid based on the fundamental
principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization, managing for results and mutual accountability;
52. Urges Member States and the international community to fulfil all their commitments to meet the
demands for social development, including social services and assistance, that have arisen from the global financial
and economic crisis, which particularly affects the poorest and most vulnerable;
53. Encourages Member States to reflect in their development strategies current trends in global growth,
including nascent recoveries in some economies that offer new opportunities for trade, investment and growth;
54. Welcomes the contribution to the mobilization of resources for social development by the initiatives
taken on a voluntary basis by groups of Member States based on innovative financing mechanisms, including those
that aim to provide further drug access at affordable prices to developing countries on a sustainable and predictable
basis, such as the International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID, as well as other initiatives such as the
International Finance Facility for Immunization and the Advance Market Commitments for Vaccines, and notes the
New York Declaration of 20 September 2004, which launched the Action against Hunger and Poverty initiative and
called for further attention to raising funds urgently needed to help to meet the Millennium Development Goals and
to complement and ensure the long-term stability and predictability of foreign aid;
55. Reaffirms that social development requires the active involvement of all actors in the development
process, including civil society organizations, corporations and small businesses, and that partnerships among all
relevant actors are increasingly becoming part of national and international cooperation for social development, also
reaffirms that, within countries, partnerships among the Government, civil society and the private sector can
contribute effectively to the achievement of social development goals, and acknowledges the importance of efforts
to promote the exchange of information and knowledge on decent work for all and job creation, including green
jobs initiatives and related skills, and to facilitate the integration of relevant data into national economic and
employment policies;
56. Underlines the responsibility of the private sector, at both the national and the international levels,
including small and large companies and transnational corporations, regarding not only the economic and financial
implications but also the development, social, gender and environmental implications of their activities, their
obligations towards their workers and their contributions to achieving sustainable development, including social
development, and emphasizes the need to take concrete actions on corporate responsibility and accountability,
including through the participation of all relevant stakeholders, inter alia, for the prevention or prosecution of
corruption;
57. Stresses the importance of promoting corporate social responsibility and accountability, encourages
responsible business practices, such as those promoted by the Global Compact and the Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,40
invites the private sector to take into account not only the economic and financial implications but also the
development, social, human rights, gender and environmental implications of its undertakings, and underlines the
importance of the International Labour Organization Tripartite Declaration of Principles concerning Multinational
Enterprises and Social Policy;
58. Encourages Member States to give appropriate consideration to poverty eradication, social integration,
full employment and decent work for all in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
59. Underlines the importance of the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen from 6
to 12 March 1995, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the consideration of
an appropriate celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the World Summit, in 2015, in the context of
coordinated and integrated follow-up to the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields;
60. Invites the Secretary-General, the Economic and Social Council, the regional commissions, the relevant
specialized agencies, the funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental forums,
within their respective mandates, to continue to integrate into their work programmes and give priority attention to
_______________
40

A/HRC/17/31, annex.

503

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the Copenhagen commitments and the Declaration on the tenth anniversary of the World Summit for Social
Development,41 to continue to be actively involved in their follow-up and to monitor the achievement of those
commitments and undertakings;
61. Invites the Commission for Social Development to emphasize, in its review of the implementation of the
Copenhagen Declaration and the Programme of Action, the increased exchange of national, regional and
international experiences, the focused and interactive dialogues among experts and practitioners and the sharing of
best practices and lessons learned, and to engage actively in the discussions on the post-2015 development agenda;
62. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Social
development”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the question to the Assembly at that session.
RESOLUTION 68/136
A/RE S/68 /136

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/448, para. 34)42

68/136. Preparations for and observance of the twentieth anniversary of the International Year of the
Family
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/82 of 8 December 1989, 50/142 of 21 December 1995, 52/81 of 12 December
1997, 54/124 of 17 December 1999, 56/113 of 19 December 2001, 57/164 of 18 December 2002, 58/15 of
3 December 2003, 59/111 of 6 December 2004, 59/147 of 20 December 2004, 60/133 of 16 December 2005,
62/129 of 18 December 2007, 64/133 of 18 December 2009, 66/126 of 19 December 2011 and 67/142 of
20 December 2012 concerning the proclamation of, preparations for and observance of the International Year of the
Family and its tenth and twentieth anniversaries,
Recognizing that the preparations for and observance of the twentieth anniversary of the International Year in
2014 provide a useful opportunity to draw further attention to the objectives of the International Year for increasing
cooperation at all levels on family issues and for undertaking concerted actions to strengthen family-centred policies
and programmes as part of an integrated comprehensive approach to development,
Noting that the family-related provisions of the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits of the 1990s and their follow-up processes continue to provide policy guidance on ways to strengthen
family-centred components of policies and programmes as part of an integrated comprehensive approach to
development,
Noting also the importance of designing, implementing and monitoring family-oriented policies, especially in
the areas of poverty eradication, full employment and decent work, work-family balance, social integration and
intergenerational solidarity,
Recognizing that the family has the primary responsibility for the nurturing and protection of children and that
children, for the full and harmonious development of their personality, should grow up in a family environment and
in an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding,
Recognizing also that family policies are most effective when targeting the family unit and its dynamic as a
whole, including taking into consideration the needs of its members, and noting that family-oriented policies aim in
particular at strengthening, and should be designed to enhance, a household’s capacity to escape poverty, ensure
financial independence and support work-family balance to help manage family functions and foster child
development,
_______________
41

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 6 (E/2005/26), chap. I, sect. A; see also Economic and
Social Council decision 2005/234.
42
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Fiji (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Uzbekistan.

504

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Cognizant of the need for continued inter-agency and regional cooperation on family issues in order to
generate greater awareness of this subject among the governing bodies of the United Nations system,
Convinced that civil society, including research and academic institutions, has a pivotal role in advocacy,
promotion, research and policymaking in respect of family policy development and capacity-building,
Noting with satisfaction the close collaboration of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
Secretariat with intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations active in the family field, as well as its
research efforts and preparations for the twentieth anniversary of the International Year,
Encouraging the active role of the regional commissions and organizations, and acknowledging the
participation of civil society in the preparatory process for the twentieth anniversary of the International Year,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General,43
1. Encourages Governments to continue to make every possible effort to realize the objectives of the
International Year of the Family and its follow-up processes and to integrate a family perspective into national
policymaking;
2. Decides to devote one plenary meeting during the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, in 2014,
to the observance of the twentieth anniversary of the International Year, in order to discuss the role of familyoriented policies in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
3. Invites Governments and regional intergovernmental entities to provide for more systematic national and
regional data on family well-being and to identify and ensure support for constructive family policy developments,
including the exchange of information on good policies and practices;
4. Urges Member States to view 2014 as a target year by which concrete efforts will be made to
improve family well-being through the implementation of effective national policies, strategies and
programmes and to give due consideration to advancing family policy development in the elaboration of the
post-2015 development agenda;
5. Encourages Member States to promote policies that strengthen social integration and intergenerational
solidarity through investment in family-centred support programmes, including social protection assistance, the
prevention of the abuse of older persons, the protection of persons with disabilities, including in particular children
with disabilities, and investments in cross-generational facilities and intergenerational learning, and volunteer
programmes for youth, older persons, mentoring and job-sharing;
6. Also encourages Member States to continue their efforts to develop appropriate policies and
programmes that address family poverty, social exclusion, domestic violence, work-family balance and
intergenerational issues and to share good practices in those areas;
7. Further encourages Member States to promote the delivery of family-centred benefits, such as housing
assistance, child benefits, old-age pensions, cash transfers, social protection, social transfer programmes and other
relevant measures to reduce family poverty and prevent the intergenerational transfer of poverty;
8. Encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant stakeholders and in accordance with national
plans and policies, to strengthen provisions for parental leave, extend flexible working arrangements for employees
with family responsibilities, promote gender equality and the empowerment of women, enhance paternal
involvement in family responsibilities and support a wide range of quality childcare arrangements, including
investing in quality early childhood care and education, in order to improve work-family balance;
9. Urges Member States to create a conducive environment to strengthen and support all families,
recognizing that equality between women and men and respect for all the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all family members are essential to family well-being and to society at large, noting the importance of
reconciliation of work and family life and recognizing the principle of shared parental responsibility for the
upbringing and development of the child;
10. Invites Governments to continue to develop strategies and programmes aimed at strengthening national
capacities to address national priorities relating to family issues;
_______________
43

A/68/61-E/2013/3.

505

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

11. Invites Member States to consider undertaking activities in preparation for the twentieth anniversary of
the International Year at the national level;
12. Invites Member States, United Nations organizations and bodies, regional commissions, civil society
organizations and academic institutions to continue providing information on their activities in support of the
objectives of and preparations for the twentieth anniversary of the International Year and to share good practices and
data on family policy development;
13. Invites Member States, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations and academic
institutions to support, as appropriate, the preparations for regional meetings in observance of the twentieth
anniversary of the International Year;
14. Encourages Governments to support the United Nations Trust Fund on Family Activities to enable the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat to continue research activities and provide assistance
to countries, upon their request;
15. Recommends that United Nations organizations and bodies, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, research and academic institutions and the private sector play a supportive role in promoting the
twentieth anniversary of the International Year;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session,
through the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the
present resolution and on the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the International Year in 2014 at all levels;
17. Decides to consider the topic “Preparations for and observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family” at its sixty-ninth session under the sub-item entitled “Social development,
including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family” of
the item entitled “Social development”.
RESOLUTION 68/137
A/RE S/68 /137

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/449 and Corr.1, para. 21)44

68/137. Violence against women migrant workers
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on violence against women migrant workers and those adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women, the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice, and the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women,45
Reaffirming the provisions concerning women migrant workers contained in the outcome documents of the
World Conference on Human Rights,46 the International Conference on Population and Development,47 the Fourth
World Conference on Women48 and the World Summit for Social Development49 and their reviews,
_______________
44

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mexico, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Timor-Leste, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay and Zambia.
45
Resolution 48/104.
46
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
47
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
48
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
49
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

506

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also the provisions concerning women migrants contained in the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,50 and calling upon States to promote and protect effectively the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants regardless of migration status, especially those of women and
children, and to encourage their active participation, as appropriate, in processes that contribute to decision-making,
planning and implementation of policies and programmes for sustainable development at all levels,
Acknowledging the role of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), including in supporting national efforts, to increase women’s access to economic opportunities,
including for women migrant workers, and to end violence against them, in the light of the UN-Women strategic
plan, 2014–2017,51 which has among its six goals increasing women’s access to economic opportunities, and
preventing violence against women and girls and expanding access to services for survivors, and acknowledging the
policy and programmatic work of UN-Women on empowering women migrant workers,
Welcoming the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women during its fiftyseventh session,52 and taking note, in particular, of the commitment, as appropriate, to further adopt and implement
measures to ensure the social and legal inclusion and protection of women migrants, including women migrant
workers in countries of origin, transit and destination, promote and protect the full realization of their human rights
and their protection against violence and exploitation, implement gender-sensitive policies and programmes for
women migrant workers and provide safe and legal channels that recognize their skills and education, provide fair
labour conditions and, as appropriate, facilitate their productive employment and decent work as well as integration
into the labour force,
Recalling the declaration of the United Nations High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development,53 held on 3 and 4 October 2013, which reaffirmed the need to promote and protect effectively the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of
women and children, and to address international migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation
and dialogue and through a comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of
countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding
approaches that might aggravate their vulnerability,
Recalling also that the declaration recognized that women and girls account for almost half of all international
migrants at the global level and the need to address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and
girls by, inter alia, incorporating a gender perspective into policies and strengthening national laws, institutions and
programmes to combat gender-based violence, including trafficking in persons and discrimination against them, and
emphasized in this regard the need to establish appropriate measures for the protection of women migrant workers
in all sectors, including those involved in domestic work,
Welcoming the adoption of Convention No. 189 and Recommendation No. 201 on decent work for domestic
workers by the International Labour Conference on 16 June 2011, at its 100th session, and the entry of the
Convention into force on 5 September 2013, and inviting States to consider ratifying it, encouraging States parties to
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women54 to take note of and consider
general recommendation No. 26 on women migrant workers adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women in November 2008,55 and encouraging States parties to the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families56 to take note of and
consider general comment No. 1 on migrant domestic workers adopted by the Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in December 2010,57 acknowledging that they are
complementary and mutually reinforcing,
_______________
50

Resolution 66/288, annex.
UNW/2013/6.
52
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
53
Resolution 68/4.
54
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
55
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/64/38), part one, annex I, decision 42/I.
56
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
57
CMW/C/GC/1.
51

507

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the increasing participation of women in international migration, driven in large part by
socioeconomic factors, and that this feminization of migration requires greater gender sensitivity in all policies and
efforts related to the subject of international migration,
Stressing the shared responsibility of and need for cooperation among all stakeholders, in particular countries
of origin, transit and destination, relevant regional and international organizations, the private sector and civil
society, in promoting an environment that prevents and addresses violence against women migrant workers,
including in the context of discrimination, through targeted measures, and in this regard recognizing the importance
of joint and collaborative approaches and strategies at the national, bilateral, regional and international levels,
Recognizing that women migrant workers are important contributors to social and economic development
through the economic and social impacts, as a result of their work, on countries of origin and destination, and
underlining the value and dignity of their labour, including the labour of domestic workers,
Recognizing also the particular vulnerability and needs of women and their children at all stages of the
migration process, extending from the moment of deciding to migrate, and including transit, engagement in formal
and informal employment and integration into the host society, as well as during their return to and reintegration in
their countries of origin,
Expressing deep concern at the continuing reports of grave abuses and violence committed against migrant
women and girls, including gender-based violence, sexual violence, domestic and family violence, racist and
xenophobic acts, discrimination, abusive labour practices, exploitative conditions of work and contemporary forms
of slavery, inter alia, all forms of forced labour and trafficking in persons,
Recognizing that the intersection of, inter alia, gender, age, class, race and ethnic discrimination and
stereotypes can compound the discrimination faced by women migrant workers and that gender-based violence is a
form of discrimination,
Reaffirming the commitment to protect and promote the human rights of all women, including, without
discrimination, indigenous women who migrate for work, and in this regard noting the attention paid in the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 58 to the elimination of all forms of violence and
discrimination against indigenous women, as appropriate,
Noting that the priority theme of the fifty-eighth session of the Commission on the Status of Women will be
“Challenges and achievements in the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals for women and girls”
and that migration can enable equitable, inclusive and sustainable growth and human development for countries of
origin and destination, migrants and their families, and in this regard recognizing the potential role and contribution
of women migrant workers towards accelerating progress in the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals and attaining equitable, inclusive and sustainable growth and human development,
Concerned that many migrant women who are employed in the informal economy and in less skilled work are
especially vulnerable to abuse and exploitation, underlining in this regard the obligation of States to protect the
human rights of migrants so as to prevent and address abuse and exploitation, and observing with concern that many
women migrant workers take on jobs for which they may be overqualified and in which, at the same time, they may
be more vulnerable because of poor pay and inadequate social protection,
Emphasizing the need for objective, comprehensive and broad-based information, including sex- and agedisaggregated data and statistics, and gender-sensitive indicators for research and analysis, and a wide exchange of
experience and lessons learned by individual Member States and civil society in the formulation of targeted policies
and concrete strategies to specifically address violence against women migrant workers, including in the context of
discrimination,
Realizing that the movement of a significant number of women migrant workers may be facilitated and made
possible by means of fraudulent or irregular documentation and sham marriages with the object of migration, that
this may be facilitated through, inter alia, the Internet and that those women migrant workers are more vulnerable to
abuse and exploitation,
_______________
58

508

Resolution 61/295, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the importance of exploring the link between migration and trafficking in persons in order to
further efforts towards protecting women migrant workers from violence, discrimination, exploitation and abuse,
Encouraged by some measures adopted by some countries of destination to alleviate the plight of women
migrant workers residing in their areas of jurisdiction and to promote access to justice, such as the establishment of
gender-sensitive protection mechanisms for migrant workers, facilitating their access to mechanisms for reporting
complaints or providing assistance during legal proceedings,
Underlining the important role of relevant United Nations treaty bodies in monitoring the implementation of
human rights conventions and of the relevant special procedures, within their respective mandates, in addressing the
problem of violence against women migrant workers and in protecting and promoting their human rights and
welfare,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;59

2. Invites Member States to consider ratifying relevant International Labour Organization conventions,
including Convention No. 189 on decent work for domestic workers, and to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families,56 the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,60 the Protocol
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime,61 the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons62 and the 1961
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness,63 as well as all other human rights treaties that contribute to the
protection of the rights of women migrant workers, and also encourages Member States to implement the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons;64
3. Takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights of
migrants submitted to the Council at its seventeenth and twentieth sessions,65 in particular their elaboration of the
vulnerabilities and challenges faced by irregular migrants, including negative public perceptions and limited access
to protection, assistance and justice;
4. Encourages all United Nations special rapporteurs on human rights whose mandates touch on the issues
of violence against women migrant workers to improve the collection of information on and analysis of those areas
within their mandates relating to the current challenges facing women migrant workers, and also encourages
Governments to cooperate with the special rapporteurs in this regard;
5. Calls upon all Governments to incorporate a human rights, gender-sensitive and people-centred
perspective in legislation, policies and programmes on international migration and on labour and employment,
consistent with their human rights obligations and commitments under human rights instruments, for the prevention
of and protection of migrant women against violence and discrimination, exploitation and abuse, to take effective
measures to ensure that such migration and labour policies do not reinforce discrimination, and, where necessary, to
conduct impact assessment studies of such legislation, policies and programmes in order to identify the impact of
measures taken and the results achieved in regard to women migrant workers;
6. Calls upon Governments to adopt or strengthen measures to protect the human rights of women migrant
workers, including domestic workers, regardless of their immigration status, including in policies that regulate the
recruitment and deployment of women migrant workers, to consider expanding dialogue among States on devising
innovative methods to promote legal channels of migration, inter alia, in order to deter irregular migration, to
consider incorporating a gender perspective into immigration laws in order to prevent discrimination and violence
_______________
59

A/68/178.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
61
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
62
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
63
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
64
Resolution 64/293.
65
A/HRC/17/33 and A/HRC/20/24.
60

509

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

against women, including in independent, circular and temporary migration, and to consider permitting, in
accordance with national legislation, women migrant workers who are victims of violence to apply for residency
permits independently of abusive employers or spouses, and to eliminate abusive sponsorship systems;
7. Urges Governments to enhance bilateral, regional, interregional and international cooperation to address
violence against women migrant workers, fully respecting international law, including international human rights
law, as well as to strengthen efforts to reduce the vulnerability of women migrant workers by facilitating effective
access to justice and effective action in the areas of law enforcement, prosecution, prevention, capacity-building and
victim protection and support, by exchanging information and good practices in combating violence and
discrimination against women migrant workers and by fostering sustainable development alternatives to migration
in countries of origin;
8. Also urges Governments to take into account the best interests of the child by adopting or strengthening
measures to promote and protect the human rights of migrant girls, including unaccompanied girls, regardless of
their immigration status, so as to prevent labour and economic exploitation, discrimination, sexual harassment,
violence and sexual abuse in the workplace, including in domestic work;
9. Further urges Governments to strongly encourage all stakeholders, especially the private sector,
including employment agencies involved in recruiting women migrant workers, to strengthen the focus on and
funding support for the prevention of violence against women migrant workers, in particular by promoting the
access of women to meaningful and gender-sensitive information and education on, inter alia, the costs and benefits
of migration, rights and benefits to which they are entitled in the countries of origin and employment, overall
conditions in countries of employment and procedures for legal migration, as well as to ensure that laws and policies
governing recruiters, employers and intermediaries promote adherence to and respect for the human rights of
migrant workers, particularly women;
10. Encourages all States to remove obstacles that may prevent the transparent, safe, unrestricted and
expeditious transfer of remittances of migrants to their countries of origin or to any other countries, including, where
appropriate, by reducing transaction costs and implementing woman-friendly remittance transfer, savings and
investment schemes, including diaspora investment schemes, in conformity with applicable national legislation, and
to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems that may impede women migrant workers’ access to
and management of their economic resources;
11. Calls upon States to address the structural and underlying causes of violence against women migrant
workers through education, dissemination of information and awareness-raising, by promoting their empowerment
and, where relevant, their integration into the formal economy, in particular in economic decision-making, and by
promoting their participation in public life, as appropriate;
12. Calls upon Governments to recognize the right of women migrant workers, regardless of their
immigration status, to have access to emergency health care, and in this regard to ensure that women migrant
workers are not discriminated against on the grounds of pregnancy and childbirth and, in accordance with national
legislation, to address the vulnerabilities to HIV experienced by migrant populations and support their access to HIV
prevention, treatment, care and support;
13. Urges States that have not yet done so to adopt and implement legislation and policies that protect all
women migrant workers, including those in domestic service, to include therein, and improve where necessary,
relevant monitoring and inspection measures in line with applicable International Labour Organization
conventions and other instruments to ensure compliance with international obligations and to grant women
migrant workers in domestic service access to gender-sensitive, transparent mechanisms for bringing complaints
against employers, including terminating their contracts in case of labour and economic exploitation,
discrimination, sexual harassment, violence and sexual abuse in the workplace, while stressing that such
instruments should not punish women migrant workers, and calls upon States to promptly investigate and punish
all violations of their rights;
14. Calls upon Governments, in cooperation with international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and other stakeholders, to provide women migrant workers who are victims of
violence, irrespective of their immigration status, in line with domestic legislation, with the full range of emergency
assistance and protection and, to the extent possible, gender-sensitive services that are culturally and linguistically
appropriate, in accordance with relevant international human rights instruments and applicable conventions;
510

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

15. Also calls upon Governments to ensure that legislative provisions and judicial processes are in place for
women’s access to justice, to enhance, develop or maintain legal frameworks and specific gender-sensitive policies
to explicitly meet the needs and rights of women migrant workers and to take appropriate steps to reform existing
legislation and policies to capture their needs and protect their rights;
16. Further calls upon Governments, in particular those of the countries of origin and destination, to put in
place penal and criminal sanctions, in order to punish perpetrators of violence against women migrant workers and
intermediaries, and gender-sensitive redress and justice mechanisms that victims can access effectively and that
allow their views and concerns to be presented and considered at appropriate stages of proceedings, including other
measures that will allow victims to be present during the judicial process, when possible, and to protect women
migrant workers who are victims of violence from revictimization, including by authorities;
17. Urges all States to adopt effective measures to put an end to the arbitrary arrest and detention of women
migrant workers and to take action to prevent and punish any form of illegal deprivation of the liberty of women
migrant workers by individuals or groups;
18. Encourages Governments to formulate and implement training programmes for their law enforcement
officials, immigration officers and border officials, diplomatic and consular officials, judiciary, prosecutors, public
sector medical staff and other service providers, with a view to sensitizing those public sector workers to the issue of
violence against women migrant workers and imparting to them the necessary skills and attitude to ensure the
delivery of proper, professional and gender-sensitive interventions;
19. Also encourages Governments to promote coherence between migration, labour and anti-trafficking
policies and programmes concerning women migrant workers, based on a human rights, gender-sensitive and
people-centred perspective, to ensure that the human rights of women migrant workers are protected throughout the
migration process and to enhance efforts to prevent violence against women migrant workers, prosecute perpetrators
and protect and support victims and their families;
20. Calls upon States, in accordance with the provisions of article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations,66 to ensure that, if a woman migrant worker is arrested or committed to prison or custody pending trial, or
is detained in any other manner, the competent authorities respect her freedom to communicate with and have
access to the consular officials of the country of her nationality and, in this regard, to inform without delay, if that
woman migrant worker so requests, the consular post of her State of nationality;
21. Invites the United Nations system and other concerned intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to cooperate with Governments, within existing resources, towards a better understanding of the issues
concerning women and international migration, and to improve the collection, dissemination and analysis of sex- and
age-disaggregated data and information in order to assist in the formulation of migration and labour policies that are,
inter alia, gender-sensitive and that protect human rights, as well as to aid in policy assessment and to continue to
support national efforts to address violence against women migrant workers in a coordinated way that ensures effective
implementation, enhances their impact and strengthens positive outcomes for women migrant workers;
22. Encourages Governments to formulate national policies concerning women migrant workers that are
based on up-to-date, relevant sex-disaggregated data and analysis, in close consultation with women migrant
workers and relevant stakeholders throughout the policy process, and also encourages Governments to ensure that
this process is adequately resourced and that the resulting policies have measurable targets and indicators, timetables
and monitoring and accountability measures, in particular for employment agencies, employers and public officials,
and provide for impact assessments and ensure multi-sector coordination within and between countries of origin,
transit and destination through appropriate mechanisms;
23. Encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of the countries of origin, transit and
destination, to avail themselves of the expertise of the United Nations, including the Statistics Division of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), to develop and enhance appropriate sexdisaggregated national data collection, analysis and dissemination methodologies that will generate
_______________
66

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

511

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

comparable data, and tracking and reporting systems on violence against women migrant workers and,
wherever possible, on violations of their rights at all stages of the migration process, and:
(a) To further study the costs of violence against women, including migrant workers, to the women
themselves, their families and their communities;
(b)

To analyse the opportunities available to women migrant workers and their impact on development;

(c) To support the improvement of macrodata on remittances, for appropriate policy formulation and
implementation;
24. Requests Governments and international organizations to take appropriate measures to give due
consideration to the declaration of the United Nations High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development,53 held in New York on 3 and 4 October 2013, in order to ensure that the human rights and human
development aspects of women’s migration are adequately integrated into national, regional and international
development policy and practice, such as poverty reduction strategies and strategies aimed at accelerating progress
towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
25. Encourages the United Nations system and related entities to continue and step up their efforts and
promote partnerships with all stakeholders, including civil society organizations, and to coordinate their work in
support, as appropriate, of effective implementation of relevant international and regional instruments in order
to enhance their impact through concrete positive outcomes for the advancement of women migrant workers’ rights;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a comprehensive, analytical and thematic report to the
General Assembly at its seventieth session on the problem of violence against women migrant workers and on the
implementation of the present resolution, taking into account updated information from the organizations of the
United Nations system, in particular the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Development
Programme, UN-Women and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well as the reports of special
rapporteurs that refer to the situation of women migrant workers and other relevant sources, such as the International
Organization for Migration, including non-governmental organizations.
RESOLUTION 68/138
A/RE S/68 /138

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/449 and Corr.1, para. 21)67

68/138. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/131 of 19 December 2011,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women;68
2. Also welcomes the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its
fifty-second to fifty-fourth sessions;69
_______________
67

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
68
A/68/121.
69
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/68/38).

512

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Invites the Chair of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to address and
to engage in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth and seventieth sessions under the
item on the advancement of women;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the status of the Convention.
RESOLUTION 68/139
A/RE S/68 /139

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/449 and Corr.1, para. 21)70

68/139. Improvement of the situation of women in rural areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/129 of 19 December 2001, 58/146 of 22 December 2003, 60/138 of 16 December
2005, 62/136 of 18 December 2007, 64/140 of 18 December 2009 and 66/129 of 19 December 2011,
Affirming the obligation of all States to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
also that all forms of discrimination, including discrimination against women, are contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,71 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,72 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,72 the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,73 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,74 the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities75 and other human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions pertaining to women in rural areas contained in the outcome documents of
relevant international conferences and summits, in particular the Beijing Declaration 76 and Platform for
Action77 adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”,78
Recognizing that rural women are critical agents in poverty reduction, that they are crucial to the achievement
of food and nutrition security in poor and vulnerable households and to environmental sustainability and that, in
other ways, they are also critical to the achievement of all the Millennium Development Goals, and concerned that
rural women continue to be economically and socially disadvantaged because of their limited access to economic
resources and opportunities, their limited or lack of access to land, water and other resources, their limited or lack of
access to credit, extension services and agricultural inputs, their exclusion from planning and decision-making and
their disproportionate burden of unpaid care work,
_______________
70
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina Faso, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay and
Zimbabwe.
71
Resolution 217 A (III).
72
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
73
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
74
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
75
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
76
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
77
Ibid., annex II.
78
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.

513

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and
Forests in the Context of National Food Security79 endorsed in May 2012 by the Committee on World Food
Security, which embrace gender equality as one of the main guiding principles of implementation in order to help
address the ongoing disparities with regard to land,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;80

2. Urges Member States, in collaboration with the organizations of the United Nations system, and civil
society, as appropriate, to continue their efforts to implement the outcome of and to ensure an integrated and
coordinated follow-up to the relevant United Nations conferences and summits, including their reviews, and to
attach greater importance to the improvement of the situation of rural women, including indigenous women, in their
national, regional and global development strategies by, inter alia:
(a) Creating an enabling environment for improving the situation of rural women and ensuring systematic
attention to their needs, priorities and contributions, including through enhanced cooperation and a gender
perspective, and their full participation in the development, implementation and follow-up of macroeconomic
policies, including development policies and programmes and poverty eradication strategies, including poverty
reduction strategy papers, where they exist, based on the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”;81
(b) Pursuing the political and socioeconomic empowerment of rural women and supporting their full and
equal participation in decision-making at all levels, including through affirmative action, where appropriate, and
support for women’s and farmers’ organizations in which smallholder women farmers are members, labour unions
or other associations and civil society groups promoting rural women’s rights;
(c) Promoting consultation with and the participation of rural women, including indigenous women, women
with disabilities and older women, through their organizations and networks, in the design, development and
implementation of gender equality and rural development programmes and strategies;
(d) Ensuring that perspectives of rural women are taken into account and that they participate in the design,
implementation, follow-up and evaluation of policies and activities related to emergencies, including natural
disasters, humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction, and taking appropriate measures
to eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against rural women in this regard;
(e) Integrating a gender perspective into the design, implementation and evaluation of and follow-up to
development policies and programmes, including budget policies, paying increased attention to the needs of rural
women so as to ensure that they benefit from policies and programmes adopted in all spheres and that the
disproportionate number of rural women living in poverty is reduced;
(f) Mainstreaming gender considerations in the governance of natural resources, leveraging the
participation and influence of women in managing the sustainable use of natural resources, and enhancing the
capacities of Governments, civil society and development partners to better understand and address gender issues in
the management and governance of natural resources;
(g) Strengthening measures, including resource generation, to accelerate progress towards the achievement
of Millennium Development Goal 5 on improving maternal health by addressing the specific health and nutrition
needs of rural women and taking concrete measures to enhance and provide access to the highest attainable
standards of health for women in rural areas, as well as quality, affordable and universally accessible primary health
care and support services, including in such areas of sexual and reproductive health as prenatal and postnatal health
care, emergency obstetric care, family planning information and increasing knowledge, awareness and support for
the prevention of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, and by promoting and protecting their reproductive
rights in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development,82 the Beijing Platform for Action77 and their review outcomes;
_______________
79

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.
A/68/179.
81
Resolution 66/288, annex.
82
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
80

514

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(h) Promoting sustainable infrastructure, access to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation and safe
cooking and heating practices to improve the health and nutrition of rural women and children;
(i) Investing in and strengthening efforts to meet the basic needs of rural women, including needs relating to
their food and nutrition security and that of their families, and to promote adequate standards of living for them as
well as decent conditions for work and access to local, regional and global markets through improved availability,
access to and use of critical rural infrastructure, such as energy and transport, science and technology, local services,
capacity-building and human resources development measures and the provision of a safe and reliable water supply
and sanitation, nutritional programmes, affordable housing programmes, education and literacy programmes and
health and social support measures, including in the areas of sexual and reproductive health, reproductive rights, in
accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, the
Beijing Platform for Action and their review outcomes, HIV prevention, treatment, care, including psychosocial
aspects, and support services;
(j) Designing and implementing national policies and legal frameworks that promote and protect the
enjoyment by rural women and girls of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and creating an environment
that does not tolerate violations or abuses of their rights, including domestic violence, sexual violence and all other
forms of gender-based violence;
(k) Ensuring that the rights of older women in rural areas are taken into account with regard to their equal
access to basic social services, appropriate social protection/social security measures, equal access to and control of
economic resources and their empowerment through access to financial and infrastructure services, with special
focus on the provision of support to older women, including indigenous women, who often have access to few
resources and are more vulnerable;
(l) Valuing and supporting the critical role and contribution of rural women, including indigenous women
in rural areas, in the conservation and sustainable use of traditional crops and biodiversity for present and future
generations as an essential contribution to food and nutrition security;
(m) Promoting the rights of women and girls with disabilities in rural areas, including by ensuring access on
an equal basis to productive employment and decent work, economic and financial resources and disabilitysensitive infrastructure and services, in particular in relation to health and education, as well as by ensuring that their
priorities and needs are fully incorporated into policies and programmes, inter alia, through their participation in
decision-making processes;
(n) Developing specific assistance programmes and advisory services to promote economic skills of rural
women in banking, modern trading and financial procedures and providing microcredit and other financial and
business services to a greater number of women in rural areas, in particular female heads of households, for their
economic empowerment;
(o) Supporting women entrepreneurs and women smallholder farmers, including those in subsistence
farming, by facilitating their access to extension and financial services, agricultural inputs and land, water sanitation
and irrigation, markets and innovative technologies;
(p) Mobilizing resources, including at the national level and through official development assistance, for
increasing women’s access to existing savings and credit schemes, as well as targeted programmes that provide
women with capital, knowledge and tools that enhance their economic capacities;
(q) Ensuring and improving equal access for rural women to employment in agricultural and nonagricultural sectors, supporting and promoting opportunities in small enterprises, sustainable social enterprises and
cooperatives and improving working conditions;
(r) Investing in infrastructure and in time- and labour-saving technologies, especially in rural areas,
benefiting women and girls by reducing their burden of domestic activities, affording the opportunity for girls to
attend school and for women to engage in self-employment or to participate in the labour market;
(s) Taking steps to ensure that women’s unpaid work and contributions to on-farm and off-farm production,
including income generated in the informal sector, are recognized, supporting remunerative non-agricultural
employment of rural women, improving working conditions, increasing access to productive resources and
recognizing that women’s full integration into the formal economy is essential in order to address the structural and
underlying causes of the difficult conditions of rural women;
515

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(t) Promoting programmes and services to enable rural women and men to reconcile their work and family
responsibilities and to encourage men to share, equally with women, household, childcare and other care
responsibilities;
(u) Developing strategies to decrease women’s vulnerability to environmental factors while promoting rural
women’s role in protecting the environment;
(v) Considering the adoption, where appropriate, of national legislation to protect the knowledge,
innovations and practices of women in indigenous and local communities relating to traditional medicines,
biodiversity and indigenous technologies;
(w) Addressing the lack of timely, reliable data disaggregated by sex and age, including by intensifying
efforts to include women’s unpaid work in official statistics, and developing a systematic and comparative research
base on rural women that will inform policy and programme decisions;
(x) Strengthening the capacity of national statistical offices to collect, analyse and disseminate comparable
data disaggregated by sex and age, including on time use, and gender statistics in rural areas to serve as a basis for
gender-responsive policy design and strategy development in rural areas;
(y) Designing, revising and implementing laws to ensure that rural women are accorded full and equal
rights to own and lease land and other property, including through the equal right to inheritance, and undertaking
administrative reforms and all necessary measures to give women the same right as men to credit, capital,
appropriate technologies and access to markets and information, and to ensure their equal access to justice and legal
support;
(z) Supporting a gender-sensitive education system that considers the specific needs of rural women in
order to eliminate gender stereotypes and discriminatory tendencies affecting them, including through communitybased dialogue involving women and men and girls and boys;
(aa) Promoting education, training and relevant information programmes for rural and farming women
through the use of affordable and appropriate technologies and the mass media, and taking concrete measures to
improve rural women’s skills, productivity and employment opportunities through technical, agricultural and
vocational education and training;
3. Encourages Member States, United Nations entities and all other relevant stakeholders to promote
access to social protection for female-headed rural households;
4. Requests the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular those dealing
with issues of development, to address and support the empowerment of rural women and their specific needs in
their programmes and strategies;
5. Stresses the need to identify the best practices for ensuring that rural women have access to and full
participation in the area of information and communications technology, to address the priorities and needs of rural
women and girls as active users of information and to ensure their participation in developing and implementing
global, regional and national information and communications technology strategies, taking appropriate educational
measures to eliminate gender stereotypes regarding women in the field of technology;
6. Calls upon Member States to consider the concluding observations and recommendations of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women concerning their reports to the Committee when
formulating policies and designing programmes focused on the improvement of the situation of rural women,
including those to be developed and implemented in cooperation with relevant international organizations;
7. Invites Governments to promote the economic empowerment of rural women, including through
entrepreneurship training, and to adopt gender-responsive rural development strategies, including budget framework
and relevant assessment measures, as well as to ensure that the needs and priorities of rural women and girls are
systematically addressed and that they can effectively contribute to poverty alleviation, hunger eradication and food
and nutrition security;
8. Encourages Governments and international organizations to implement the outcome document of
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to
22 June 2012,81 with a view to accelerating progress on gender equality and women’s empowerment in rural
516

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

areas, and to ensure that the discussions concerning the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda take
into account gender equality as well as the empowerment of rural women;
9. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to give consideration to the issue of the empowerment
of rural women in a timely and appropriate manner;
10. Invites Governments, relevant international organizations and the specialized agencies to continue to
observe the International Day of Rural Women annually, on 15 October, as proclaimed by the General Assembly in
its resolution 62/136, and to address rural women’s concerns and contributions in celebrating the International Year
of Family Farming, 2014;83
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/140
A/RE S/68 /140

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/449 and Corr.1, para. 21)84

68/140. Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question, including resolution 67/148 of 20 December 2012, and
recalling also the section of resolution 64/289 of 2 July 2010 entitled “Strengthening the institutional arrangements
for support of gender equality and the empowerment of women”,
Deeply convinced that the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action85 and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”,86 are important contributions to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of
women and must be translated into effective action by all States, the United Nations system and other organizations
concerned,
Reaffirming the commitments to gender equality and the advancement of women made at the Millennium
Summit,87 the 2005 World Summit,88 the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium
Development Goals,89 the special event of the General Assembly to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals90 and other major United Nations summits, conferences and special sessions, and
reaffirming also that their full, effective and accelerated implementation is integral to achieving the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Welcoming progress made towards achieving gender equality, but stressing that challenges and obstacles
remain in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twentythird special session,
Recognizing that the responsibility for the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session rests primarily at the national level and that
_______________
83

See resolution 66/222.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee.
85
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
86
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
87
Resolution 55/2.
88
Resolution 60/1.
89
Resolution 65/1.
90
Resolution 68/6.
84

517

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

strengthened efforts are necessary in this respect, and reiterating that enhanced international cooperation is
essential for full, effective and accelerated implementation,
Welcoming the work of the Commission on the Status of Women in reviewing the implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and taking note with appreciation of all its agreed conclusions,
including the agreed conclusions on the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence against women and girls
adopted by the Commission at its fifty-seventh session,91 and of the need to implement them,
Welcoming also the strengthening of the capacity of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and its experience in achieving its mandate,
Taking note of the activities carried out by the Fund for Gender Equality and the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women,
Recognizing that the participation and contribution of civil society, in particular women’s groups and
organizations and other non-governmental organizations, are important to the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session,
Reaffirming that gender mainstreaming is a globally accepted strategy for promoting the empowerment of
women and achieving gender equality by transforming structures of inequality, which is relevant in all issues
considered by its Main Committees and subsidiary bodies, including in resolutions dealing with issues beyond
social, humanitarian, cultural, economic and financial matters,
Reaffirming also the commitment to actively promote the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into the
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programmes in all political, economic and social
spheres, as well as the commitment to strengthen the capabilities of the United Nations system in the area of gender
equality,
Reaffirming further the commitments in regard to gender equality and the empowerment of women in the
Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,92
Bearing in mind the challenges and obstacles to changing discriminatory attitudes and gender stereotypes,
which perpetuate discrimination against women and girls and stereotypical roles of boys and girls, men and women,
and stressing that challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation of international standards and norms to
address inequality between men and women,
Reaffirming the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS93 and the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS:
Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS, adopted at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
AIDS, held on 10 June 2011,94 in which, inter alia, the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of
women were recognized as fundamental for reducing the vulnerability of women to HIV and AIDS,
Welcoming the integration of a gender perspective into the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, 95 and in this regard commending
UN-Women for its efforts to ensure coherence throughout the United Nations system in its advocacy for gender
equality and the empowerment of women in the context of sustainable development,
Expressing serious concern that the urgent goal of 50/50 gender balance in the United Nations system,
especially at senior and policymaking levels, with full respect for the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, in conformity with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, remains unmet, and
that the representation of women in the United Nations system has remained almost static, with negligible
improvement in some parts of the system, as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General on improvement in the
status of women in the United Nations system,96
_______________
91

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
Resolution 63/239, annex.
93
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
94
Resolution 65/277, annex.
95
Resolution 66/288, annex.
96
A/67/347.
92

518

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
and stressing the need for their participation therein,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008,
1888 (2009) of 30 September 2009, 1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009, 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010,
2106 (2013) of 24 June 2013 and 2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013 on women and peace and security and resolution
1882 (2009) of 4 August 2009 on children and armed conflict,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the measures taken and progress
achieved in follow-up to the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of
the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly;97
2. Reaffirms the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted at the Fourth World Conference on
Women,85 the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly86 and the declaration adopted on
the occasion of the 15-year review of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action at the
fifty-fourth session of the Commission on the Status of Women,98 and also reaffirms its commitment to their full,
effective and accelerated implementation;
3. Also reaffirms the primary and essential role of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as the catalytic role of the Commission on the Status of Women, in promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women based on the full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session and in promoting and monitoring gender mainstreaming within
the United Nations system;
4. Recognizes that the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
fulfilment of the obligations of States parties under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women 99 are mutually reinforcing in respect of achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women, welcomes in this regard the contributions of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women to promoting the implementation of the Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session, and invites States parties to the Convention to include information on measures taken
to enhance implementation at the national level in their reports to the Committee under article 18 of the Convention;
5. Calls upon States parties to comply fully with their obligations under the Convention and the Optional
Protocol thereto 100 and to take into consideration the concluding observations as well as the general
recommendations of the Committee, urges States parties to consider limiting the extent of any reservations that they
lodge to the Convention, to formulate any reservations as precisely and narrowly as possible and to regularly review
such reservations with a view to withdrawing them so as to ensure that no reservation is incompatible with the
object and purpose of the Convention, also urges all Member States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the
Convention to consider doing so, and calls upon those Member States that have not yet done so to consider signing
and ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol;
6. Emphasizes the importance and value of the mandate of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and welcomes the Entity’s leadership in providing a strong voice
for women and girls at all levels;
7. Reaffirms the important role of UN-Women in leading, coordinating and promoting accountability of the
United Nations system in its work on gender equality and the empowerment of women;
8. Calls upon UN-Women to continue to support gender mainstreaming across the United Nations system
as an integral part of its work and, in that regard, to place a strong and more systematic focus on support for gender
mainstreaming across the United Nations system, including by continuing its efforts to accelerate action across the
United Nations system;
_______________
97

A/68/175.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2010, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2010/27 and Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2010/232.
99
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
100
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
98

519

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Welcomes the commitment of UN-Women to support Member States in their efforts to develop and
strengthen norms, policies and standards on gender equality and the empowerment of women as well as to integrate
gender perspectives into sectoral policy and normative frameworks, and encourages the Entity to continue to raise
awareness of the need to mainstream and strengthen a gender perspective in the work of intergovernmental bodies,
including in their resolutions, and to provide technical assistance, at the request of Member States, in this regard;
10. Urges Member States to increase funding for the budget of UN-Women by providing, when legislative
and budgetary provisions allow, core, multi-year, predictable, stable and sustainable voluntary contributions,
recognizing the importance of adequate funding in enabling UN-Women to implement its strategic plan promptly
and effectively and that the mobilization of financial resources for achieving its goals still remains a challenge;
11. Encourages all actors, including Governments, the United Nations system, other international
organizations and civil society, to continue to support the work of the Commission on the Status of Women in
fulfilling its central role in the follow-up to and review of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, and, as applicable, to carry out the
recommendations of the Commission, welcomes in this regard the Commission’s continued sharing of experiences,
lessons learned and good practices in overcoming challenges to full implementation at the national and international
levels and the evaluation of progress in the implementation of priority themes, and encourages the
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations system, as appropriate, to incorporate the outcomes of the
Commission into their work;
12. Calls upon Governments and the organs and relevant funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system, within their respective mandates, other international and regional organizations, including
financial institutions, and all relevant actors of civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to intensify
action to achieve the full and effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
outcome of the twenty-third special session;
13. Reaffirms that States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent and combat all forms of
violence against women and girls, provide protection to the victims and investigate, prosecute and punish the
perpetrators of violence against women and girls, and that failure to do so violates and impairs or nullifies the
enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, calls upon Governments to elaborate and implement
laws and strategies to eliminate violence against women and girls, encourages and supports men and boys to take an
active part in the prevention and elimination of all forms of violence, encourages increased understanding among
men and boys of how violence harms girls, boys, women and men and undermines gender equality, encourages all
actors to speak out against any violence against women, and in this regard encourages Member States to continue to
support the Secretary-General’s ongoing campaign “UNiTE to End Violence against Women” and the UN-Women
social mobilization and advocacy platform “Say NO – UNiTE to End Violence against Women”;
14. Reiterates its call upon the United Nations system, including the main organs, their main committees
and subsidiary bodies, functions such as the annual ministerial review and the Development Cooperation Forum of
the Economic and Social Council and the funds, programmes and specialized agencies, to increase efforts to fully
mainstream a gender perspective into all issues under their consideration and within their mandates, as well as into
all United Nations summits, conferences and special sessions and their follow-up processes, including those of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in 2012, and the review and appraisal of the Madrid
International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, at the fifty-first session of the Commission for Social Development,
held in 2013;
15. Reiterates that the full, effective and accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session is essential to achieving the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard welcomes ongoing efforts to
mainstream a gender perspective into discussions on the post-2015 development framework, and calls for the goal
of gender equality and women’s empowerment to be considered a priority in the elaboration of the post-2015
development agenda and for integrating a gender perspective into the new development framework;
16. Requests the entities of the United Nations system to systematically incorporate the outcomes of the
Commission on the Status of Women into their work, within their mandates, and, inter alia, to ensure effective
support for the efforts of Member States towards the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of
women, and in this regard welcomes the commitment of UN-Women to establish concrete results-based reporting
mechanisms and to ensure coherence, consistency and coordination between the normative and operational aspects
of its work;
520

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Strongly encourages Governments to continue to support the role and contribution of civil society, in
particular non-governmental organizations and women’s organizations, in the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
18. Calls upon Governments and the United Nations system to encourage women’s groups and other nongovernmental organizations specializing in gender equality and the empowerment of women to participate in
intergovernmental processes, including through increased outreach, funding and capacity-building;
19. Calls upon the intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations system to systematically request the
inclusion of a gender perspective in reports of the Secretary-General and other inputs to intergovernmental
processes;
20. Requests that reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and their subsidiary bodies systematically address gender perspectives through gender-sensitive
analysis and the provision of data disaggregated by sex and age and that conclusions and recommendations for
further action address the different situations and needs of women and men, in order to facilitate gender-sensitive
policy development, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to convey the importance of reflecting a
gender perspective to all stakeholders who provide inputs to his reports;
21. Encourages Member States, with the support of, as appropriate, United Nations entities, including
UN-Women, international and regional organizations and other relevant actors, to prioritize the strengthening of
national data collection and monitoring capacities with regard to statistics disaggregated by sex and age, as well as
national tracking indicators for gender equality and the empowerment of women through multisectoral efforts and
partnerships;
22. Calls upon all parts of the United Nations system to continue to play an active role in ensuring the full,
effective and accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session, through, inter alia, the maintenance of gender specialists in all entities of the United
Nations system, as well as by ensuring that all personnel, especially those in the field, receive training and
appropriate follow-up, including tools, guidance and support, for accelerated gender mainstreaming, and reaffirms
the need to strengthen the capabilities of the United Nations system in the area of gender;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to review and redouble his efforts to make progress towards achieving
the goal of 50/50 gender balance at all levels throughout the United Nations system, with full respect for the
principle of equitable geographical distribution, in conformity with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations, considering, in particular, women from developing and least developed countries, countries with
economies in transition and unrepresented or largely underrepresented Member States, and to ensure managerial and
departmental accountability with respect to gender balance targets, and strongly encourages Member States to
identify and regularly submit more women candidates for appointment to positions in the United Nations system,
especially at more senior and policymaking levels, including in peacekeeping operations;
24. Calls upon the United Nations system to continue its efforts towards achieving the goal of gender
balance, including with the active support of gender focal points, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide an oral report to the Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-eighth session and to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the improvement of the status of women in the United Nations
system, under the item entitled “Advancement of women”, and on progress made and obstacles encountered
in achieving gender balance, with recommendations for accelerating progress and up-to-date statistics,
including the number and percentage of women and their functions and nationalities throughout the United
Nations system, as well as information on the responsibility and accountability of the offices of human
resources management and the secretariat of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination for promoting gender balance;
25. Encourages increased efforts by Governments and the United Nations system to enhance accountability
for the implementation of commitments to gender equality and the empowerment of women at the international,
regional, national and local levels, including through improved monitoring and reporting on progress in relation to
policies, strategies, resource allocations and programmes and by achieving gender balance;
26. Reaffirms that Governments bear the primary responsibility for the achievement of gender equality and
the empowerment of women and that international cooperation has an essential role in assisting developing
countries in progressing towards the full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action;
521

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

27. Encourages its Main Committees and subsidiary bodies, as well as the Economic and Social Council
and its functional commissions, in the light of the analysis contained in the report of the Secretary-General97 and of
the cross-cutting nature of gender equality and the empowerment of women, to make further progress in the
integration of a gender perspective into their work;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the United Nations system the findings of his
report in order to strengthen follow-up on these findings and accelerate the implementation of the present resolution;
29. Recalls Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/18 of 24 July 2013, in which the Council decided
that, at its fifty-ninth session, in 2015, the Commission on the Status of Women will undertake a review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcomes of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly, including current challenges that affect the implementation of the
Platform for Action and the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women, as well as
opportunities for strengthening gender equality and the empowerment of women in the post-2015 development
agenda through the integration of a gender perspective;
30. Urges all States and all other stakeholders, in that context, to undertake comprehensive reviews of the
progress made and challenges encountered in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, with a view to strengthening and
accelerating their full implementation, and to consider appropriate commemorative activities for the twentieth
anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action;
31. Encourages States and all stakeholders to strengthen the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into all
sectors and in all areas of development, including through the national and regional preparations for the review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action;
32. Calls upon the United Nations system, in particular UN-Women, to support and contribute to the review
and appraisal process of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action at the international, regional, national and
local levels;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report annually to the General Assembly under the item
entitled “Advancement of women”, and to the Commission on the Status of Women and the Economic and Social
Council on the follow-up to and progress made in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, with an assessment of progress in gender
mainstreaming, including information on key achievements, lessons learned and good practices, and
recommendations on further measures to enhance and accelerate implementation.
RESOLUTION 68/141
A/RE S/68 /141

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/450, para. 16)101

68/141. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office102 and noting that it includes the first decennial strategic review pursuant to General Assembly resolution
_______________
101

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
102
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/68/12 (Parts I and II)).

522

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

58/153 of 22 December 2003, and the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its sixty-fourth session103 and the decisions contained therein,
Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees since its establishment by the General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High Commissioner,
Commending the staff and implementing partners of the Office of the High Commissioner for the competent,
courageous and dedicated manner in which they discharge their responsibilities,
Underlining its strong condemnation of all forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel are increasingly exposed,
1. Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and its Executive Committee in the course of the year, which is aimed at strengthening the international
protection regime and at assisting Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities;
2. Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its sixty-fourth session;103
3. Welcomes the resumption by the Executive Committee of the practice of adopting conclusions, and
notes with appreciation its adoption of the conclusion on civil registration;
4. Appreciates the high-level segment of the sixty-fourth plenary session of the Executive Committee,
welcomes the statement adopted on 1 October 2013 by States members of the Executive Committee, and calls upon
all States to urgently provide assistance, as identified in the statement, in order to relieve pressure on host
communities;
5. Welcomes the ongoing implementation, and encourages further implementation, of pledges made by
States at the intergovernmental ministerial event held in 2011 to mark the sixtieth anniversary of the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 104 and the fiftieth anniversary of the 1961 Convention on the
Reduction of Statelessness;105
6. Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol thereto106 as the
foundation of the international refugee protection regime, recognizes the importance of their full and effective
application by States parties and the values they embody, notes with satisfaction that 148 States are now parties to
one or both instruments, encourages States not parties to consider acceding to those instruments and States parties
with reservations to give consideration to withdrawing them, underlines, in particular, the importance of full respect
for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that a number of States not parties to the international refugee
instruments have shown a generous approach to hosting refugees;
7. Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the responsibility of States, whose full and
effective cooperation, action and political resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to
fulfil its mandated functions, and strongly emphasizes, in this context, the importance of active international
solidarity and burden-sharing;
8. Welcomes pledges by States to accede to the statelessness conventions, the 1954 Convention relating to
the Status of Stateless Persons107 and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, as well as pledges to
remove reservations to them, also welcomes the recent increase in the number of accessions to the two Conventions
and notes that 79 States are now parties to the 1954 Convention and 55 are parties to the 1961 Convention,
encourages States that have not done so to give consideration to acceding to those instruments, notes the work of the
High Commissioner in regard to identifying stateless persons, preventing and reducing statelessness and protecting
_______________
103

Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/68/12/Add.1).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
105
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
106
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
107
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
104

523

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

stateless persons, and urges the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to work in this area in accordance with
relevant General Assembly resolutions and Executive Committee conclusions;
9. Re-emphasizes that prevention and reduction of statelessness are primarily the responsibility of States, in
appropriate cooperation with the international community;
10. Also re-emphasizes that protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons are primarily the
responsibility of States, in appropriate cooperation with the international community;
11. Notes the current activities of the Office of the High Commissioner related to protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons, including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field,
emphasizes that such activities should be consistent with relevant General Assembly resolutions and should not
undermine the refugee mandate of the Office and the institution of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner
to continue his dialogue with States on the role of his Office in this regard;
12. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue responding adequately to emergencies, in
accordance with its mandate and in cooperation with States, notes the measures taken by the Office to strengthen its
capacity to respond to emergencies, and encourages the Office to pursue its efforts to further strengthen its
emergency capacity and thereby ensure a more predictable, effective and timely response to coordinated interagency efforts;
13. Also encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to work in partnership and in full cooperation
with relevant national authorities, United Nations offices and agencies, international and intergovernmental
organizations, regional organizations and non-governmental organizations to contribute to the continued
development of humanitarian response capacities at all levels, and recalls the role of the Office as the leading entity
of the cluster for protection, camp coordination and management and emergency shelter in complex emergencies;
14. Further encourages the Office of the High Commissioner, among other relevant United Nations and
other relevant intergovernmental organizations and humanitarian and development actors, to continue to work with
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat to enhance the coordination, effectiveness
and efficiency of humanitarian response and to contribute, in consultation with States, as appropriate, to making
further progress towards common humanitarian needs assessments, as stated, among other important issues, in
General Assembly resolution 67/87 of 13 December 2012 on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;
15. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to engage in and implement in full the objectives of
the “Delivering as one” initiative;
16. Notes with appreciation the measures taken and efficiencies gained in the process of structural and
management change to reinforce the capacity of the Office of the High Commissioner, and encourages the Office to
focus on continuous improvement in order to enable a more efficient response to the needs of beneficiaries,
including identifying unmet needs, and to ensure the effective and transparent use of its resources;
17. Expresses deep concern about the increasing threats to the safety and security of humanitarian aid
workers and convoys and, in particular, the loss of life of humanitarian personnel working in the most difficult and
challenging conditions in order to assist those in need;
18. Emphasizes the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of attacks committed on their territory against
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel do not operate with impunity and that the
perpetrators of such acts are promptly brought to justice as provided for by national laws and obligations under
international law;
19. Strongly condemns attacks on refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons and acts that
pose a threat to their personal security and well-being, and calls upon all States concerned and, where applicable,
parties involved in an armed conflict to take all measures necessary to ensure respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law;
20. Deplores the refoulement and unlawful expulsion of refugees and asylum seekers, and calls upon all
States concerned to ensure respect for the relevant principles of refugee protection and human rights;
21. Urges States to uphold the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and settlements, inter
alia, through effective measures to prevent the infiltration of armed elements, to identify and separate any such
524

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

armed elements from refugee populations, to settle refugees in secure locations and to afford to the Office of the
High Commissioner and, where appropriate, other humanitarian organizations prompt, unhindered and safe access
to asylum seekers, refugees and other persons of concern;
22. Notes with concern that asylum seekers, refugees and stateless persons are subject to arbitrary detention
in some situations, welcomes the increasing use of alternatives to detention, and emphasizes the need for States to
limit detention of asylum seekers, refugees and stateless persons to that which is necessary;
23. Expresses concern at the large number of asylum seekers who have lost their lives at sea trying to reach
safety, and encourages international cooperation to further strengthen search and rescue mechanisms;
24. Emphasizes that the international protection of refugees is a dynamic and action-oriented function that is
at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High Commissioner and that it includes, in cooperation with States
and other partners, the promotion and facilitation of the admission, reception and treatment of refugees in
accordance with internationally agreed standards and the ensuring of durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing
in mind the particular needs of vulnerable groups and paying special attention to those with specific needs, and notes
in this context that the delivery of international protection is a staff-intensive service that requires adequate staff with
the appropriate expertise, especially at the field level;
25. Affirms the importance of age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in analysing protection needs and
ensuring the participation of refugees and other persons of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner, as
appropriate, in the planning and implementation of programmes of the Office and State policies, also affirms the
importance of according priority to addressing discrimination, gender inequality and the problem of sexual and
gender-based violence, recognizing the importance of addressing the protection needs of women, children and
persons with disabilities in particular, and underlines the importance of continuing to work on those issues;
26. Notes that the lack of civil registration and related documentation makes persons vulnerable to
statelessness and associated protection risks, recognizes that birth registration provides an official record of a child’s
legal identity and is crucial to preventing and reducing statelessness, and welcomes pledges by States to ensure the
birth registration of all children;
27. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely humanitarian and non-political character
of the function of the Office of the High Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, and recalls that those solutions include voluntary repatriation and, where
appropriate and feasible, local integration and resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary
repatriation, supported, as necessary, by rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate sustainable
reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
28. Expresses concern about the particular difficulties faced by the millions of refugees in protracted
situations, and emphasizes the need to redouble international efforts and cooperation to find practical and
comprehensive approaches to resolving their plight and to realize durable solutions for them, consistent with
international law and relevant General Assembly resolutions;
29. Recognizes the importance of achieving durable solutions to refugee problems and, in particular, the
need to address in this process the root causes of refugee movements;
30. Recalls the important role of effective partnerships and coordination in meeting the needs of refugees
and in finding durable solutions to their situations, welcomes the efforts under way, in cooperation with countries
hosting refugees and countries of origin, including their respective local communities, relevant United Nations
agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations, as appropriate, nongovernmental organizations and development actors, to promote a framework for durable solutions, particularly in
protracted refugee situations, which includes an approach to sustainable and timely return that encompasses
repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities, and encourages States, in cooperation with
relevant United Nations agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations, nongovernmental organizations and development actors, to support, inter alia, through the allocation of funds, the
implementation of such a framework to facilitate an effective transition from relief to development;
31. Recognizes that no solution to displacement can be durable unless it is sustainable, and therefore
encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to focus on a solution-oriented approach that supports the
sustainability of return and reintegration;
525

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

32. Calls upon States to create opportunities for resettlement as a durable solution, recognizes the need to
increase the number of resettlement places and the number of countries with regular resettlement programmes and
to improve the integration of resettled refugees, calls upon States to ensure inclusive and non-discriminatory policies
in their resettlement programmes, and notes that resettlement is a strategic protection tool and solution for refugees;
33. Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken by States to strengthen the regional initiatives that
facilitate cooperative policies and approaches on refugees, and encourages States to continue their efforts to address,
in a comprehensive manner, the needs of the people who require international protection in their respective regions,
including the support provided for host communities that receive large numbers of persons who require international
protection;
34. Notes the importance of States and the Office of the High Commissioner discussing and clarifying the
role of the Office in mixed migratory flows, in order to better address protection needs in the context of mixed
migratory flows, bearing in mind the particular needs of vulnerable groups, especially women, children and persons
with disabilities, including by safeguarding access to asylum for those in need of international protection, and also
notes the readiness of the High Commissioner, consistent with his mandate, to assist States in fulfilling their
protection responsibilities in this regard;
35. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their nationals, calls upon States to
facilitate the return of their nationals who have been determined not to be in need of international protection, and
affirms the need for the return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full respect for
their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons concerned;
36. Expresses concern about the challenges associated with climate change and environmental degradation
to the operations of the Office of the High Commissioner and the assistance it provides to vulnerable populations of
concern across the globe, particularly in the least developed countries, and urges the Office to continue to address
such challenges in its work, within its mandate, and in consultation with national authorities and in cooperation with
competent agencies in its operations;
37. Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations, in conjunction with the Office
of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international solidarity and burden-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources, including through financial and in-kind assistance as well as direct aid to host countries, refugee
populations and communities hosting them, with a view to enhancing the capacity of and reducing the heavy burden
borne by countries and communities hosting refugees, in particular those that have received large numbers of
refugees and asylum seekers, and whose generosity is appreciated;
38. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to play its catalytic role in mobilizing
assistance from the international community to address the root causes as well as the economic, environmental and
social impact of large-scale refugee populations in developing countries, in particular the least developed countries,
and countries with economies in transition, and notes with appreciation those donor States, organizations and
individuals that contribute to improving the condition of refugees who remain vulnerable members of society;
39. Expresses deep concern about the existing and potential challenges posed by the world financial and
economic crisis to the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner, and calls upon the Office to further explore
ways and means to broaden its donor base so as to achieve greater burden-sharing by reinforcing cooperation with
governmental donors, non-governmental donors and the private sector;
40. Recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office of the High Commissioner to
continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it through its statute 108 and by subsequent General Assembly
resolutions on refugees and other persons of concern, recalls its resolutions 58/153 of 22 December 2003, 58/270 of
23 December 2003, 59/170 of 20 December 2004, 60/129 of 16 December 2005, 61/137 of 19 December 2006,
62/124 of 18 December 2007, 63/148 of 18 December 2008, 64/127 of 18 December 2009, 65/194 of 21 December
2010, 66/133 of 19 December 2011 and 67/149 of 20 December 2012 concerning, inter alia, the implementation of
paragraph 20 of the statute of the Office, and urges Governments and other donors to respond promptly to annual
and supplementary appeals issued by the Office for requirements under its programmes;
41. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his annual activities to the General Assembly at its sixtyninth session.
_______________
108

526

Resolution 428 (V), annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/142
A/RE S/68 /142

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/450, para. 16)109

68/142. Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision 2013/251 of 25 July 2013 concerning the enlargement
of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Taking note also of the request regarding the enlargement of the Executive Committee contained in the note
verbale dated 12 February 2013 from the Permanent Mission of Afghanistan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General,110 the letter dated 2 April 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Belarus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council,111 the note verbale dated 16 May 2013
from the Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,112 the
note verbale dated 28 May 2013 from the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General,113 the note verbale dated 5 June 2013 from the Permanent Mission of Slovakia to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,114 the note verbale dated 21 June 2013 from the Permanent Mission of
Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General115 and the note verbale dated 2 July 2013 from the
Permanent Mission of Latvia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,116
1. Decides to increase the number of members of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees from 87 States to 94 States;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to elect the additional members at a coordination and
management meeting in 2014.
RESOLUTION 68/143
A/RE S/68 /143

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/450, para. 16)117

68/143. Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Organization of African Unity Convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in
Africa of 1969118 and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights,119
_______________
109

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Belarus, Cameroon, Czech Republic,
Latvia, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Russian Federation, Senegal and Slovakia.
110
E/2013/10.
111
E/2013/49.
112
E/2013/76.
113
E/2013/85.
114
E/2013/83.
115
E/2013/86.
116
E/2013/89.
117
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Honduras, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Liberia (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste and Turkey.
118
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1001, No. 14691.
119
Ibid., vol. 1520, No. 26363.

527

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming that the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,120 together with the 1967 Protocol
thereto,121 as complemented by the Organization of African Unity Convention of 1969, remains the foundation of
the international refugee protection regime in Africa,
Welcoming the entry into force on 6 December 2012 and the ongoing process of ratification of the African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, which mark a
significant step towards strengthening the national and regional normative frameworks for the protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons,
Recognizing the particular vulnerability of women and children among refugees and displaced persons,
including exposure to discrimination and sexual and physical abuse, violence and exploitation, and in this regard
acknowledging the importance of preventing, responding to and addressing sexual and gender-based violence,
Gravely concerned about the rising number of refugees and displaced persons in various parts of the
continent,
Acknowledging the efforts of Member States, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
stakeholders in improving the situation of refugees, and expressing grave concern about the deteriorating living
conditions in many refugee camps in Africa,
Recognizing that refugees, internally displaced persons and, in particular, women and children are at an
increased risk of exposure to HIV and AIDS, malaria and other infectious diseases,
Recalling the Joint Declaration adopted at the joint summit of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the East African Community on the Horn of Africa crisis, held in Nairobi on 8 and 9 September
2011, which, inter alia, expressed concern about the mass exodus of refugees into neighbouring countries, as well as
the increased number of internally displaced persons due to the ongoing humanitarian crises of drought and famine
in the Horn of Africa,
Recalling also the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region, adopted by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in 2006, and its instruments, in particular two of the protocols
to the Pact which are relevant to the protection of displaced persons, namely, the Protocol on the Protection of and
Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and the Protocol on the Property Rights of Returning Persons,
Acknowledging with appreciation the generosity, hospitality and spirit of solidarity of African countries that
continue to host the influx of refugees due to the humanitarian crises and protracted refugee situations, and in this
regard expressing particular appreciation for the commitment and efforts of neighbouring countries in the recent
humanitarian crises on the continent, and further acknowledging with appreciation the coordination of humanitarian
assistance by the United Nations as well as the continuing efforts of donors, the United Nations system, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, regional organizations, international agencies,
non-governmental organizations and other partners, with regard to, inter alia, integration, voluntary return,
reintegration and resettlement, in addressing the plight of refugees during the emergency,
Recognizing that host States have the primary responsibility for the protection of and assistance to refugees on
their territory and the need to redouble efforts to develop and implement comprehensive durable solution strategies,
in appropriate cooperation with the international community, and burden- and responsibility-sharing,
Emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility to provide protection and assistance to internally
displaced persons within their jurisdiction, as well as to address the root causes of the displacement problem, in
appropriate cooperation with the international community,
Welcoming the ongoing implementation of pledges made by States at the intergovernmental ministerial event
held in 2011 to mark the sixtieth anniversary of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the
fiftieth anniversary of the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness,122
_______________
120

Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
122
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
121

528

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General123 and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;124
2. Calls upon African Member States that have not yet signed or ratified the African Union Convention for
the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa to consider doing so as early as possible in
order to ensure its wider implementation;
3. Notes the need for African Member States to address resolutely the root causes of all forms of forced
displacement in Africa and to foster peace, stability and prosperity throughout the African continent so as to forestall
flows of refugees;
4. Notes with great concern that, despite all the efforts made so far by the United Nations, the African
Union and others, the situation of refugees and displaced persons in Africa remains precarious, and calls upon States
and other parties to armed conflict to observe scrupulously the letter and spirit of international humanitarian law,
bearing in mind that armed conflict is one of the principal causes of forced displacement in Africa;
5. Welcomes decisions EX.CL/Dec.686 (XX) and EX.CL/Dec.709 (XXI) adopted by the Executive
Council of the African Union at its twentieth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa from 23 to 27 January 2012, and
at its twenty-first ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa from 9 to 13 July 2012, on the humanitarian situation in
Africa, insofar as they relate to persons of concern to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the leadership shown by the Office of the High Commissioner, and
commends the Office for its ongoing efforts, with the support of the international community, to assist African
countries of asylum, including by providing support to vulnerable local host communities, and to respond to the
protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa;
7. Notes with appreciation the initiatives taken by the African Union, the Subcommittee on Refugees,
Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons of its Permanent Representatives Committee, and the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, in particular the role of its Special Rapporteur on Refugees, Asylum
Seekers, Migrants and Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, to ensure the protection of and assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa;
8. Acknowledges the important contribution of age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in identifying,
through a participatory approach, the protection risks faced by the different members of the refugee communities, in
particular the non-discriminatory treatment and protection of women, children, persons with disabilities and the elderly;
9. Affirms that children, because of their age, social status and physical and mental development, are often
more vulnerable than adults in situations of forced displacement, recognizes that forced displacement, return to postconflict situations, integration into new societies, protracted situations of displacement and statelessness can increase
child protection risks, taking into account the particular vulnerability of refugee children to forcible exposure to the
risks of physical and psychological injury, exploitation and death in connection with armed conflict, and
acknowledges that wider environmental factors and individual risk factors, particularly when combined, may
generate different protection needs;
10. Recognizes that no solution to displacement can be durable unless it is sustainable, and therefore
encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to support the sustainability of voluntary return, reintegration and
resettlement;
11. Welcomes the adoption of the conclusion on civil registration by the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at its sixty-fourth session, held in Geneva from
30 September to 4 October 2013,125 and recognizes the importance of early registration and effective registration
systems and censuses as a tool of protection and as a means to the quantification and assessment of needs for the
provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance and to implement appropriate durable solutions;
_______________
123

A/68/341.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/68/12 (Parts I and II)).
125
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/68/12/Add.1), chap. III, sect. A.
124

529

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Recalls the conclusion on registration of refugees and asylum seekers adopted by the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner at its fifty-second session,126 notes the many forms of
harassment faced by refugees and asylum seekers who remain without any form of documentation attesting to their
status, recalls the responsibility of States to register refugees on their territories and, as appropriate, the responsibility
of the Office of the High Commissioner or mandated international bodies to do so, reiterates in this context the
central role that early and effective registration and documentation can play, guided by protection considerations, in
enhancing protection and supporting efforts to find durable solutions, and calls upon the Office, as appropriate, to
help States to conduct this procedure should they be unable to register refugees on their territory;
13. Calls upon the international community, including States and the Office of the High Commissioner and
other relevant United Nations organizations, within their respective mandates, to take concrete action to meet the
protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons and to contribute generously to projects
and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight, facilitating durable solutions for refugees and displaced persons
and supporting vulnerable local host communities;
14. Reaffirms the importance of timely and adequate assistance and protection for refugees, returnees and
displaced persons, also reaffirms that assistance and protection are mutually reinforcing and that inadequate material
assistance and food shortages undermine protection, notes the importance of a rights- and community-based
approach in engaging constructively with individual refugees, returnees and displaced persons and their
communities so as to achieve fair and equitable access to food and other forms of material assistance, and expresses
concern with regard to situations in which minimum standards of assistance are not met, including those in which
adequate needs assessments have yet to be undertaken;
15. Also reaffirms that respect by States for their protection responsibilities towards refugees is strengthened
by international solidarity involving all members of the international community and that the refugee protection
regime is enhanced through committed international cooperation in a spirit of solidarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing among all States;
16. Further reaffirms that host States have the primary responsibility to ensure the civilian and humanitarian
character of asylum, calls upon States, in cooperation with international organizations, within their mandates, to take
all measures necessary to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection and, in particular, to ensure that the
civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps is not compromised by the presence or the activities of armed
elements or used for purposes that are incompatible with their civilian character, and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue efforts, in consultation with States and other relevant actors, to ensure the civilian and
humanitarian character of camps;
17. Condemns all acts that pose a threat to the personal security and well-being of refugees and asylum
seekers, such as refoulement, unlawful expulsion and physical attacks, calls upon States of refuge, in cooperation
with international organizations, where appropriate, to take all measures necessary to ensure respect for the
principles of refugee protection, including the humane treatment of asylum seekers, notes with interest that the High
Commissioner has continued to take steps to encourage the development of measures to better ensure the civilian
and humanitarian character of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner to continue those efforts, in
consultation with States and other relevant actors;
18. Deplores the continuing violence and insecurity which constitute an ongoing threat to the safety and
security of staff members of the Office of the High Commissioner and other humanitarian organizations and an
obstacle to the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Office and the ability of its implementing partners and
other humanitarian personnel to discharge their respective humanitarian functions, urges States, parties to conflict
and all other relevant actors to take all measures necessary to protect activities related to humanitarian assistance,
prevent attacks on and kidnapping of national and international humanitarian workers and ensure the safety and
security of the personnel and property of the Office and that of all humanitarian organizations discharging functions
mandated by the Office, and calls upon States to investigate fully any crime committed against humanitarian
personnel and bring to justice the persons responsible for such crimes;
19. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the African Union, subregional organizations and all
African States, in conjunction with agencies of the United Nations system, intergovernmental and non_______________
126

530

Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/56/12/Add.1), chap. III, sect. B.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

governmental organizations and the international community, to strengthen and revitalize existing partnerships and
forge new ones in support of the protection system for refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons,
and encourages African States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying and enforcing the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel;127
20. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the international community and other entities
concerned to continue and, where appropriate, to intensify their support to African Governments through
appropriate capacity-building activities, including training of relevant officers, disseminating information about
refugee instruments and principles, providing financial, technical and advisory services to accelerate the enactment
or amendment and implementation of legislation relating to refugees, strengthening emergency response and
enhancing capacities for the coordination of humanitarian activities, in particular those Governments that have
received large numbers of refugees and asylum seekers;
21. Reaffirms the right of return and the principle of voluntary repatriation, appeals to countries of origin and
countries of asylum to create conditions that are conducive to voluntary repatriation, and recognizes that, while
voluntary repatriation remains the pre-eminent solution, local integration and third-country resettlement, where
appropriate and feasible, are also viable options for dealing with the situation of African refugees who, owing to
prevailing circumstances in their respective countries of origin, are unable to return home;
22. Also reaffirms that voluntary repatriation should not necessarily be conditioned on the accomplishment
of political solutions in the country of origin in order not to impede the exercise of the refugees’ right to return,
recognizes that the voluntary repatriation and reintegration process is normally guided by the conditions in the
country of origin, in particular that voluntary repatriation can be accomplished in conditions of safety and dignity,
and urges the High Commissioner to promote sustainable return through the development of durable and lasting
solutions, particularly in protracted refugee situations;
23. Calls upon the international donor community to provide financial and material assistance that allows
for the implementation of community-based development programmes that benefit both refugees and host
communities, as appropriate, in agreement with host countries and consistent with humanitarian objectives;
24. Appeals to the international community to respond positively, in the spirit of solidarity and burdenand responsibility-sharing, to the third-country resettlement needs of African refugees, notes in this regard the
importance of using resettlement strategically, as part of situation-specific comprehensive responses to refugee
situations, and to this end encourages States, the Office of the High Commissioner and other relevant partners
to make full use of the Multilateral Framework of Understandings on Resettlement, where appropriate
and feasible;
25. Calls upon the international donor community to provide material and financial assistance for the
implementation of programmes intended for the rehabilitation of the environment and infrastructure affected by
refugees in countries of asylum as well as internally displaced persons, where appropriate;
26. Urges the international community, in the spirit of international solidarity and burden-sharing, to
continue to fund generously the refugee programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner and, taking into
account the substantially increased needs of programmes in Africa, inter alia, as a result of repatriation possibilities,
to ensure that Africa receives a fair and equitable share of the resources designated for refugees;
27. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner and interested States to identify protracted refugee
situations which might lend themselves to resolution through the development of specific, multilateral,
comprehensive and practical approaches to resolving such refugee situations, including the improvement of
international burden- and responsibility-sharing and the realization of durable solutions, within a multilateral
context;
28. Expresses grave concern about the plight of internally displaced persons in Africa, notes the efforts of
African States in strengthening the regional mechanisms for the protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons, calls upon States to take concrete action to pre-empt internal displacement and to meet the protection and
assistance needs of internally displaced persons, recalls in that regard the Guiding Principles on Internal
_______________
127

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

531

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Displacement,128 notes the current activities of the Office of the High Commissioner related to the protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons, including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field,
emphasizes that such activities should be consistent with relevant General Assembly resolutions and should not
undermine the refugee mandate of the Office and the institution of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner
to continue his dialogue with States on the role of his Office in this regard;
29. Invites the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced persons to continue his
ongoing dialogue with Member States and the intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned,
in accordance with his mandate, and to include information thereon in his reports to the Human Rights Council and
the General Assembly;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on assistance to refugees, returnees
and displaced persons in Africa to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, taking fully into account the
efforts expended by countries of asylum, under the item entitled “Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions”.
RESOLUTION 68/144
A/RE S/68 /144

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/451,
para. 14),129 by a recorded vote of 94 to 71, with 23 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chad, China,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay
Abstaining: Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Brazil, Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Samoa,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Vanuatu

68/144. Report of the Human Rights Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/251 of 15 March 2006, by which it established the Human Rights Council, and
65/281 of 17 June 2011 on the review of the Council,
Recalling also its resolutions 62/219 of 22 December 2007, 63/160 of 18 December 2008, 64/143 of
18 December 2009, 65/195 of 21 December 2010, 66/136 of 19 December 2011 and 67/151 of 20 December 2012,
Having considered the recommendations contained in the report of the Human Rights Council,130,131
_______________
128

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Cameroon (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of African States) and the Russian Federation.
130
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53).
131
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1).
129

532

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Takes note of the report of the Human Rights Council,130 including the addendum thereto,131 and its
recommendations;
2. Decides to defer consideration of and action on Human Rights Council resolution 24/24 of
27 September 2013132 on cooperation with the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms in the field of
human rights, in order to allow time for further consultations thereon;
3. Also decides to conclude its consideration of Human Rights Council resolution 24/24 before the end of
its sixty-eighth session.
RESOLUTION 68/145
A/RES/68/145

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/452 and Corr.1, para. 31)133

68/145. Strengthening collaboration on child protection within the United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,134
Reaffirming further the Convention on the Rights of the Child135 and its Optional Protocols,136 and recalling
all its previous resolutions on the rights of the child and its resolution 66/139, adopted on 19 December 2011,
Recognizing the primary role and responsibility of the State in the promotion and protection of the rights of the
child, including child protection, bearing in mind the importance of relevant actors of the United Nations supporting
the State in this regard,
Reaffirming that the best interest of the child, non-discrimination, participation and survival and development
provide the framework for all actions concerning children, including those of States and of all relevant actors of the
United Nations dealing with the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, including child protection,
Recognizing the important role and the continuing work of the United Nations system and all its relevant
actors in the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, including child protection, and recognizing also the
important role and contribution of civil society in this regard,
Encouraging relevant actors to promote capacity-building through international, regional, trilateral and SouthSouth cooperation in support of national efforts in the endeavour to promote child protection,
Stressing that collaboration within the United Nations system on the promotion and protection of the rights of
the child, including child protection, is important for the continuation of support for the efforts of Member States in
the realization of the rights of the child, and in this regard reaffirms the important role that the General Assembly
continues to play in strengthening collaboration and coherence within the United Nations system,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;137

2. Welcomes the existing collaboration among relevant actors of the United Nations working on the
promotion and protection of the rights of the child, including child protection, invites them, within existing resources
_______________
132

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Vanuatu, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
134
Resolution 217 A (III).
135
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
136
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
137
A/68/253.
133

533

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and mandates, to continue to highlight information on such collaboration in their existing reports to the General
Assembly and to also address this issue within the framework of the existing interactive dialogue of the Third
Committee under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of the rights of children”, and invites these United
Nations actors to further enhance their collaboration;
3. Reiterates the importance of all relevant actors of the United Nations on child protection continuing to
exercise their functions in a fully independent manner and to act in full observance of their respective mandates;
4. Underlines the importance of sustained, adequate resources and support for the work of the United
Nations system on the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, including child protection, and in this
regard strongly encourages enhanced voluntary contributions to support the work of all relevant actors of the United
Nations, so as to support the delivery of technical assistance and capacity-building in the area of child protection, at
the request of Member States;
5. Encourages key child protection stakeholders in the United Nations system to continue their
collaboration, including through promoting holistic, multi-partner and multisectoral responses to child protection
issues, taking into account national best practices in different regions and countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a follow-up report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session on the current collaboration within the United Nations system on child protection, taking into account
information provided by Member States and relevant actors of the United Nations.
RESOLUTION 68/146
A/RES/68/146

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/452 and Corr.1, para. 31)138

68/146. The girl child
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 66/140 of 19 December 2011 and all relevant resolutions on the girl child, and recalling
the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women, in particular those relevant to the girl child,
Recalling all human rights and other instruments relevant to the rights of the child, in particular the girl child,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 139 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 140 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 141 the Optional
Protocols thereto142 and the Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of
Marriages,143
Reaffirming the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, as
well as the commitments relevant to the girl child made in the outcome documents of the 2005 World Summit144
_______________
138

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are
members of the Southern African Development Community), Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
139
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
140
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
141
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
142
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531 and resolution 66/138, annex; United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2131, No. 20378; and ibid.,
vol. 2518, No. 44910.
143
Ibid., vol. 521, No. 7525.
144
Resolution 60/1.

534

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, entitled
“Keeping the promise: united to achieve the Millennium Development Goals”,145 and welcoming the outcome
document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals held
in 2013,146
Recalling its resolution 66/170 of 19 December 2011 on the International Day of the Girl Child and its role in
raising awareness of the situation of girls around the world,
Reaffirming the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly on
children, entitled “A world fit for children”,147
Reaffirming also the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS adopted at the twenty-sixth special session of
the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, entitled “Global Crisis – Global Action”,148 and the Political Declarations on
HIV/AIDS adopted by the high-level meetings of the General Assembly in 2006149 and 2011,150
Reaffirming further all other relevant outcomes of major United Nations summits and conferences relevant to
the girl child, as well as their 5-, 10- and 15-year reviews, including the Beijing Declaration151 and Platform for
Action,152 the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”,153 the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development154 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social
Development, 155 and reiterating that their full and effective implementation is essential to achieving the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Recognizing that education, adequate health care, nutrition, skills development and combating
discrimination and violence against girls, inter alia, are all necessary for the empowerment of the girl child, in
this regard recalling the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women at its fiftyseventh session, 156 which highlight the intrinsic linkages between empowerment of the girl child and the
prevention and elimination of violence, and Commission on Population and Development resolution 2012/1 of
27 April 2012,157 which highlights actions concerning development and the human rights of adolescents and
youth, and further recalling the importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective across the United Nations
system in relation to the girl child,
Recalling the Secretary-General’s 2008–2015 campaign “UNiTE to End Violence against Women” and the
call upon Governments, civil society, women’s organizations, young people, the private sector, the media and the
entire United Nations system to join forces in addressing the global pandemic of violence against women and girls,
Taking note of the appointment by the Secretary-General of the first Envoy on Youth in line with the
imperative, contained in his five-year action agenda, on “Working for and with women and young people”,
Recognizing that chronic poverty remains one of the biggest obstacles to meeting the needs of and promoting
and protecting the rights of children, including the girl child,
_______________
145

Resolution 65/1.
Resolution 68/6.
147
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
148
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
149
Resolution 60/262, annex.
150
Resolution 65/277, annex.
151
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
152
Ibid., annex II.
153
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
154
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
155
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
156
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
157
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 5 (E/2012/25), chap. I, sect. B.
146

535

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that urgent national and international action is required to eliminate poverty, in particular
extreme poverty, and noting that the ongoing effects of the global financial and economic crisis, volatile energy and
food prices and continuing food insecurity as a result of various factors are felt directly by households, especially
those headed by girls,
Recognizing further that the phenomenon of child-headed households is linked to other economic, social and
political realities, such as armed conflict, natural disasters, lack of economic empowerment and health inequities,
and that a comprehensive approach to these problems is needed to resolve the issue of child-headed households,
Deeply concerned about the serious social problem of child-headed households, in particular those headed by
girls, and that the impact of the HIV and AIDS epidemic, including illness and mortality, the erosion of the extended
family, the exacerbation of poverty, unemployment and underemployment and migration, as well as urbanization,
have contributed to the increase in the number of child-headed households,
Recognizing that child-headed households may result from the death of parents and/or legal guardians, and
that children can become de facto heads of households owing to parental illness, whether physical or mental,
parental neglect, the migration of parents or other such factors,
Deeply concerned about the extreme vulnerability of children who are heads of households, particularly girls,
who may be exceptionally negatively affected by the economic and care burdens placed on them at a young age,
which in turn may lead to their having difficulty completing their education and increase their vulnerability to
poverty, discrimination, trafficking and physical abuse,
Deeply concerned also about the vulnerability of children raised in child-headed households, in particular the
girl child, who suffer from the lack of adult support and may be particularly vulnerable to poverty, mental and
psychosocial trauma and physical vulnerability owing to, inter alia, food insecurity and poor nutrition, limited access
to safe water and adequate sanitation, and communicable and non-communicable diseases,
Deeply concerned further that children in child-headed households may be subjected to stigma and
discrimination owing to the fact that parental death is a result of HIV/AIDS, and that children heading households
may be at greater risk of HIV because of their vulnerability to violence and exploitation as they seek to support their
households,
Deeply concerned that, in situations of poverty, armed conflict, natural disasters and other humanitarian
emergencies, the incidence of child-headed households increases and makes the girl child particularly vulnerable to
sexual violence, abuse, exploitation and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, which have a serious impact
on the quality of their lives and leave them open to further discrimination, violence and neglect, thus limiting their
potential for full development,
Recognizing that women and girls are more vulnerable to HIV infection and that they bear a disproportionate
burden of the impact of the HIV and AIDS epidemic, including the care of and support for those living with and
affected by HIV and AIDS, and that this negatively affects girls by depriving them of their childhood and
diminishing their opportunities to receive an education, often resulting in their having to head households and
increasing their vulnerability to the worst forms of child labour and to sexual exploitation,
Noting with concern that an estimated 68 million girls158 are engaged in child labour and that many of them
face the double burden of having to combine economic activities with domestic chores, which deprive them of their
childhood and diminish their opportunities to benefit from education and decent employment in the future,
Recognizing that the needs of girls vary, according to a number of factors, including their age, and that the
risks of violence and discrimination that they face change over their life cycles, from childhood through adolescence,
Recognizing also that girl children are often at greater risk of being exposed to and encountering various forms of
discrimination and violence, which continue to hinder efforts towards the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals, and reaffirming the need to achieve gender equality to ensure a just and equitable world for girls, including
through partnering with men and boys, as an important strategy for advancing the rights of the girl child,
_______________
158

As stated in the 2013 report of the International Labour Organization on marking progress against child labour and global estimates and
trends for the period 2000–2012.

536

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing further that the empowerment of and investment in girls, which is critical for economic growth,
and the achievement of all Millennium Development Goals, including the eradication of poverty and extreme
poverty, as well as the meaningful participation of girls in decisions that affect them, are key in breaking the cycle of
discrimination and violence and in promoting and protecting the full and effective enjoyment of their human rights,
and recognizing that empowering girls requires their active participation in decision-making processes and the
active support and engagement of their parents, legal guardians, families and care providers, boys and men, as well
as the wider community,
Deeply concerned about all forms of violence against children, in particular the phenomena that
disproportionately affect girls, such as commercial sexual exploitation and child pornography, child, early and
forced marriage, rape, sexual abuse, domestic violence and trafficking in persons, and, in addition, about the
corresponding lack of accountability and impunity, which reflect discriminatory norms that reinforce the lower
status of girls in society,
Deeply concerned also that violence against women and girls is underrecognized, particularly at the
community level, and underreported or unrecorded as a result of stigma, fear, social tolerance and the often illegal
and covert nature of such activities,
Deeply concerned further about discrimination against the girl child and the violation of the rights of the girl
child, which often result in less access for girls to education, and to quality education, nutrition, including food
allocation, and physical and mental health-care services, in girls enjoying fewer of the rights, opportunities and benefits
of childhood and adolescence than boys, and in leaving them more vulnerable than boys to the consequences of
unprotected and premature sexual relations and often being subjected to various forms of cultural, social, sexual and
economic exploitation and violence, abuse, rape, incest, honour-related crimes and harmful practices, such as female
infanticide, child, early and forced marriage, prenatal sex selection and female genital mutilation,
Taking note with appreciation of the adoption by the Human Rights Council of its resolution 24/23 of
27 September 2013 entitled “Strengthening efforts to prevent and eliminate child, early and forced marriage:
challenges, achievements, best practices and implementation gaps”,159
Deeply concerned that, despite its widespread practice, child, early and forced marriage is still underreported,
recognizing that this requires further attention and that child, early and forced marriage exposes the girl child to
greater risk of HIV and sexually transmitted infections, often leads to premature sexual relations, early pregnancy
and early childbearing and increases the risk of obstetric fistula and high levels of maternal mortality and morbidity,
and furthermore entails complications during pregnancy and childbirth, which often lead to disability, stillbirth and
maternal death, particularly for young women and girls, which require appropriate prenatal and postnatal health-care
services for mothers, including in the area of skilled birth attendance and emergency obstetric care, and noting with
concern that this reduces girls’ opportunities to complete their education, gain comprehensive knowledge,
participate in the community or develop employable skills and is likely to have a long-term adverse impact on their
employment opportunities and their and their children’s quality of life and violates and impairs the full enjoyment of
their human rights,
Deeply concerned also that female genital mutilation violates and impairs the full enjoyment of the human
rights of women and girls and that it is an irreparable and irreversible harmful practice, and that the goal of ending
female genital mutilation in the next generation, as reaffirmed by the General Assembly in its resolution 67/146 of
20 December 2012, remains unfinished business,
Stressing the need for the international community, the relevant United Nations entities, the specialized
agencies, civil society and international financial institutions to continue to actively support, through the allocation
of enhanced financial resources and technical assistance, targeted comprehensive programmes that address the
needs and priorities of child-headed households and women and girls at risk of or subjected to child, early and
forced marriage and female genital mutilation,
Emphasizing that increased access to education for young people, especially adolescent girls, including in the
areas of sexual and reproductive health, as well as health care, hygiene and sanitation, dramatically lowers their
vulnerability to preventable diseases and infections, in particular HIV and other sexually transmitted infections,
_______________
159

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.

537

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing that women and girls with disabilities are subject to multiple forms of discrimination, including in
respect of their access to education, health-care services and employment, and the importance of the implementation
of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in this regard,
1. Stresses the need for the full and urgent implementation of the rights of the girl child as provided to her
under human rights instruments, and urges States to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child,139 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,140 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities141 and the Optional Protocols thereto142 as a matter of priority;
2. Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Minimum Age Convention, 1973
(No. 138)160 and the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182)161 of the International Labour
Organization to consider doing so;
3. Urges all Governments and the United Nations system to strengthen efforts bilaterally and with
international organizations and private sector donors in order to achieve the goals of the World Education Forum162
and to implement the United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative, and calls for the reaffirmation and implementation
of the commitments contained in the Education for All goals and the Millennium Development Goals, particularly
those related to gender and education;
4. Calls upon all States to place enhanced emphasis on quality education, including communications and
technology education, where available, for the girl child, including catch-up and literacy education for those who did
not receive formal education, to promote access to skills and entrepreneurship training for young women and to
tackle male and female stereotypes in order to ensure that young women entering the labour market have
opportunities to obtain full and productive employment, equitable compensation and decent work;
5. Calls upon States and the international community to recognize the right to education on the basis of
equal opportunity and non-discrimination by making primary education compulsory and available free to all
children and ensuring that all children have access to education of good quality, as well as making secondary
education generally available and accessible to all, in particular through the progressive introduction of free
education, bearing in mind that special measures to ensure equal access, including affirmative action, improving the
safety of girls on the way to and from school, ensuring all schools are accessible, safe, secure and free from violence
and providing separate and adequate sanitation facilities contribute to achieving equal opportunity and combating
exclusion and ensuring school attendance, in particular for girls and children from low-income families and children
who become heads of households;
6. Calls upon States, with the support of international organizations, civil society and non-governmental
organizations, as appropriate, to develop policies and programmes, giving priority to formal, informal and nonformal education programmes, including age-appropriate sex education, with appropriate direction and guidance
from parents and legal guardians, that support girls and enable them to acquire knowledge, develop self-esteem and
take responsibility for their own lives, and to place special focus on programmes to educate women and men,
especially parents, about the importance of girls’ physical and mental health and well-being;
7. Urges States to acknowledge the different needs of girls and boys during their childhood and
adolescence and, as appropriate, to make differential investments that are responsive to their changing needs;
8. Calls upon all States, the United Nations system and civil society to take measures to address the
obstacles that continue to affect the achievement of the goals set forth in the Beijing Platform for Action,152 as
contained in paragraph 33 of the further actions and initiatives, 163 including reviewing remaining laws that
discriminate against women and girls in order to modify or abolish them and, where appropriate, strengthening
national mechanisms to implement policies and programmes for the girl child and, in some cases, to enhance
coordination among responsible institutions for the realization of the human rights of girls, and to mobilize all
necessary resources and support in order to achieve those goals;
_______________
160

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14862.
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
162
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal,
26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
163
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
161

538

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Urges States to strengthen efforts to urgently eradicate all forms of discrimination against women and
girls and, where applicable, to remain dedicated to the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Optional Protocol thereto;164
10. Also urges States to improve the situation of girl children living in poverty, in particular extreme poverty,
deprived of nutrition, water and sanitation facilities, with limited or no access to basic physical and mental healthcare services, shelter, education, participation and protection, taking into account that, while a severe lack of goods
and services hurts every human being, it is particularly threatening and harmful to the girl child, leaving her unable
to enjoy her rights, to reach her full potential and to participate as a full member of society, with a particular focus on
children living in child-headed households, including the child head of household;
11. Further urges States to ensure that the applicable requirements of the International Labour Organization
for the employment of girls and boys are respected and effectively enforced and that girls who are employed have
equal access to decent work and equal payment and remuneration, are protected from economic and sexual
exploitation, discrimination, sexual harassment, violence and abuse in the workplace, are aware of their rights and
have access to formal and non-formal education, skills development and vocational training, and also urges States to
develop gender-sensitive measures, including national action plans, where appropriate, to eliminate the worst forms
of child labour, commercial sexual exploitation, hazardous forms of child labour, trafficking and slavery-like
practices, including forced and bonded labour, and to recognize that girls, including in child-headed households,
face greater risks in this regard;
12. Calls upon States, with the support of relevant stakeholders, including the private sector, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations, as appropriate, to take all measures necessary
to ensure the right of girls to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health, including sexual and
reproductive health, and to develop sustainable health systems, strengthen existing ones to ensure primary health
care with an integrated HIV response and make them more accessible to adolescent girls;
13. Urges all States to promote gender equality and equal access to basic social services, such as education,
nutrition, water and sanitation, birth registration, health care, vaccinations and protection from diseases representing
the major causes of mortality, including non-communicable diseases, and to mainstream a gender perspective into
all development policies and programmes, including those specific to the girl child;
14. Calls upon States to strengthen the capacity of national health systems, and in this regard calls upon the
international community to assist national efforts, including by allocating adequate resources in order to provide
essential services needed to prevent obstetric fistula and to treat those cases that occur by providing the continuum
of services, including family planning, prenatal and postnatal care, skilled birth attendance, emergency obstetric care
and post-partum care, to adolescent girls, including those living in poverty and in underserved rural areas where
obstetric fistula is most common;
15. Urges all States to enact and strictly enforce laws ending child, early and forced marriage and ensure that
marriage is entered into only with the informed, free and full consent of the intending spouses, to enact and strictly
enforce laws concerning the minimum legal age of consent and the minimum age for marriage, to raise the
minimum age for marriage, engage all stakeholders, where necessary, and ensure that these laws to end child, early
and forced marriage are well known, to further develop and implement comprehensive policies, plans of action and
programmes for the survival, protection, development and advancement of the girl child in order to promote and
protect the full enjoyment of her human rights and to ensure equal opportunities for girls, including by making such
plans an integral part of her total development process;
16. Calls upon States to support and implement, including with dedicated resources, multisectoral policies
and programmes that end the practice of child, early and forced marriage and ensure the provision of viable
alternatives and institutional support, especially educational opportunities for girls, with an emphasis on keeping
girls in school through post-primary education, including those who are already married or pregnant, ensuring
physical access to education, including by increasing financial incentives to families, promoting the empowerment
of girls, improving educational quality, ensuring safe and hygienic conditions in schools and, where applicable,
establishing safe residential facilities;
_______________
164

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2131, No. 20378.

539

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Urges States to ensure that the rights of children in child-headed households are respected and that the
heads of such households exercise all the rights of the child and to further ensure that children in child-headed
households, particularly girls, receive the support they need to ensure their continued attendance in school consistent
with their age;
18. Also urges States to ensure that efforts to enact and implement legislation to protect, support and
empower child-headed households, in particular those headed by girls, include provisions to ensure their economic
well-being, access to health-care services, nutrition, clean water and sanitation, shelter and education, and
inheritance, and that the family is protected and assisted to stay together;
19. Calls upon States to put in place concrete measures to ensure that while children heading households,
especially girls, exercise all the rights of the child, they also receive appropriate assistance to enable them to fulfil
their de facto responsibilities as household heads by ensuring and protecting their property and inheritance rights;
20. Also calls upon States to include an integrated approach in supporting and empowering child-headed
households, given the mental and psychosocial trauma, stigma and physical and economic stress children may
experience as a result of becoming heads of households at a very young age;
21. Urges States to forge partnerships with relevant stakeholders, particularly by working with and involving
communities in developing programmes and mechanisms designed to ensure the safety, protection and
empowerment of children, especially girls, in child-headed households, as well as to ensure that they receive the
support they need from their communities;
22. Calls upon States to strengthen research on families and household formation and structure, with a
particular emphasis on the existence of de facto child-headed households and the long-term economic and
psychological impact that being a child head of household or a child raised by another child has on the children and
on social sustainability;
23. Also calls upon States to strengthen research, data collection and analysis on the girl child, disaggregated
by household structure, sex, age, disability status, economic situation, marital status and geographical location, in
order to provide a better understanding of the situations of girls, especially of the multiple forms of discrimination
that they face, and to inform the development of necessary policies and programme responses, which should take a
holistic age-appropriate approach to addressing the full range of the forms of discrimination that girls may face, in
order to protect their rights effectively;
24. Urges States to take all measures necessary to ensure the full enjoyment by girls with disabilities of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis with other children, to adopt, implement and strengthen
appropriate policies and programmes designed to address their needs and to take into account the conclusions
contained in the outcome document adopted at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of
the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with
disabilities, held on 23 September 2013;165
25. Urges all States to enact and enforce legislation to protect girls from all forms of violence, discrimination
and exploitation in all settings, including female infanticide and prenatal sex selection, female genital mutilation,
rape, domestic violence, incest, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, child prostitution and child pornography,
trafficking and forced migration, forced labour and child, early and forced marriage, and to develop age-appropriate
safe, confidential and disability-accessible programmes and medical, social and psychological support services to
assist girls who are subjected to violence and discrimination;
26. Calls upon all States to enact and enforce the necessary legislative or other measures, in cooperation
with relevant stakeholders, including the private sector and the media, to prevent the distribution over the Internet of
child pornography, including depictions of child sexual abuse, ensuring that adequate mechanisms are in place to
enable reporting and removal of such material and that its creators, distributors and collectors are prosecuted, as
appropriate;
27. Urges States to formulate comprehensive, multidisciplinary and coordinated national plans, programmes
or strategies to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls, which should have
_______________
165

540

Resolution 68/3.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

dedicated resources, be widely disseminated and provide targets and timetables for implementation, as well as
effective domestic enforcement procedures through the establishment of monitoring mechanisms involving all
parties concerned, including consultations with women’s organizations, giving attention to the recommendations
relating to the girl child of the Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council on violence against women, its
causes and consequences, and on trafficking in persons, especially women and children, and of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children;
28. Also urges States to ensure that children who are capable of forming their own views have the right to
express those views freely in all matters affecting them, with the views of the child being given due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child,to ensure that this right is fully and equally enjoyed by the girl
child, to involve girl children, including those with special needs, as well as girls with disabilities, and their
representative organizations in decision-making processes, as appropriate, and to include them as full partners in
identifying their own needs and in developing, planning, implementing and assessing policies and programmes to
meet those needs;
29. Recognizes that a considerable number of girl children are particularly vulnerable, including orphans,
children living on the street, internally displaced and refugee children, children affected by trafficking and sexual
and economic exploitation, children living with or affected by HIV and AIDS, and children who are incarcerated or
who live without parental support, and therefore urges States, with the support of the international community,
where relevant, to take appropriate measures to address the needs of such children by implementing national
policies and strategies to build and strengthen governmental, community and family capacities to provide a
supportive environment for such children, including by providing appropriate counselling and psychosocial support,
and ensuring their safety, enrolment in school and access to shelter, good nutrition and health and social services on
an equal basis with other children;
30. Encourages States to promote actions, including through bilateral and multilateral technical cooperation
and financial assistance, for the social reintegration of children in difficult situations, in particular girls, considering,
inter alia, views, skills and capacities that those children have developed in the conditions in which they lived and,
where appropriate, with their meaningful participation;
31. Urges all States and the international community to respect, promote and protect the rights of the girl
child, taking into account the particular vulnerabilities of the girl child in pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict
situations and in natural disasters, as well as in other humanitarian emergencies, all of which may result in the
creation of child-headed households, and further urges States to take special measures for the protection of girls in
all phases of humanitarian emergencies, from relief to recovery, and in particular to protect them from sexually
transmitted infections, including HIV infection, gender-based violence, including rape, sexual abuse and sexual
exploitation, torture, abduction, trafficking and forced labour, paying special attention to refugee and displaced girls,
and to take into account their special needs in disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation assistance and
reintegration processes;
32. Deplores all cases of sexual exploitation and abuse of women and girls in humanitarian crises, including
those cases involving humanitarian workers and peacekeepers, and urges States to take effective measures to
address gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies and to make all possible efforts to ensure that their laws
and institutions are adequate to prevent, promptly investigate and prosecute acts of gender-based violence;
33. Also deplores all acts of sexual exploitation, abuse of and trafficking in women and children by military,
police and civilian personnel involved in United Nations operations, welcomes the efforts undertaken by United
Nations agencies and peacekeeping operations to implement a zero-tolerance policy in this regard, and requests the
Secretary-General and personnel-contributing countries to continue to take all appropriate action necessary to
combat these abuses by such personnel, including through the full implementation without delay of those measures
adopted in the relevant General Assembly resolutions based on recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations;166
34. Urges Member States, the United Nations and other international, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as civil society, including non-governmental organizations, the private sector and the media, to fully and
_______________
166

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1).

541

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

effectively implement the relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons167 and the activities outlined therein, and expresses its view that it will, inter alia, contribute to the promotion
of the rights of girls, enhance cooperation and a better coordination of efforts in fighting trafficking in persons and
promote increased ratification and full implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime168 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;169
35. Calls upon Member States to devise, enforce and strengthen effective child- and youth-sensitive
measures to combat, eliminate and prosecute all forms of trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual and
economic exploitation, as part of a comprehensive anti-trafficking strategy within wider efforts to eliminate all
forms of violence against women and girls, including by taking effective measures against the criminalization of
girls who are victims of exploitation and ensuring that girls who have been exploited receive access to the necessary
psychosocial support;
36. Calls upon Governments, civil society, including the media, and non-governmental organizations to
promote human rights education and full respect for and the enjoyment of the human rights of the girl child, inter
alia, through the translation, production and dissemination of age-appropriate and gender-sensitive information
material on those rights to all sectors of society, in particular to children;
37. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to ensure that all organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, individually and collectively,
in particular the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the World Health Organization, the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Labour Organization, take into account the rights and the
particular needs of the girl child in country programmes of cooperation in accordance with national priorities,
including through the United Nations Development Assistance Framework;
38. Requests all human rights treaty bodies and the human rights mechanisms of the Human Rights Council,
including the special procedures, to adopt regularly and systematically a gender perspective in the implementation
of their mandates and to include in their reports information on the qualitative analysis of violations of the human
rights of women and girls, and encourages the strengthening of cooperation and coordination in that regard;
39. Requests States to ensure that, in all policies and programmes designed to provide comprehensive HIV
and AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support, particular attention and support are given to the girl child at risk,
living with or affected by HIV, including pregnant girls and young and adolescent mothers and girls with
disabilities, and child heads of households, with a view to achieving Millennium Development Goal 6, in particular
to halt and begin to reverse by 2015 the spread of HIV;
40. Invites States to promote initiatives aimed at reducing the prices of antiretroviral drugs, especially
second-line drugs, available to the girl child, including bilateral and private sector initiatives as well as initiatives on
a voluntary basis taken by groups of States, including those based on innovative financing mechanisms that
contribute to the mobilization of resources for social development, including those that aim to provide further access
to drugs at affordable prices to developing countries on a sustainable and predictable basis, and in this regard takes
note of the International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID;
41. Calls upon all States to integrate food and nutritional support with the goal that children, especially girl
children, have access at all times to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food
preferences for an active and healthy life;
42. Calls upon States to ensure that social protection programmes, including HIV-sensitive programmes, are
provided to orphans and other vulnerable children, with particular attention to addressing the needs and
vulnerabilities of girl children and protecting their rights;
_______________
167

Resolution 64/293.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
169
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
168

542

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

43. Urges States and the international community to increase resources at all levels, particularly in the
education and health sectors, so as to enable young people, especially girls, to gain the knowledge, attitudes and life
skills that they need to overcome their challenges, including the prevention of HIV infection and early pregnancy,
and to enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, including sexual and reproductive health;
44. Stresses the need to strengthen the commitment of States and the United Nations system in their
responsibility to mainstream the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, in particular the girl child, into
the development agenda at the national, regional and international levels, including in the elaboration of the
post-2015 development agenda;
45. Urges States, the international community, relevant United Nations entities, civil society and
international financial institutions to continue to actively support, through the allocation of financial resources and
technical assistance, efforts to address the situation of child-headed households;
46. Calls upon States and the international community to create an environment in which the well-being of
the girl child is ensured, inter alia, by cooperating, supporting and participating in global efforts for poverty
eradication at the global, regional and country levels, recognizing that strengthened availability and effective
allocation of resources are required at all levels in order to ensure that all the internationally agreed development and
poverty eradication goals, including those set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,170 are realized
within their time frame, and reaffirming that investment in children, particularly girls, and the realization of their
rights are among the most effective ways to eradicate poverty and should be given due consideration in the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
47. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly the report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on preventing and eliminating child, early and forced marriage with
a particular focus on challenges, achievements, best practices and implementation gaps, as well as the summary
report of the panel discussion to be held at the twenty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council, and decides to
consider both documents at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
48. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session
on the implementation of the present resolution, including a status analysis and emphasis on the importance of
implementing policies and achieving targets on water, sanitation and hygiene as they relate to the girl child, using
information provided by Member States, the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and nongovernmental organizations, with a view to assessing the impact of the present resolution on the well-being of the
girl child.
RESOLUTION 68/147
A/RES/68/147

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/452 and Corr.1, para. 31)171

68/147. Rights of the child
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming all its previous resolutions on the rights of the child in their entirety, the most recent of which is
resolution 67/152 of 20 December 2012,
_______________
170

Resolution 55/2.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).

171

543

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Emphasizing that the Convention on the Rights of the Child172 constitutes the standard in the promotion and
protection of the rights of the child, reaffirming that States parties to the Convention shall undertake all appropriate
legislative, administrative and other measures for the implementation of the rights recognized therein, while bearing
in mind the importance of the Optional Protocols to the Convention,173 and calling for their universal ratification
and effective implementation, as well as that of other human rights instruments,
Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 174 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,174 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 175 the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 176 the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,177 the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime178 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime,179 and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against
Women,180
Reaffirming that the general principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the best
interests of the child, non-discrimination, participation and survival and development, provide the framework for all
actions concerning children,
Recalling the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples181 of 2007, as well as its
resolution 65/198 of 21 December 2010 on indigenous issues, in which it was decided to hold a high-level meeting
in 2014, to be known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,
Reaffirming the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 182 the United Nations Millennium
Declaration 183 and the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly on
children, entitled “A world fit for children”,184 and recalling the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development
and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development,185 the Dakar Framework for Action
adopted at the World Education Forum,186 the Declaration on Social Progress and Development,187 the Universal
Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition,188 the Declaration on the Right to Development189 and
the Declaration of the commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of the
special session on children, held in New York from 11 to 13 December 2007,190 the outcome document of the highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held in New York from
_______________
172

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
174
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
175
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
176
Resolution 61/177, annex.
177
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
178
Ibid., vol. 2225, No. 39574.
179
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
180
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
181
Resolution 61/295, annex.
182
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
183
Resolution 55/2.
184
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
185
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
186
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal,
26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
187
See resolution 2542 (XXIV).
188
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
189
Resolution 41/128, annex.
190
Resolution 62/88.
173

544

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

20 to 22 September 2010,191 the outcome document, entitled “The future we want”, adopted at the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,192 and the
outcome document of the third Global Conference on Child Labour, held in Brasilia from 8 to 10 October 2013, and
recalling the World Congresses against Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents, held in Stockholm from
27 to 31 August 1996, in Yokohama, Japan, from 17 to 20 December 2001 and in Rio de Janeiro from 25 to
28 November 2008,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on progress made towards achieving the
commitments set out in the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly193
and on the status of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the issues addressed in Assembly resolution
67/152, 194 as well as the report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against
Children 195 and the report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict,196 whose recommendations should be carefully studied, taking fully into account the views of Member
States,
Acknowledging the important role played by national governmental structures for children, including, where
they exist, ministries and institutions in charge of child, family and youth issues and independent ombudspersons for
children or other national institutions for the promotion and protection of the rights of the child,
Recognizing that the family has the primary responsibility for the nurturing and protection of children, in the
best interests of the child, and that children, for the full and harmonious development of their personality, should
grow up in a family environment and in an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding,
Noting with appreciation the work to promote and protect the rights of the child carried out by all relevant
organs, bodies, entities and organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, by
relevant mandate holders and special procedures of the United Nations and by relevant regional organizations,
where appropriate, and intergovernmental organizations, and recognizing the valuable role of civil society, including
non-governmental organizations,
Profoundly concerned that the situation of children in many parts of the world remains negatively affected by
the world financial and economic crisis, and reaffirming that eradicating poverty continues to be the greatest global
challenge facing the world today, recognizing its impact beyond the socioeconomic context,
Profoundly concerned also that the situation of children in many parts of the world remains critical, in an
increasingly globalized environment, as a result of the persistence of poverty, social inequality, inadequate social and
economic conditions, pandemics, in particular HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, non-communicable diseases,
lack of access to safe drinking water and sanitation, environmental damage, climate change, natural disasters, armed
conflict, foreign occupation, displacement, violence, terrorism, abuse, trafficking in children and their organs, all
forms of exploitation, commercial sexual exploitation of children, child prostitution, child pornography and child
sex tourism, neglect, illiteracy, hunger, intolerance, discrimination, racism, xenophobia, gender inequality, disability
and inadequate legal protection, and convinced that urgent and effective national and international action is
called for,
Expressing deep concern that, despite the recognition of the right of the child to express his or her views freely
on all matters affecting him or her, and bearing in mind their evolving capacities, children are still seldom seriously
consulted and involved in such matters owing to a variety of constraints and impediments and that the full
implementation of this right in many parts of the world has yet to be fully realized,

_______________
191

Resolution 65/1.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
193
A/68/269.
194
A/68/257.
195
A/68/274.
196
A/68/267.
192

545

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

I
Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Optional Protocols thereto
1. Reaffirms that the general principles of, inter alia, the best interests of the child, non-discrimination,
participation and survival and development provide the framework for all actions concerning children;
2. Urges States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,172
the Optional Protocol thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography197 and the Optional
Protocol thereto on the involvement of children in armed conflict198 as a matter of priority and to implement them
fully by, inter alia, putting in place effective national legislation, policies and action plans, strengthening relevant
governmental structures for children, including, where appropriate, by establishing ministries and/or departments in
charge of child and youth issues and independent ombudspersons for children or other institutions for the promotion
and protection of the rights of the child and ensuring adequate and systematic training in the rights of the child for all
those working with and for children, as well as ensuring child rights education for children themselves;
3. Welcomes, in this regard, the efforts of the Secretary-General to promote the universal ratification of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography and the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict;
4. Also welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child194 and his reports on the implementation of the priority themes addressed in the resolutions on the rights of the
child adopted by the General Assembly at its sixty-first to sixty-fifth sessions,199 and in this regard welcomes the
progress achieved, recognizes the challenges that remain and calls upon States to further intensify the implementation
of the Convention;
5. Urges States parties to withdraw reservations that are incompatible with the object and purpose of the
Convention or the Optional Protocols thereto and to consider reviewing regularly other reservations with a view to
withdrawing them, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;182
6. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure,200 and calls upon States parties to implement it;
7. Welcomes the work of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, taking into account the adoption of its
general comments, and its actions to follow up on its concluding observations and recommendations, and calls upon
all States to strengthen their cooperation with the Committee, to comply in a timely manner with their reporting
obligations under the Convention and the Optional Protocols thereto, in accordance with the guidelines elaborated
by the Committee, and to take into account its recommendations, observations and general comments on the
implementation of the Convention;
8. Requests all relevant organs and mechanisms of the United Nations system to systematically incorporate
a strong child rights perspective throughout all activities in the fulfilment of their mandates, as well as to ensure that
their staff are trained in child rights matters, and calls upon States to continue to cooperate closely with all those
organs and mechanisms;
9. Encourages States to strengthen their national statistical capacities and to use statistics disaggregated,
inter alia, by age, sex and other relevant factors to enable the identification of discrimination and/or disparities and
other statistical indicators at the national, subregional, regional and international levels so as to develop and assess
social policies and programmes for the full realization of the rights of the child;
10. Expresses its concern that children with disabilities, particularly girls, are often at greater risk, both
within and outside the home, of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment and
maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse;
_______________
197

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2171, No. 27531.
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
199
Resolutions 61/146, 62/141, 63/241, 64/146 and 65/197.
200
Resolution 66/138, annex.
198

546

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

II
Promotion and protection of the rights of the child
and non-discrimination against children
Non-discrimination
11.

Calls upon all States:

(a) To ensure the enjoyment by all children of all their civil, political, cultural, economic and social rights
without discrimination of any kind;
(b) To incorporate special measures in formal and non-formal education and other programmes to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance affecting children;
(c) To take all necessary and effective measures to prevent and eliminate all forms of discrimination against
girls and all forms of violence, including female infanticide and prenatal sex selection, rape, sexual abuse and
harmful traditional or customary practices, including female genital mutilation, child, early and forced marriage and
forced sterilization, by enacting and enforcing legislation and, where appropriate, by formulating comprehensive,
multidisciplinary and coordinated national plans, programmes or strategies to protect girls, as well as by promoting
awareness-raising and social mobilization initiatives for the protection of their rights;
(d) To ensure the full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by children with disabilities
on an equal basis with other children, inter alia, by integrating the rights of children with disabilities into policies and
programmes affecting children, including their rights to education, to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health, including sexual and reproductive health, and to protection from violence, abuse and neglect; to
develop and enforce legislation aiming at their maximum inclusion in society, without discrimination, taking into
account that children with disabilities may be subject to multiple or aggravated forms of discrimination and
segregation; and to take into account the conclusions included in the outcome document of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed
development goals for persons with disabilities, held on 23 September 2013;201
12. Urges all States to respect and promote the right of girls and boys to express themselves freely, and their
right to be heard, to ensure that their views are given due weight, in accordance with their age and maturity, in all
matters affecting them and to involve children, including children with special needs, in decision-making processes,
taking into account the evolving capacities of children and the importance of involving children’s organizations and
child-led initiatives;
13. Also urges all States, in particular, to establish and strengthen mechanisms for the effective participation
of children in planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation relating to matters that affect them, such as
health, the environment, education, social and economic welfare, protection against violence, abuse and
exploitation, and disaster response;
14. Calls upon States that find themselves in situations of economic crisis to refrain from adopting
retrogressive measures that have a negative impact on the rights of the child, and also calls upon States to meet core
obligations on the rights of the child under the Convention on the Rights of the Child as a matter of priority, while
fully using maximum available resources;
Registration, family relations, adoption and alternative care
15. Once again urges all States parties to intensify their efforts to comply with their obligations under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child to preserve the child’s identity, including nationality, name and family
relations, as recognized by law, reminding States of their obligation to register the birth of all children without
discrimination of any kind, including late birth registration, and to ensure that registration procedures are universal,
accessible, simple, expeditious and effective and provided at minimal or no cost;
_______________
201

Resolution 68/3.

547

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

16. Recalls the adoption of the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children,202 and encourages States to
take the Guidelines into account when adopting, enforcing, improving or implementing policies and programmes to
protect children growing up without parents or caregivers, recognizing that efforts should be directed primarily to
enabling the child to remain in or return to the care of his or her parents or, when appropriate, other close family
members and that, where alternative care is necessary, family- and community-based care should be promoted over
placement in institutions;
17. Calls upon States to guarantee, to the extent consistent with the obligations of each State, the right of a
child whose parents reside in different States to maintain, on a regular basis, save in exceptional circumstances,
personal relations and direct contact with both parents by providing enforceable means of access and visitation in
both States and by respecting the principle that both parents have common responsibilities for the upbringing and
development of their children;
18. Also calls upon States to address and pay particular attention to cases of international parental or familial
child abduction, and encourages States to engage in multilateral and bilateral cooperation to resolve those cases,
preferably by accession to or ratification of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child
Abduction,203 and to comply fully with the Convention, and to facilitate, inter alia, the return of the child to the
country in which he or she resided immediately before the removal or retention;
19. Further calls upon States to take all necessary measures to prevent and combat illegal adoptions and all
adoptions that are not in the best interests of the child;
Economic and social well-being of children
20. Calls upon States and the international community to create a safe and enabling environment in which
the well-being of the child is ensured, including by strengthening international cooperation in this field, while
reaffirming that the primary responsibility rests with each individual State;
Eradication of poverty
21. Calls upon all States and the international community to cooperate, support and participate in the global
efforts for poverty eradication, to mobilize all necessary resources and support in that regard, according to national
plans and strategies, including through an integrated and multifaceted approach based on the rights and well-being
of children, and to accelerate their efforts to realize the internationally agreed development and poverty eradication
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, within their time framework, and reaffirms that investments in
children and the realization of their rights are among the most effective ways to eradicate poverty;
22. Strongly recommends that the promotion and protection of the rights and well-being of children be well
reflected in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
Right to education
23. Recognizes the right to education on the basis of equal opportunity and non-discrimination by making
primary education compulsory, inclusive and available free to all children, ensuring that all children have equal
access to education of good quality, making secondary education generally available and accessible to all, in
particular through the progressive introduction of free education, bearing in mind that special measures to ensure
equal access, including affirmative action, contribute to achieving equal opportunity and combating exclusion, and
ensuring school attendance, in particular for girls, children with disabilities and children living in poverty;
24. Urges Member States to implement strategies for the realization of the right to education, including in
humanitarian emergencies, as an integral element in the context of humanitarian protection and assistance, with the
support of the international community, the United Nations system, donors, multilateral agencies, the private sector,
civil society and non-governmental organizations;
_______________
202
203

548

Resolution 64/142, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1343, No. 22514.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health
25. Calls upon States:
(a) To take all necessary measures to ensure that the right of the child to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health is promoted and protected, without any kind of discrimination, and
that all forms of violence, which have a negative impact on the physical and mental health of the child, are
prevented and addressed, including through the enactment and implementation of laws, strategies and policies,
gender- and child-responsive budgeting and resource allocation, and adequate investment in health systems,
including comprehensive and integrated primary health care, including in efforts to achieve Millennium
Development Goals 4 and 5, and in the health workforce;
(b) To adopt strategies to prevent and address the harmful use of alcohol and illicit substances with a holistic
and human rights perspective, and to provide information, education and counselling on the effects of substance
abuse and on the importance of family and school support for its prevention and the treatment, rehabilitation and
reintegration of children and adolescents with substance abuse issues;
(c) To ensure that the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, including sexual
and reproductive health, is fully realized for all children by giving full attention to all health needs of children,
through providing information, health-care services and comprehensive, evidence-based education on sexual and
reproductive health, human rights and gender equality, consistent with their evolving capacities and with appropriate
direction and guidance from parents or legal guardians, in accordance with the rights, needs and best interests of the
child, free of discrimination and on an equitable and universal basis;
26. Recognizes the importance of the implementation of the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation for the full realization of the right of the child to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health, and therefore urges States and, through them, service providers to ensure a regular
supply of safe, acceptable, accessible and affordable drinking water and sanitation services of good quality and
sufficient quantity, guided also by the principles of equity, equality and non-discrimination, bearing in mind that the
human right to safe drinking water and sanitation for their populations is to be progressively realized with full
respect for national sovereignty;
27. Affirms the importance of applying a human rights-based approach to reducing and eliminating
preventable maternal and child mortality and morbidity, and requests all States to renew their political commitment
in that respect at all levels;
28. Calls upon States and all relevant stakeholders to address, as a matter of priority, the vulnerabilities faced
by children affected by and living with HIV by providing care, support and treatment to those children, their
families and caregivers by promoting rights-based and child-oriented HIV and AIDS policies and programmes, and
to ensure access to affordable, effective and quality prevention, care and treatment, including through correct
information, access to voluntary and confidential testing, comprehensive health care, including sexual and
reproductive health care, services and education, and access to safe, affordable, effective, quality pharmaceutical
products and medical technologies, by intensifying efforts to develop affordable, accessible and quality tools for
early diagnosis and by prioritizing the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of the virus;
Right to food
29. Calls upon all States to take action to ensure the full realization of the right to food for all and to
eliminate child hunger and malnutrition, including through the adoption or strengthening of national programmes to
address food security and nutrition and adequate livelihoods, especially regarding vitamin A, iron and iodine
deficiencies, the promotion of breastfeeding and a nutritious diet, as well as programmes, for example, school meal
programmes, that should ensure adequate nutrition for all children, in order to enable all children to fully develop
and maintain their physical and mental capacities;
Child labour
30. Calls upon all States to translate into concrete action their commitment to the progressive and effective
eradication of child labour that is likely to be hazardous, to interfere with the child’s education or to be harmful to
the child’s health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development, to eliminate immediately the worst
549

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

forms of child labour, to promote education as a key strategy in this regard, including the creation of vocational
training and apprenticeship programmes and the integration of working children into the formal education system,
and to examine and devise economic policies, where necessary, in cooperation with the international community
and the private sector, that address factors contributing to these forms of child labour;
31. Also calls upon all States to take into account the 2013 report of the International Labour Organization
on economic vulnerability, social protection and the fight against child labour, urges all States that have not yet
ratified the Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138)204 and the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999
(No. 182)205 of the International Labour Organization to consider doing so as a matter of priority, and encourages
States to consider ratifying the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189);
32. Urges States to substantially increase efforts to achieve the goal of eliminating the worst forms of child
labour by 2016, and in this regard encourages States to fully implement the Road Map for Achieving the
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour by 2016, an outcome of the Hague Global Child Labour
Conference;
33. Takes note with appreciation of the Brasilia Declaration on Child Labour, the outcome document of the
third Global Conference on Child Labour, held in Brasilia from 8 to 10 October 2013, and urges States to continue
to promote the engagement of all sectors of society in creating an enabling environment for the eradication of child
labour;
Prevention and elimination of violence against children
34. Condemns all forms of violence against children, and urges all States:
(a) To take effective and appropriate legislative and other measures to prohibit, prevent and eliminate all
forms of violence against children in all settings, and to strengthen international, national and local cooperation and
mutual assistance in this regard;
(b) To respect fully the rights, human dignity and physical integrity of children and to prevent and address
any emotional, physical or sexual violence or any other humiliating or degrading treatment or punishment;
(c) To give priority attention to the prevention of all forms of violence against children and to addressing its
underlying causes and its gender dimension through a systematic, comprehensive and multifaceted approach,
recognizing that witnessing violence, including domestic violence, also causes harm to children;
(d) To develop a well-coordinated and well-resourced national strategy for the prevention and elimination of
all forms of violence against children, including measures aimed at, inter alia, raising awareness, building the
capacity of professionals working with and for children, supporting effective parenting programmes, fostering
research, collecting data on the incidence of violence against children and developing and implementing appropriate
national monitoring tools to periodically assess progress;
(e) To protect children from all forms of violence or abuse by all those who work with and for children,
including in educational settings, in alternative care and residential care settings, and in international development
activities and humanitarian relief work, as well as by government officials, such as the police, law enforcement
authorities, employees and officials in detention centres or welfare institutions and health-care personnel;
(f) To establish and develop safe, well-publicized, confidential and accessible mechanisms to enable
children or their representatives to seek counselling, to report violence against children and file complaints on
incidents of violence against children and to ensure that child victims of violence have access to confidential, childand gender-sensitive health and social services and are supported in their recovery and reintegration, taking into
account the joint report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children206 on this matter;
_______________
204

Ibid., vol. 1015, No. 14862.
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
206
A/HRC/16/56.
205

550

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(g) To take measures to ensure that all those who work with and for children protect children from bullying,
including from bullying through the Internet and other communications technologies, and implement preventive and
anti-bullying policies in order to ensure a safe and supportive environment free from harassment and violence;
(h) To raise awareness of the negative effects of violence against children and to strive to change attitudes
that condone or normalize any form of violence against children, including cruel, inhuman or degrading forms of
discipline, treatment or punishment, harmful practices and all forms of sexual violence;
(i) To take measures to promote constructive and positive forms of discipline and child development
approaches in all settings, including the home, schools and other educational settings, and throughout care and
justice systems;
(j) To end impunity for perpetrators of crimes against children, to undertake thorough and prompt
investigations of all acts of violence against children and to prosecute such acts of violence and impose appropriate
penalties, recognizing that persons convicted of violent offences against children, including sexual abuse, who
continue to pose a risk of harm to children should be prevented from working with children;
(k) To address the gender dimension of all forms of violence against children and incorporate a gender
perspective in all policies adopted and actions taken to protect children against all forms of violence, acknowledging that
girls and boys face varying risks from different forms of violence at different ages and in different situations, and in this
context recalls the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women, including those adopted at
its fifty-seventh session,207 on the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence against women and girls;
35. Recognizes the contribution of the International Criminal Court in ending impunity for the most serious
crimes against children, including genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, and calls upon States not to
grant amnesties for such crimes;
36. Encourages all States, and requests United Nations entities, regional organizations and civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, to continue to disseminate widely and follow up on the United Nations
study on violence against children and the recommendations contained therein,208 and to promote, where relevant,
their mainstreaming in regional policy agendas and to further consolidate their implementation at the national level;
37. Recognizes the significant progress and achievements made since the establishment of the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, expresses support for her work to
promote the prevention and elimination of all forms of violence against children in all regions and to advance the
implementation of the recommendations in the study on violence against children, and takes note with appreciation
of her global survey and thematic reports, including the report entitled “Protecting children from harmful practices
in plural legal systems”, and the joint report of the Special Representative, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on prevention of and
responses to violence against children within the juvenile justice system;209
38. Notes with appreciation the consolidated partnerships promoted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children, in coordination with national Governments, United Nations
agencies, regional organizations, human rights bodies and mechanisms and representatives of civil society and with
the participation of children, and the contribution of her regional and thematic consultations and field missions to
advancing progress in the protection of children from violence;
39. Encourages all States, requests United Nations entities and agencies, and invites regional organizations
and civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to cooperate with the Special Representative and to
provide support, including financial support, to her for the continued effective and independent performance of her
mandate, and calls upon States and institutions concerned and invites the private sector to provide voluntary
contributions for that purpose;

_______________
207

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
See A/61/299 and A/62/209.
209
A/HRC/21/25.
208

551

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Promoting and protecting the rights of children, including children in particularly difficult situations
40. Calls upon all States to prevent violations of the rights of children working and/or living on the street,
including all forms of discrimination, arbitrary detention and extrajudicial, arbitrary or summary executions, torture
and all kinds of violence and exploitation, and to bring the perpetrators to justice, to adopt and implement policies
for the protection, social and psychosocial rehabilitation and reintegration of those children and to adopt economic,
social and educational strategies to address the problems of children working and/or living on the street;
41. Reaffirms the right of the child to express his or her views freely in all matters affecting him or her, as
well as the rights of the child to freedom of association, to freedom of expression and to freedom of peaceful
assembly;
42. Calls upon all States to protect refugee, asylum-seeking and internally displaced children, in particular
those who are unaccompanied, who are particularly exposed to violence and risks in connection with armed conflict
and trafficking, and taking into account their gender-specific needs, stressing the need for States as well as the
international community to continue to pay more systematic and in-depth attention to the special assistance,
protection and development needs of those children through, inter alia, programmes aimed at rehabilitation and
physical and psychological recovery, and to programmes for voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and
feasible, local integration and resettlement, to give priority to family tracing and family reunification and
reintegration and, where appropriate, to cooperate with international humanitarian and refugee organizations,
including by facilitating their work;
43. Also calls upon all States to ensure, for children belonging to minorities and vulnerable groups,
including migrant children and indigenous children, the enjoyment of all human rights as well as access to health
care, social services and education on an equal basis with others and to ensure that all such children, in particular
unaccompanied migrant children and those who are victims of violence and exploitation, receive special protection
and assistance;
44. Calls upon States to protect the human rights of migrant children, given their vulnerability, particularly
unaccompanied migrant children, ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in their
policies of integration, return and family reunification;
45. Urges States to ensure equal access to quality education for indigenous children, particularly for
indigenous girls, and to promote education systems that respect the cultures and traditions of the communities that
are responsive to their needs;
46. Reaffirms the right of indigenous children, in community with other members of their group, to learn,
enjoy and transmit their own culture, to profess and practise their own religion or belief and to use their own
language, in this regard encourages Member States to actively promote the objectives of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People,181 and looks forward to the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples, to be held in 2014;
47. Calls upon all States to protect, in law and in practice, the inheritance and property rights of orphans,
paying particular attention to underlying gender-based discrimination, which may interfere with the fulfilment of
these rights;
48. Also calls upon all States to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of children in emergency situations,
including natural disasters, in particular their right to food, safe drinking water and sanitation, education, emergency
health care, family reunification, protection and trauma relief;
Children and the administration of justice
49. Recalls the validity and importance of international standards and norms in the field of human rights in
the administration of juvenile justice, including the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,210 the
United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency,211 the United Nations Standard Minimum
_______________
210
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal Instruments (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
211
Resolution 45/112, annex.

552

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, 212 the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles
Deprived of their Liberty,213 the Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime214
and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women
Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),215 and calls upon all States:
(a) To abolish, by law and in practice, as soon as possible, the death penalty, life imprisonment without
possibility of release, emotional or physical violence or any other humiliating or degrading treatment for those under
18 years of age at the time of the commission of the offence, and invites States to consider repealing all other forms
of life imprisonment for offences committed by those under 18 years of age;
(b) To immediately commute such sentences and to ensure that any child previously sentenced to the death
penalty or life imprisonment without possibility of release is removed from special prison facilities, especially from
death row, and transferred to regular institutions of detention appropriate for the age of the offender and the offence
committed;
50. Encourages States to develop and implement a comprehensive juvenile justice policy to protect and
address the needs of children in contact with the law, with a view to promoting, inter alia, crime prevention
programmes, the use of alternative measures, such as diversion and restorative justice, and ensuring compliance
with the principle that deprivation of liberty of children should only be used as a measure of last resort and for the
shortest appropriate period of time, as well as to avoid, wherever possible, the use of pretrial detention for children;
51. Urges States to take special measures to protect children in contact with the law, including by means of
the provision of adequate legal assistance, training in juvenile justice for judges, police officers, prosecutors and
specialized lawyers, as well as other representatives who provide other appropriate assistance, such as social
workers, the establishment of specialized courts, as appropriate, the promotion of universal birth registration and age
documentation and the protection of the right of juvenile offenders to maintain contact with their families through
correspondence and visits, save in exceptional circumstances;
52. Calls upon all States to protect children deprived of their liberty from torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, to ensure that, if they are arrested, detained or imprisoned, children are provided
with adequate legal assistance and that no child is sentenced or subjected to forced labour or emotional or physical
violence or any other humiliation or degrading treatment or deprived of access to and provision of health care and
services, hygiene and environmental sanitation, access to open space for recreation, education, basic instruction and
vocational training, and to undertake prompt investigations of all reported acts of violence and ensure that all
violators are held accountable;
53. Urges States to ensure that the child is assisted during all judicial proceedings by a competent adult,
parent or guardian, in addition to the child’s lawyer, and to ensure that the child’s right to be heard in proceedings is
observed;
54. Calls upon all States to take all the measures necessary to avoid revictimization of children victims or
witnesses during all stages of judicial proceedings;
55. Encourages continued regional and cross-regional efforts, the sharing of best practices and the provision
of technical assistance in the field of juvenile justice, and notes in this regard the initiative to convene a world
congress on juvenile justice in Geneva from 26 to 30 January 2015;
Children of incarcerated parents
56. Calls upon all States to give attention to the impact of parental detention and imprisonment on children
and, in particular:
(a) To give priority consideration to non-custodial measures when sentencing or deciding on pretrial
measures for a child’s sole or primary caretaker, subject to the need to protect the public and the child, and bearing
in mind the gravity of the offence;
_______________
212

Resolution 40/33, annex.
Resolution 45/113, annex.
214
Economic and Social Council resolution 2005/20, annex.
215
Resolution 65/229, annex.
213

553

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(b) To identify and promote good practices in relation to the needs and physical, emotional, social and
psychological development of babies and children affected by parental detention and imprisonment;
57. Acknowledges that a parent’s deprivation of liberty, sentencing to death or life imprisonment has a
serious impact on children’s development, and urges States, in the framework of their national child protection
efforts, to provide the assistance and support these children may require;
Prevention and eradication of the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography
58. Expresses deep concern about the persistence of the practices of the sale of children, child slavery and
sexual exploitation of children in prostitution and pornography, and calls upon all States:
(a) To prevent, criminalize, prosecute and punish effectively all forms of the sale of children, including for
the purposes of the transfer of organs of the child for profit, child slavery, commercial and domestic sexual
exploitation of children, child prostitution and child pornography, with the aim of eradicating those practices and the
use of the Internet and other information and communications technologies for these purposes, to combat the
existence of a market that encourages such criminal practices and take measures to eliminate the demand that fosters
them, as well as to address the rights of victims to effective protection and rehabilitation, to provide remedy and to
take effective measures against the criminalization of children who are victims of exploitation;
(b) To enact and enforce necessary legislative or other measures, in cooperation with relevant stakeholders,
to prevent the distribution over the Internet and in all other media of pornography that exploits children, ensuring
that adequate mechanisms are in place to enable the reporting and removal of such material and that its creators,
distributors and collectors are prosecuted, as appropriate;
(c) To ensure the prosecution and punishment of offenders, whether local or foreign, by the competent
national authorities, either in the country in which the crime was committed, in the country of which the offender is
a national or resident, in the country of which the victim is a national or on any other basis permitted under domestic
law, and for these purposes to afford one another the greatest measure of assistance and the necessary collaboration
for prevention, detection, investigations or criminal or extradition proceedings;
(d) To increase cooperation at all levels to prevent and dismantle networks trafficking in or selling children
and their organs and, for those States that have not yet done so, to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;179
(e) In cases of trafficking in children, the sale of children, child prostitution, child pornography and child sex
tourism, to address effectively the needs of victims, including their safety, legal assistance and protection, physical
and psychological recovery and full reintegration into society, paying particular attention to their gender-specific
needs, including through bilateral and multilateral technical cooperation and financial assistance;
(f) To combat the existence of a market that encourages such criminal practices against children, including
through the adoption, effective application and enforcement of preventive, rehabilitative and punitive measures
targeting customers or individuals who sexually exploit or sexually abuse children;
(g) To give priority to the identification of norms and standards on the responsibilities of transnational
corporations and other business enterprises, particularly those involved in information and communications
technologies, related to respect for the rights of children, including the right to be protected from sexual abuse and
exploitation, particularly in the virtual realm, as set out in the relevant legal instruments, and to outline basic
measures to be taken for implementation;
(h) To mobilize public awareness, involving families and communities, with the participation of children,
concerning the protection of children against all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse;
(i) To contribute to the prevention and elimination of the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography by adopting a holistic approach, addressing the contributing factors, including underdevelopment,
poverty, economic disparities, inequitable socioeconomic structures, dysfunctional families, lack of education,
urban-rural migration, gender discrimination, criminal or irresponsible adult sexual behaviour, child sex tourism,
organized crime, armed conflicts and trafficking in children;
(j) To take measures to eliminate the demand that fosters all forms of exploitation that leads to trafficking,
including sexual exploitation and the sex tourism demand;
554

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Children affected by armed conflict
59. Condemns in the strongest terms all violations and abuses committed against children in armed conflict,
and in this regard urges all States and other parties to armed conflict that are engaged, in contravention of applicable
international law, including humanitarian law, in the recruitment and use of children, in patterns of killing and
maiming of children and/or rape and other sexual violence against children, acknowledging that sexual violence in
these situations disproportionately affects girls, and in recurrent attacks on schools and/or hospitals and related
personnel, as well as in all other violations and abuses against children, to take time-bound and effective measures to
end them;
60. Recalls, in accordance with international humanitarian law, that indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
including children, are prohibited and that they shall not be the object of attack, including by way of reprisal or
excessive use of force, condemns such practices resulting in the killing and maiming of children, and demands that
all parties immediately put an end to such attacks;
61. Urges States, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, other relevant international and regional
organizations and civil society to give serious attention to, and protect and assist child victims of, all violations and
abuses committed against children in situations of armed conflict, in accordance with international humanitarian
law, including the First to Fourth Geneva Conventions;216
62. Calls upon all States, relevant United Nations bodies and agencies and regional organizations to
mainstream the rights of the child into all activities in armed conflict and post-conflict situations and to ensure
adequate child protection training of their staff and personnel;
63. Calls upon States:
(a) When ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, to raise the minimum age for voluntary recruitment of persons into the national armed
forces from that set out in article 38, paragraph 3, of the Convention, bearing in mind that, under the Convention,
persons under 18 years of age are entitled to special protection, and to adopt safeguards to ensure that such
recruitment is not forced or coerced;
(b) To take all feasible measures to ensure the demobilization and effective disarmament of children used in
armed conflicts and to implement effective measures for their rehabilitation, physical and psychological recovery
and reintegration into society, in particular through educational measures, taking into account the rights and the
specific needs and capacities of girls, and calls upon States and regional organizations to include commitments in
this regard in peace agreements;
(c) To ensure timely and adequate funding for national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for children and for settlement, rehabilitation and reintegration efforts for all children associated with
armed forces and groups, including detained children, particularly in support of national initiatives, and to secure the
long-term sustainability of such efforts, including through the use of a multisectoral and community-based approach
that is inclusive of all children, family-based care arrangements, as also highlighted in the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (the Paris Principles), and the mobilization of
financial resources and technical assistance from international cooperation for rehabilitation and reintegration
programmes for children;
(d) To undertake measures to ensure that children in situations of armed conflict enjoy all the rights
enshrined in relevant international instruments and that national authorities, with the support of the international
community, as appropriate, take steps to ensure access to and the delivery of basic services necessary for the
survival of children in different areas, including health, nutrition, water, sanitation and psychosocial recovery,
ensuring continuous access to education for children affected by armed conflict, and to encourage the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to further raise attention and mobilize
international support to address the plight of these children;
_______________
216

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.

555

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(e) To protect children affected by armed conflict, in particular from violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to ensure that they receive timely, effective humanitarian assistance,
noting the efforts taken to end impunity by ensuring accountability and punishing perpetrators, and calls upon the
international community to hold those responsible for violations accountable, inter alia, through the International
Criminal Court;
(f) To take all feasible measures, in accordance with international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as a matter of priority, to prevent the recruitment and use of children by armed groups, as distinct from the armed
forces of a State, including the adoption of policies that do not tolerate such practices and legal measures necessary
to prohibit and criminalize them;
(g) To support relevant existing internationally agreed mechanisms established to address the issue of
children in armed conflict that contribute to the roles, responsibilities and capacities of national Governments in
this field;
64. Calls upon all States and relevant United Nations bodies to continue to support, as appropriate, national
and international mine action efforts, including with regard to cluster munitions and other unexploded ordnance, and
further calls upon States, regional and subregional organizations and non-governmental actors to minimize the
impact of explosive weapons on civilians, including children, and to offer assistance to victims of mines;
65. Condemns in the strongest terms rape and other forms of sexual violence committed against children in
armed conflict, expresses deep concern at mass and systematic rape and sexual violence committed against children
in armed conflict, in some instances calculated to humiliate, dominate, instil fear and disperse and/or forcibly
relocate a population, calls upon all States and relevant United Nations bodies and agencies and regional
organizations to address this issue, as well as the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse of children in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and urges States to adopt appropriate national legislation to prevent such crimes
and to ensure their rigorous investigation and prosecution;
66. Reaffirms the essential roles of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Human
Rights Council for the promotion and protection of the rights and welfare of children, including children affected by
armed conflict, notes the increasing role played by the Security Council in ensuring protection for children affected
by armed conflict, and also notes the activities undertaken by the Peacebuilding Commission in areas that promote
and contribute to the enjoyment of the rights and welfare of children;
67. Notes with appreciation the steps taken regarding Security Council resolutions 1539 (2004) of 22 April
2004, 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005, 1882 (2009) of 4 August 2009, 1998 (2011) of 12 July 2011 and 2068 (2012) of
19 September 2012, and the efforts of the Secretary-General to implement the monitoring and reporting mechanism
on children and armed conflict in accordance with those resolutions, with the participation of and in cooperation
with national Governments and relevant United Nations and civil society actors, including at the country level,
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that information collected and communicated by the monitoring and
reporting mechanism is accurate, objective and verifiable, and in this regard encourages the work and the
deployment of United Nations child protection advisers in peacekeeping operations and political and peacebuilding
missions;
68. Welcomes the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and recognizes the increased level of activity of her office and the progress achieved since the
establishment of the mandate of the Special Representative;
69. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Representative196 and of the significant
developments and achievements in the protection of children in armed conflict at the national and international
levels, and emphasizes the contribution of the field visits conducted by the Special Representative with the consent
of the State concerned in situations of armed conflict as an important element in the implementation of her mandate;
70. Recalls that all parties bear the primary responsibility for the protection of children, recalls the
obligations to refrain from attacking schools in violation of international humanitarian law and to take all
feasible precautionary measures to protect civilians from such attacks, in particular schoolchildren, and urges
States to avoid using schools for military purposes and to ensure safe and continuous access to education in
times of conflict;
556

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

III
Follow-up
71. Decides:
(a) To request the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the rights of the child containing information on the status of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
issues addressed in the present resolution, with a focus on progress achieved and challenges in protecting children
from discrimination and overcoming inequalities, in the light of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child;
(b) To request the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
continue to submit reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on the activities undertaken in
discharging her mandate, including information on her field visits and on the progress achieved and the challenges
remaining on the children and armed conflict agenda;
(c) To request the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children to continue
to submit annual reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on the activities undertaken in the
fulfilment of her mandate, including information on her field visits and on the progress achieved and the challenges
remaining on the violence against children agenda, and, in accordance with paragraph 48 of its resolution 67/152, to
ensure that the effective performance and the sustainability of the core activities of the mandate of the Special
Representative are maintained;
(d) To request the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography to
continue to submit reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on the activities undertaken in
the fulfilment of her mandate, including information on her field visits and on the progress achieved and the
challenges remaining on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography agenda;
(e) To invite the Chair of the Committee on the Rights of the Child to present an oral report on the work of
the Committee to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session as a way to enhance communication between the
Assembly and the Committee;
(f) To continue its consideration of the question at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled “Promotion
and protection of the rights of children”, focusing section III of the resolution entitled “The rights of the child” on
the theme “Progress achieved and challenges in protecting children from discrimination and overcoming
inequalities in the light of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child”.
RESOLUTION 68/148
A/RES/68/148

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/452 and Corr.1, para. 31)217

68/148. Child, early and forced marriage
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 66/140 of 19 December 2011 on the girl child and 67/144 of 20 December 2012 on
the intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women, as well as Human Rights Council
_______________
217

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Zambia.

557

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

resolution 24/23 of 27 September 2013, entitled “Strengthening efforts to prevent and eliminate child, early and
forced marriage: challenges, achievements, best practices and implementation gaps”,218 and all other previous
resolutions relevant to child, early and forced marriage,
Reaffirming its resolution 66/170 of 19 December 2011 on the International Day of the Girl Child, and noting
with appreciation the theme of the first International Day, “Ending child marriage”,
Guided by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,219 the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights220 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,220 as well as other relevant
human rights instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child221 and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,222
Reaffirming the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,223 as well as the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development,224 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action225 and
the outcome documents of their review conferences,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on preventing and eliminating child, early and forced marriage, with a particular
focus on challenges, achievements, best practices and implementation gaps, mandated by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution 24/23,218 as well as the related summary report on the panel discussion to be held at the
twenty-sixth session of the Council, to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of the rights of children”;
2. Decides to convene during its sixty-eighth session a panel discussion on child, early and forced marriage
worldwide, including the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda, requests the Secretary-General to liaise
with States, relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, relevant special procedures
mechanisms, civil society, including relevant children and youth organizations, and national human rights
institutions with a view to ensuring their input, and also requests the Secretary-General to prepare an informal
summary report on the panel discussion;
3. Also decides to consider the issue of child, early and forced marriage at its sixty-ninth session under the
item entitled “Promotion and protection of the rights of children”, taking into account the multifaceted and
worldwide nature of the issue of child, early and forced marriage.
RESOLUTION 68/149
A/RES/68/149

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/453, para. 11)226

68/149. Rights of indigenous peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the Economic and
Social Council relating to the rights of indigenous peoples,
_______________
218

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
Resolution 217 A (III).
220
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
221
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
222
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
223
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
224
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
225
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
226
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Lithuania, Mexico, Montenegro, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Slovenia, Spain, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
219

558

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming its resolutions 65/198 of 21 December 2010, 66/142 of 19 December 2011 and 67/153 of
20 December 2012,
Reaffirming also its resolution 66/296 of 17 September 2012 on the organization of the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly, to be known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, to be held on
22 and 23 September 2014, and noting with appreciation its inclusive preparatory process, as well as the participation
of representatives of indigenous peoples in the World Conference,
Recalling the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,227 which addresses their
individual and collective rights,
Inviting Governments and indigenous peoples to organize international or regional conferences and other
thematic events to contribute to the preparations for the World Conference, and encouraging the participation of the
three United Nations mechanisms on indigenous peoples228 at these events,
Welcoming the engagement of indigenous peoples in the preparations for the World Conference, including at
the regional and global levels, and encouraging their continued and active engagement,
Recalling its resolution 59/174 of 20 December 2004 on the Second International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous People (2005–2014) and its resolution 60/142 of 16 December 2005 on the Programme of Action for the
Second International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People, in which it adopted “Partnership for action and
dignity” as the theme for the Second Decade,
Welcoming the achievements made during the Second International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People,
and recognizing that challenges remain in finding the solutions to the problems faced by indigenous peoples in such
areas as traditional knowledge, culture, education, health, human rights, the environment and social and economic
development,
Stressing the importance of promoting and pursuing the objectives of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples also through international cooperation to support national and regional efforts to
achieve the ends of the Declaration, including the right to maintain and strengthen the distinct political, legal,
economic, social and cultural institutions of indigenous peoples and the right to participate fully, if they so choose, in
the political, economic, social and cultural life of the State,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,229 the 2005 World Summit Outcome230 and the outcome
document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,231
Recalling also the outcome document, entitled “The future we want”, of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,232
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolutions 24/9 of 26 September 2013, entitled “Human rights and
indigenous peoples: mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples”,233 by which the
Council decided to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, and 24/10 of
26 September 2013, entitled “Human rights and indigenous peoples”,233
Recalling Commission on the Status of Women resolutions 49/7 of 11 March 2005, entitled “Indigenous
women: beyond the ten-year review of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action”,234 and 56/4 of 9 March
2012, entitled “Indigenous women: key actors in poverty and hunger eradication”,235
_______________
227

Resolution 61/295, annex.
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on the rights of indigenous peoples.
229
Resolution 55/2.
230
Resolution 60/1.
231
Resolution 65/1.
232
Resolution 66/288, annex.
233
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
234
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. D.
235
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2012/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. D.
228

559

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also the first Peoples’ World Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth, hosted
by the Plurinational State of Bolivia in Cochabamba from 20 to 22 April 2010,236
Taking note of the regional review conferences on population and development, including the Regional
Conference on Population and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, held in Montevideo from 12 to
15 August 2013, which included “Indigenous peoples: interculturalism and rights” as part of the Montevideo
Consensus on Population and Development adopted at the Conference,
Welcoming the global launch of the International Year of Quinoa, 2013, and the high-level panel discussion on
food security and nutrition, held on 20 February 2013, which constituted one of the first steps in an ongoing process,
focusing the world’s attention on the important role of quinoa, promoting the traditional knowledge of Andean
indigenous peoples, contributing to the achievement of food security, nutrition and poverty eradication and raising
awareness of their contribution to social, economic and environmental development, and inviting Member States to
share good practices on the implementation of activities in support of the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Recognizing the value and the diversity of the cultures and the form of social organization of indigenous
peoples and their holistic traditional scientific knowledge of their lands, natural resources and environment,
Recognizing also the importance of traditional sustainable agricultural practices, including traditional seed
supply systems, as well as access to credit and other financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health care,
social services, education, training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable technologies, including efficient
irrigation, the reuse of treated wastewater and water harvesting and storage for indigenous peoples and others living
in rural areas,
Concerned about the extreme disadvantages that indigenous peoples have typically faced across a range of
social and economic indicators and about the impediments to their full enjoyment of their rights,
Stressing the need to pay particular attention to the rights and special needs of indigenous women, children,
youth and persons with disabilities, as set out in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, including in the process of protecting and promoting access to justice by indigenous peoples, indigenous
women, children, youth and persons with disabilities,
Recalling its resolution 65/198, by which it decided to expand the mandate of the United Nations Voluntary
Fund for Indigenous Populations so that it could assist representatives of indigenous peoples’ organizations and
communities to participate in sessions of the Human Rights Council and of human rights treaty bodies, on the basis
of diverse and renewed participation and in accordance with relevant rules and regulations, including Economic and
Social Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996, and urged States to contribute to the Fund,
Recalling also its decision, in its resolution 66/296, to expand the mandate of the Fund so that it can assist, in
an equitable manner, representatives of indigenous peoples, organizations, institutions and communities to
participate in the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, including in the preparatory process, in accordance with
relevant rules and regulations,
1. Welcomes the work of the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, of the Permanent
Forum on Indigenous Issues and of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of indigenous
peoples, takes note of his report,237 and encourages all Governments to respond favourably to his requests for visits;
2. Takes note of the outcome document of the Global Indigenous Preparatory Conference for the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples,238 held in Alta, Norway, in June 2013, and other proposals made by indigenous
peoples, and recommends that the four themes identified in the outcome document be taken into account when
considering the specific themes for the round-table and interactive panel discussions for the World Conference, and
that the Alta outcome document, as well as other proposals made by indigenous peoples, be taken into account
when preparing the outcome document of the World Conference;
_______________
236

See A/64/777, annexes I and II.
A/68/317.
238
See A/67/994, annex.
237

560

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Urges Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to continue to
contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations and the Trust Fund for the Second
International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People, and invites indigenous organizations and private institutions
and individuals to do likewise;
4. Encourages those States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the International Labour Organization
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169)239 to consider doing so and to consider supporting the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,227 and welcomes the increased support by States
for the Declaration;
5. Encourages States, in consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples, to take the appropriate
measures, including legislative measures, to achieve the goals of the Declaration;
6. Encourages all interested parties, in particular indigenous peoples, to disseminate and consider good
practices at different levels as a practical guide on how to attain the goals of the Declaration;
7. Stresses the need to strengthen the commitment of States and the entities of the United Nations system to
mainstream the promotion and protection of the rights of indigenous peoples into the development agenda at the
national, regional and international levels, and encourages giving due consideration to the rights of indigenous
peoples in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
8. Decides to continue, at its sixty-ninth session, its consideration of ways and means of promoting the
participation of representatives of indigenous peoples at meetings of relevant United Nations bodies and other relevant
United Nations meetings and processes on issues affecting indigenous peoples, on the basis of the rules of procedure of
such bodies and existing procedural rules and regulations of the United Nations, taking into account the report of the
Secretary-General,240 existing practices for the accreditation of representatives of indigenous peoples at the United
Nations and the objectives of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples;
9. Requests that United Nations entities further enhance their coordination and intensify their efforts
towards a more coherent, comprehensive and integrated approach to the rights of indigenous peoples through, inter
alia, the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Issues and the United Nations Indigenous Peoples’ Partnership,
and calls upon the United Nations entities, in close collaboration with Member States, organizations, institutions and
representatives of indigenous peoples, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and relevant partners, to
develop additional measures to continue to support national, regional and international efforts to advance the rights
of indigenous peoples;
10. Decides to change the title of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations to the
United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Peoples;
11. Also decides to continue consideration of the question at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled
“Rights of indigenous peoples”.
RESOLUTION 68/150
A/RES/68/150

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/454,
para. 22),241 by a recorded vote of 135 to 4, with 51 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,

_______________
239

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1650, No. 28383.
A/HRC/21/24.
241
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, Burundi, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Mauritania, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Seychelles,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
240

561

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Kiribati, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominica, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

68/150. Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,242 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,243 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination244 and other relevant human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16 of 16 April 2004 245 and
2005/5 of 14 April 2005 246 and relevant Human Rights Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of
28 March 2008,247 18/15 of 29 September 2011248 and 21/33 of 28 September 2012,249 as well as General Assembly
resolutions 60/143 of 16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006, 62/142 of 18 December 2007, 63/162 of
18 December 2008, 64/147 of 18 December 2009, 65/199 of 21 December 2010, 66/143 of 19 December 2011 and
67/154 of 20 December 2012 on this issue and resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220 of 22 December
2007, 63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of 18 December 2009, 65/240 of 24 December 2010, 66/144 of
19 December 2011 and 67/155 of 20 December 2012, entitled “Global efforts for the total elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up
to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”,
Acknowledging other important initiatives within the General Assembly aimed at raising awareness about the
suffering of victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including in the historical
perspective, in particular regarding commemoration of the victims of the transatlantic slave trade,
Recalling the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and the Judgement of the Tribunal, which recognized as
criminal, inter alia, the SS organization and all its integral parts, including the Waffen SS, through its officially
accepted members implicated in or with knowledge of the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity
connected with the Second World War, as well as other relevant provisions of the Charter and the Judgement,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September
_______________
242

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
244
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
245
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
246
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
247
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
248
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
249
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
243

562

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2001,250 in particular paragraph 2 of the Declaration and paragraph 86 of the Programme of Action, as well as the
relevant provisions of the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference, of 24 April 2009,251 in particular
paragraphs 11 and 54,
Alarmed, in this regard, at the spread in many parts of the world of various extremist political parties,
movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, as well as similar extremist ideological
movements,
Deeply concerned by all recent manifestations of violence and terrorism incited by violent nationalism,
racism, xenophobia and related intolerance,
1. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration250 and of the outcome document of the
Durban Review Conference,251 in which States condemned the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neoFascism and violent nationalist ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena
could never be justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
2. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared in accordance with the request contained in General
Assembly resolution 67/154;252
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for her
commitment to maintaining the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance as
one of the priority activities of her Office, and welcomes in this regard the launch by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of the database on practical means to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
4. Expresses deep concern about the glorification, in any form, of the Nazi movement, neo-Nazism and
former members of the Waffen SS organization, including by erecting monuments and memorials and holding
public demonstrations in the name of the glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo-Nazism, as well
as by declaring or attempting to declare such members and those who fought against the anti-Hitler coalition and
collaborated with the Nazi movement participants in national liberation movements;
5. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that “any commemorative celebration of the
Nazi Waffen SS organization and its crimes against humanity, whether official or non-official, should be prohibited
by States”;253
6. Expresses concern at recurring attempts to desecrate or demolish monuments erected in remembrance of
those who fought against Nazism during the Second World War, as well as to unlawfully exhume or remove the
remains of such persons, and in this regard urges States to fully comply with their relevant obligations, inter alia,
under article 34 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949;254
7. Notes with concern the increase in the number of racist incidents worldwide, including the rise of
skinhead groups, which have been responsible for many of these incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and
xenophobic violence targeting, inter alia, persons belonging to national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities;
8. Reaffirms that such acts may be qualified to fall within the scope of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,244 that they may not be justified as exercises of the rights to
freedom of peaceful assembly and of association as well as the rights to freedom of opinion and expression, and that
they may fall within the scope of article 20 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights243 and may
legitimately be restricted, as set out in articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Covenant;
9. Expresses deep concern at attempts at commercial advertising aimed at exploiting the sufferings of the
victims of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the Second World War by the Nazi regime;
_______________
250

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
252
A/68/329.
253
Ibid., para.137.
254
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.
251

563

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Stresses that the practices described above do injustice to the memory of the countless victims of crimes
against humanity committed in the Second World War, in particular those committed by the SS organization and by
those who fought against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement, and may negatively
influence children and young people, and that failure by States to effectively address such practices is incompatible
with the obligations of States Members of the United Nations under its Charter and is incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Organization;
11. Also stresses that such practices fuel contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance and contribute to the spread and multiplication of various extremist political parties,
movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for increased vigilance;
12. Expresses concern at the human rights and democratic challenges posed by all extremist political parties,
movements and groups;
13. Emphasizes the need to take the measures necessary to put an end to the practices described above, and
calls upon States to take more effective measures in accordance with international human rights law to combat those
phenomena and the extremist movements, which pose a real threat to democratic values;
14. Encourages States to adopt further measures to provide training to the police and other law enforcement
bodies on the ideologies of extremist political parties, movements and groups whose advocacy constitutes
incitement to racist and xenophobic violence, to strengthen their capacity to address racist and xenophobic crimes,
to fulfil their responsibility of bringing to justice the perpetrators of such crimes and to combat impunity;
15. Notes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur regarding the responsibility of political leaders and
parties in relation to messages that incite racial discrimination or xenophobia;
16. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to introduce into national criminal law a
provision according to which committing an offence with racist or xenophobic motivations or aims constitutes an
aggravating circumstance, allowing for enhanced penalties, and encourages those States whose legislation does not
contain such provisions to consider that recommendation;
17. Underlines that the roots of extremism are multifaceted and must be addressed through adequate
measures such as education, awareness-raising and the promotion of dialogue, and in this regard recommends the
increase of measures to raise awareness among young people of the dangers of the ideologies and activities of
extremist political parties, movements and groups;
18. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of education, including human rights
education, as a complement to legislative measures, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;
19. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur presented at the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly, in which he emphasized the importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and
human suffering which arose out of the adoption of ideologies such as Nazism and Fascism;
20. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed at bringing communities
together and providing them with space for genuine dialogue, such as round tables, working groups and seminars,
including training seminars for State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising activities,
especially those initiated by civil society representatives, which require continued State support;
21. Calls upon States to continue to invest in education, in both conventional and non-conventional
curricula, inter alia, in order to transform attitudes and correct ideas of racial hierarchies and superiority promoted by
extremist political parties, movements and groups and counter their negative influence;
22. Underlines the potentially positive role that relevant United Nations entities and programmes, in particular
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
23. Reaffirms article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties to that instrument condemn all
propaganda and all organizations that are based on ideas or theories of superiority of one race or group of persons of
one colour or ethnic origin, or that attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and
undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such
discrimination and, to that end, with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights242 and the rights expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention, inter alia:
564

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or
hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any
race or group of persons of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist
activities, including the financing thereof;
(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and organized and all other propaganda activities, that
promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall recognize participation in such organizations or activities as an
offence punishable by law;
(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local, to promote or incite racial
discrimination;
24. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome document of the Durban Review
Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination,
hostility or violence should be prohibited by law, that all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred,
or incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts, shall be declared
offences punishable by law, in accordance with the international obligations of States, and that these prohibitions are
consistent with freedom of opinion and expression;
25. Recognizes the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, as well
as full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information, including through the Internet, can play in
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
26. Expresses concern about the use of the Internet to propagate racism, racial hatred, xenophobia, racial
discrimination and related intolerance, and in this regard calls upon States parties to the Covenant to implement fully
articles 19 and 20 thereof, which guarantee the right to freedom of expression and outline the grounds on which the
exercise of this right can be legitimately restricted;
27. Recognizes the need to promote the use of new information and communications technologies,
including the Internet, to contribute to the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
28. Also recognizes the positive role that the media can play in combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, promoting a culture of tolerance and representing the diversity of a multicultural
society;
29. Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the Convention to give serious
consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a matter of priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur;
30. Notes the importance of strengthening cooperation at the regional and international levels with the aim
of countering all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular
regarding issues raised in the present resolution;
31. Stresses the importance of cooperating closely with civil society and international and regional human
rights mechanisms in order to counter effectively all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, as well as extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead
groups, and other similar extremist ideological movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
32. Encourages States parties to the Convention to ensure that their legislation incorporates the provisions of
the Convention, including those of article 4;
33. Encourages States to adopt the legislation necessary to combat racism while ensuring that the definition
of racial discrimination set out therein complies with article 1 of the Convention;
34. Recalls that any legislative or constitutional measures adopted with a view to countering extremist
political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and similar extremist
ideological movements should be in conformity with the relevant international human rights norms, in particular
articles 4 and 5 of the Convention and articles 19 to 22 of the Covenant;
565

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

35. Also recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 2005/5,246 that the Special
Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue, make relevant recommendations in his future reports and seek and take
into account in this regard the views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
36. Encourages States to consider including in their reports for the universal periodic review and to treaty
bodies information on the steps taken to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
including with the aim of implementing the provisions of the present resolution;
37. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session and to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-sixth session, reports on the implementation of the present
resolution, in particular regarding paragraphs 4 to 6, 8 to 10, 19 and 20 above, based on the views collected in
accordance with the request of the Commission, as recalled in paragraph 35 above;
38. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that have provided information to the Special
Rapporteur in the course of the preparation of his reports to the General Assembly, and notes the increase in such
contributions received from States;
39. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences and best practices in the fight
against extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other
extremist ideological movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
40. Encourages Governments and non-governmental organizations to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the exercise of the tasks outlined in paragraph 35 above;
41. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant actors to disseminate, as
widely as possible, information regarding the contents of and the principles outlined in the present resolution,
including through the media, but not limited to it;
42. Decides to remain seized of the issue.
RESOLUTION 68/151
A/RES/68/151

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/454,
para. 22),255 by a recorded vote of 134 to 11, with 46 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Israel, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine

_______________
255

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Fiji (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and the Russian Federation.

566

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

68/151. Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the effective implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference,256 and in this regard underlining
the imperative need for their full and effective implementation,
Stressing that the outcome of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance has the same status as the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences, summits and
special sessions in the human rights and social fields,
Recalling the three Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination previously declared by
the General Assembly, and regretting that the Programmes of Action for those Decades were not fully implemented
and that their objectives are yet to be attained,
Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and have the potential to
contribute constructively to the development and well-being of their societies, and that any doctrine of racial
superiority is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must be rejected, together
with theories that attempt to determine the existence of separate human races,
Underlining the intensity, magnitude and organized nature of slavery and the slave trade, including the
transatlantic slave trade, and the associated historical injustices, as well as the untold suffering caused by colonialism
and apartheid, and that Africans and people of African descent, Asians and people of Asian descent and indigenous
peoples continue to be victims of the cascading effects of those legacies,
Acknowledging the efforts and initiatives undertaken by States to prohibit discrimination and segregation and
to engender the full enjoyment of economic, social and cultural as well as civil and political rights,
Emphasizing that, despite efforts in this regard, millions of human beings continue to be victims of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their contemporary manifestations, some of
which take violent forms,
Welcoming the efforts made by civil society in support of the follow-up mechanisms in the implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
Recalling the appointment of the five independent eminent experts on 16 June 2003 by the Secretary-General,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 56/266 of 27 March 2002, with the mandate to follow up on the
implementation of the provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to make appropriate
recommendations thereon,
Underlining the primacy of the political will, international cooperation and adequate funding at the national,
regional and international levels needed to address all forms and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance for the successful implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action,
Recalling its resolution 2142 (XXI) of 26 October 1966 by which the General Assembly proclaimed 21 March
as the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Recognizing and affirming that the global fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and all their abhorrent and contemporary forms and manifestations is a matter of priority for the
international community,

_______________
256

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

567

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

I
International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
1. Reaffirms the paramount importance of universal adherence to and full and effective implementation of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,257 adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965, in addressing the scourges of racism and racial
discrimination;
2. Expresses grave concern that universal ratification of the Convention has not yet been reached, despite
commitments under the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,256 and calls upon those States that have not
done so to accede to the Convention as a matter of urgency;
3. Underlines, in the above context, that the provisions of the Convention do not respond effectively to
contemporary manifestations of racial discrimination, in particular in relation to xenophobia and related intolerance,
which is recognized as the rationale behind the convening of the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in 2001;
4. Takes note of the acknowledgement by the Human Rights Council and its subsidiary structures of the
existence of both procedural and substantive gaps in the aforementioned Convention, which must be filled as a
matter of urgency, necessity and priority;
5. Invites the Human Rights Council, in conjunction with its Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of
Complementary Standards to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, in the execution of its mandate, to continue to elaborate complementary standards in order to fill
existing gaps in the Convention, as well as to elaborate new normative standards aimed at combating all forms of
contemporary racism, thereby also covering such areas as xenophobia, Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and incitement
to national or ethnic and religious hatred;
II
International Decade for People of African Descent
6. Applauds the work undertaken by the Human Rights Council and, in particular, the Working Group of
Experts on People of African Descent, during the past 10 years, which culminated in the finalization of the draft
programme of action for the International Decade for People of African Descent;
7. Looks forward to the proclamation of the International Decade for People of African Descent during its
sixty-eighth session;258
8. Acknowledges the guidance and the effective leadership role demonstrated by the Human Rights
Council, as well as by United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, with respect to the promotion and
protection of the rights of people of African descent, including the restoration of their dignity and the imperative
need for their equal treatment in the societies in which they live, and in this regard requests the Council to continue
overseeing and guiding the implementation of the activities of the International Decade for People of African
Descent;
9. Requests the Chair of the Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent to make a report on
its work available to the General Assembly, and in this regard invites the Chair of the Working Group to engage in
an interactive dialogue with the Assembly under the item entitled “Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance” at its sixty-ninth session;

_______________
257
258

568

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
See resolution 68/237.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

III
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
10. Recalls paragraph 1 of Human Rights Council resolution 6/22 of 28 September 2007,259 and calls upon
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to implement the realignment envisaged therein as a
matter of urgency, including providing progress reports in this regard to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session;
11. Regrets that the High Commissioner omitted to include the historic and landmark World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance of 2001 among the twenty major
achievements of her Office since the adoption of the 1993 Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;260
12. Commends the High Commissioner for convening a special event on 21 March 2013 in commemoration
of the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and in particular for bringing together eminent
sports personalities to share their experiences of the dangers of racism in sport, in follow-up to the commemorative
event held in 2012, which was addressed by an eminent personality, and encourages the High Commissioner to
continue to highlight the issue of racism in sport;
13. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to fully implement paragraphs 53 and 57 of General Assembly resolution 65/240 of 24 December 2010 with
regard to the outreach programme for the follow-up to the commemoration of the 10-year anniversary of the
adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the High Commissioner to provide the resources
necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandates of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the Working Group of Experts on People of
African Descent, the group of independent eminent experts on the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action and the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of Complementary Standards;
IV
Group of independent eminent experts on the implementation
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
15. Recalls the appointment by the Secretary-General, pursuant to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action and its resolution 56/266, of five independent eminent experts, on 16 June 2003, with the mandate to
follow up on the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to make appropriate
recommendations thereon, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General, in the context of that resolution, to
revitalize and reactivate the operational activities of the group of independent eminent experts;
16. Invites the Human Rights Council to ensure the visibility, effective participation and optimal utilization
of the vast knowledge and experience of the group of independent eminent experts within its subsidiary structures,
charged with the mandate and responsibility for the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the effective implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
V
Trust Fund for the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
17. Recalls the establishment by the Secretary-General, in 1973, of the Trust Fund for the Programme
for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination as a funding mechanism that has been
utilized for the implementation of the activities of the three Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
_______________
259
260

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I, sect. A.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

569

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Discrimination declared by the General Assembly, and in this regard appreciates the fact that the Trust Fund
has also been utilized for the subsequent programmes and operational activities transcending the
three Decades;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to revitalize the Trust Fund prior to the twenty-fifth session of the
Human Rights Council, for the purpose of ensuring the successful implementation of the activities of the
International Decade for People of African Descent and enhancing the effectiveness of the comprehensive follow-up
to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the
effective implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
19. Strongly appeals to all Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
and individuals as well as other donors in a position to do so to contribute generously to the Trust Fund for
the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, and to that end
requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake appropriate contacts and initiatives to encourage
contributions;
VI
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
20. Takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,261 and encourages the Special Rapporteur, within his mandate,
to continue focusing on the issues of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
incitement to hatred, which impede peaceful coexistence and harmony within societies, and to present reports in this
regard to the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly;
21. Reiterates the invitation to the Special Rapporteur to consider examining national models of
mechanisms that measure racial equality and their added value in the eradication of racial discrimination and to
report on such challenges, successes and best practices in his next report;
VII
Follow-up and implementation activities
22. Calls upon the Human Rights Council to develop and adopt a multi-year programme of activities to
provide for the renewed and strengthened outreach activities needed to inform and mobilize the global public in
support of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to strengthen awareness of the contribution it has
made in the struggle against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
24. Requests the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Human Rights Council to
convene special meetings of the Assembly and the Council during the commemoration of the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and to hold a debate on the state of racial discrimination
worldwide, with the participation of the Secretary-General, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, encouraging eminent personalities active in the field of racial discrimination, Member States
and civil society organizations in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and the
Human Rights Council, respectively;
25. Decides to remain seized of this priority matter at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled
“Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”.

_______________
261

570

A/68/329 and A/68/333.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/152
A/RES/68/152

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/455,
para. 20),262 by a recorded vote of 128 to 55, with 8 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Colombia, Kenya, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Switzerland, Tonga

68/152. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution 67/159 of 20 December 2012, and
Human Rights Council resolutions 15/12 of 30 September 2010, 263 15/26 of 1 October 2010, 264 18/4 of
29 September 2011,265 21/8 of 27 September 2012266 and 24/13 of 26 September 2013,267 as well as all resolutions
adopted by the Commission on Human Rights in this regard,
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it condemned any State that permitted or
tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly, transit or use of mercenaries with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries,
or of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the relevant resolutions and international
instruments adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
Organization of African Unity, inter alia, the Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination of
mercenarism in Africa,268 as well as by the African Union,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations concerning the strict
observance of the principles of sovereign equality, political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the self_______________
262
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burundi, China, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
263
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II.
264
Ibid., chap. I.
265
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
266
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
267
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
268
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.

571

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

determination of peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international relations and noninterference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all peoples have the right freely to
determine their political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development and that every State
has the duty to respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,269
Welcoming the establishment of the open-ended intergovernmental working group of the Human Rights
Council with the mandate of considering the possibility of elaborating an international regulatory framework,
including the option of elaborating a legally binding instrument on the regulation, monitoring and oversight of the
activities of private military and security companies,
Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries constitute to peace and security in
developing countries in various parts of the world, in particular in areas of conflict,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the negative effects on the policy
and economies of affected countries resulting from international criminal mercenary activities,
Extremely alarmed and concerned about recent mercenary activities in some developing countries in various
parts of the world, including in areas of armed conflict, and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the
constitutional order of the affected countries,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which mercenaries or mercenary-related activities are used or the
form that they take to acquire some semblance of legitimacy, they are a threat to peace, security and the selfdetermination of peoples and an obstacle to the enjoyment of all human rights by peoples,
1. Acknowledges with appreciation the work and contributions of the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination, including its research activities, and takes note with appreciation of its latest report;270
2. Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing, protection and training are causes
for grave concern to all States and violate the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations;
3. Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert operations by third Powers
encourage, inter alia, the demand for mercenaries on the global market;
4. Urges once again all States to take the steps necessary and to exercise the utmost vigilance against the
menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to take legislative measures to ensure that their territories and
other territories under their control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the recruitment, assembly, financing,
training, protection or transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities designed to impede the right of peoples to
self-determination, to destabilize or overthrow the Government of any State or to dismember or impair, totally or in
part, the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States conducting themselves in
compliance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
5. Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of recruitment, training, hiring or
financing of mercenaries by private companies offering international military consultancy and security services, as
well as to impose a specific ban on such companies intervening in armed conflicts or actions to destabilize
constitutional regimes;
6. Encourages States that import the military assistance, consultancy and security services provided by
private companies to establish regulatory national mechanisms for the registering and licensing of those companies
in order to ensure that imported services provided by those private companies neither impede the enjoyment of
human rights nor violate human rights in the recipient country;
_______________
269
270

572

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
A/68/339.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Emphasizes its utmost concern about the impact of the activities of private military and security
companies on the enjoyment of human rights, in particular when operating in armed conflicts, and notes that private
military and security companies and their personnel are rarely held accountable for violations of human rights;
8. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider taking the action necessary to accede to or
ratify the International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries;271
9. Welcomes the cooperation extended by those countries that received a visit by the Working Group and
the adoption by some States of national legislation that restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and
transit of mercenaries;
10. Condemns recent mercenary activities in developing countries in various parts of the world, in particular
in areas of conflict, and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of those
countries and the exercise of the right of their peoples to self-determination, and stresses the importance for the
Working Group of looking into sources and root causes, as well as the political motivations of mercenaries and for
mercenary-related activities;
11. Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement whenever and wherever
criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if
so requested, in accordance with national law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
12. Condemns any form of impunity granted to perpetrators of mercenary activities and to those responsible
for the use, recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries, and urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law, to bring them, without distinction, to justice;
13. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with their obligations under international law, to cooperate
with and assist the judicial prosecution of those accused of mercenary activities in transparent, open and fair trials;
14. Recalls the holding of the second session of the open-ended intergovernmental working group to
consider the possibility of elaborating an international regulatory framework on the regulation, monitoring and
oversight of the activities of private military and security companies, expresses satisfaction at the participation of
experts, including of the members of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries, as resource persons at the
above-mentioned session, and requests the Working Group and other experts to continue their participation during
the third session of the open-ended intergovernmental working group, from 16 to 20 December 2013;
15. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to continue the work already done by previous
Special Rapporteurs on the use of mercenaries on the strengthening of the international legal framework for the
prevention and sanction of the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries, taking into account the
proposal for a new legal definition of a mercenary drafted by the Special Rapporteur on the use of mercenaries as a
means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination in his report
to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixtieth session;272
16. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as a matter of priority,
to publicize the adverse effects of the activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples to self-determination and,
when requested and where necessary, to render advisory services to States that are affected by those activities;
17. Recommends that all Member States, including those confronted with the phenomenon of private
military and security companies, as contracting States, States of operations, home States or States whose nationals
are employed to work for a private military and security company, contribute to the work of the open-ended
intergovernmental working group, taking into account the initial work done by the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries;
18. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Working Group on the use of mercenaries in the fulfilment of
its mandate;
19. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to provide the Working Group with all the assistance and support necessary for the fulfilment of its
_______________
271
272

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789.
See E/CN.4/2004/15, para. 47.

573

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

mandate, both professional and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation between the Working
Group and other components of the United Nations system that deal with countering mercenary-related activities, in
order to meet the demands of its current and future activities;
20. Requests the Working Group to consult States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations in the implementation of the present resolution and to report, with specific recommendations, to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session its findings on the use of mercenaries to undermine the enjoyment of all
human rights and to impede the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination;
21. Decides to consider at its sixty-ninth session the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of
violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled
“Right of peoples to self-determination”.
RESOLUTION 68/153
A/RES/68/153

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/455, para. 20)273

68/153. Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights, of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied
in the International Covenants on Human Rights,274 as well as in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial, foreign or
alien occupation and their emergence into sovereign statehood and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of foreign military intervention and occupation that are
threatening to suppress, or have already suppressed, the right to self-determination of peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the persistence of such actions, millions of people have
been and are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need
for concerted international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation of the right of peoples to self-determination and other
human rights as a result of foreign military intervention, aggression and occupation, adopted by the Commission on
Human Rights at its sixty-first275 and previous sessions,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination,
including resolution 67/157 of 20 December 2012,
Reaffirming also its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, containing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, and recalling its resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005, containing the 2005 World Summit Outcome,
which, inter alia, upheld the right to self-determination of peoples under colonial domination and foreign
occupation,
_______________
273
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
274
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
275
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2),
chap. II, sect. A.

574

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the right of peoples to self-determination,276
1. Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right of all peoples, including those under colonial, foreign
and alien domination, to self-determination is a fundamental condition for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights and for the preservation and promotion of such rights;
2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign military intervention, aggression and occupation, since
these have resulted in the suppression of the right of peoples to self-determination and other human rights in certain
parts of the world;
3. Calls upon those States responsible to cease immediately their military intervention in and occupation of
foreign countries and territories and all acts of repression, discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment, in particular
the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed for the execution of those acts against the peoples concerned;
4. Deplores the plight of millions of refugees and displaced persons who have been uprooted as a
result of the aforementioned acts, and reaffirms their right to return to their homes voluntarily in safety and
with honour;
5. Requests the Human Rights Council to continue to give special attention to violations of human
rights, especially the right to self-determination, resulting from foreign military intervention, aggression or
occupation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the question to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session under the item entitled “Right of peoples to self-determination”.
RESOLUTION 68/154
A/RES/68/154

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/455,
para. 20),277 by a recorded vote of 178 to 7, with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab

_______________
276

A/68/318.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe and State of
Palestine.

277

575

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Paraguay, Tonga, Vanuatu

68/154. The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Aware that the development of friendly relations among nations, based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, is among the purposes and principles of the United Nations, as defined in
the Charter,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, entitled “Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations”,
Bearing in mind the International Covenants on Human Rights, 278 the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,279 the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples280 and the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted at the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,281
Recalling the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations,282
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration,283
Recalling further the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,284 and noting in particular the
reply of the Court, including on the right of peoples to self-determination, which is a right erga omnes,285
Recalling the conclusion of the Court, in its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004, that the construction of the wall
by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, along with
measures previously taken, severely impedes the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,286
Welcoming the resumption of negotiations within the Middle East peace process, based on the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative287 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,288
aiming for the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement between the Palestinian and Israeli
sides within the agreed time frame of nine months,
Stressing the need for respect for and preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and recalling in this regard its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Recalling its resolution 67/158 of 20 December 2012,
Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Affirming the right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and internationally recognized borders,
1. Reaffirms the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including the right to their independent
State of Palestine;
2. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system to continue
to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their right to self-determination.
_______________
278

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Resolution 217 A (III).
280
Resolution 1514 (XV).
281
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
282
Resolution 50/6.
283
Resolution 55/2.
284
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
285
Ibid., advisory opinion, para. 88.
286
Ibid., para. 122.
287
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
288
S/2003/529, annex.
279

576

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/155
A/RES/68/155

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.1, para. 20)289

68/155. International Covenants on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/148 of 19 December 2011,
Welcoming the entry into force of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights on 5 May 2013,290
1. Welcomes the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee submitted to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh291 and sixty-eighth292 sessions;
2. Also welcomes the reports of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on its forty-sixth
and forty-seventh sessions293 and on its forty-eighth and forty-ninth sessions;294
3. Invites the Chairs of the Committees to address and engage in an interactive dialogue with the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth and seventieth sessions under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human
rights”, within existing resources;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed of the status of the International
Covenants on Human Rights295 and the Optional Protocols thereto,296 including all reservations and declarations,
through the United Nations websites.
RESOLUTION 68/156
A/RES/68/156

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.1, para. 20)297

68/156. Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that no one shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
_______________
289

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
290
Resolution 63/117, annex.
291
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/67/40), vols. I and II.
292
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/68/40), vols. I and II.
293
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2012, Supplement No. 2 (E/2012/22).
294
Ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 2 (E/2013/22).
295
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
296
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, resolution 44/128, annex, and resolution 63/117, annex.
297
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).

577

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling that freedom from torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is a nonderogable right under international law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian
law, that must be respected and protected under all circumstances, including in times of international or internal
armed conflict or disturbance or any other public emergency, that the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is affirmed in relevant international instruments and that legal and
procedural safeguards against such acts must not be subject to measures that would circumvent this right,
Recalling also that the prohibition of torture is a peremptory norm of international law and that international,
regional and domestic courts have recognized the prohibition of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment as customary international law,
Recalling further the definition of torture contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,298 without prejudice to any international instrument or
national legislation which contains or may contain provisions of wider application,
Recognizing that redress depends upon and is obtained through prompt, effective and impartial investigations
of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and acknowledgement of the violations,
and that the provision of redress has an inherent preventive and deterrent effect in relation to future violations,
Emphasizing the importance of properly interpreting and implementing the obligations of States with respect
to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and of abiding strictly by the definition of
torture contained in article 1 of the Convention,
Noting that, under the Geneva Conventions of 1949,299 torture and inhuman treatment are a grave breach
and that, under the statute of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, the statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court,300 acts of torture can constitute crimes against humanity and, when committed in
a situation of armed conflict, constitute war crimes,
Recognizing the importance of the implementation of the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance,301 which makes a significant contribution to the prevention and prohibition
of torture, including by prohibiting secret places of detention and by ensuring legal and procedural safeguards for
persons deprived of their liberty, and encouraging all States that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or
acceding to the Convention,
Commending the persistent efforts of civil society organizations, including non-governmental organizations,
national human rights institutions and national preventive mechanisms, and the considerable network of centres for
the rehabilitation of victims of torture, to prevent and combat torture and to alleviate the suffering of victims of
torture,
Deeply concerned about all acts which can amount to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment committed against persons exercising their rights of peaceful assembly and freedom of expression in
all regions of the world,
1. Condemns all forms of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including
through intimidation, which are and shall remain prohibited at any time and in any place whatsoever and can thus
never be justified, and calls upon all States to implement fully the absolute and non-derogable prohibition of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
_______________
298

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
300
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
301
Resolution 61/177, annex.
299

578

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Emphasizes that States must take persistent, determined and effective measures to prevent and combat
all acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, stresses that all acts of torture
must be made offences under domestic criminal law punishable by appropriate penalties that take into account their
grave nature, and calls upon States to prohibit under domestic law acts constituting cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment;
3. Welcomes the establishment of national preventive mechanisms to prevent torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, urges States to consider establishing, appointing, maintaining or
enhancing independent and effective mechanisms that have experts with the required capabilities and professional
knowledge to undertake monitoring visits to places of detention, inter alia, with a view to preventing acts of torture
or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and calls upon States parties to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment302 to fulfil their
obligation to designate or establish national preventive mechanisms that are truly independent, properly resourced
and effective;
4. Emphasizes the importance of States ensuring proper follow-up to the recommendations and
conclusions of the relevant treaty bodies and mechanisms, including the Committee against Torture, the
Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, national
preventive mechanisms and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, while recognizing the important role of the universal periodic
review, national human rights institutions and other relevant national or regional bodies in preventing torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
5. Condemns any action or attempt by States or public officials to legalize, authorize or acquiesce in torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment under any circumstances, including on grounds of
national security and counter-terrorism or through judicial decisions, and urges States to ensure accountability of
those responsible for all such acts;
6. Encourages States to consider establishing or maintaining appropriate national processes to record
allegations of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to ensure that such
information is accessible in accordance with applicable law;
7. Stresses that an independent, competent domestic authority must promptly, effectively and impartially
investigate all allegations of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, as well as
wherever there is reasonable ground to believe that such an act has been committed, and that those who encourage,
instigate, order, tolerate, acquiesce in, consent to or perpetrate such acts must be held responsible, brought to justice
and punished in a manner commensurate with the severity of the offence, including the officials in charge of any
place of detention or other place where persons are deprived of their liberty where the prohibited act is found to have
been committed;
8. Recalls, in this respect, the Principles on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the Istanbul Principles)303 as a valuable tool in
efforts to prevent and combat torture and the updated set of principles for the protection and promotion of human
rights through action to combat impunity;304
9. Calls upon all States to implement effective measures to prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment, particularly in places of detention and other places where persons are
deprived of their liberty, including legal and procedural safeguards, as well as education and training of
personnel who may be involved in the custody, interrogation or treatment of any individual subjected to any
form of arrest, detention or imprisonment;
_______________
302

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2375, No. 24841.
Resolution 55/89, annex.
304
See E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1.
303

579

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Urges States, as an important element in preventing and combating torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, to ensure that no authority or official orders, applies, permits or tolerates any
sanction, reprisal, intimidation or other prejudice against any person, group or association, including persons
deprived of their liberty, for contacting, seeking to contact or having been in contact with any national or
international monitoring or preventive body active in the prevention and combating of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
11. Also urges States to ensure accountability for any act of sanction, reprisal, intimidation or other form of
unlawful prejudicial conduct against any person, group or association, including persons deprived of their liberty, for
cooperating, seeking to cooperate or having cooperated with any national or international monitoring or preventive
body active in the prevention and combating of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment by ensuring impartial, prompt, independent and thorough investigations of any alleged act of sanction,
reprisal, intimidation or other form of unlawful prejudicial conduct; to bring the perpetrators to justice; to provide
access to effective remedies for victims, in accordance with their international human rights obligations and
commitments; and to prevent any recurrence;
12. Calls upon all States to adopt a victim-oriented approach305 in the fight against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, paying special attention to the views and needs of victims in policy
development and other activities relating to rehabilitation, prevention and accountability for torture;
13. Also calls upon all States to adopt a gender-sensitive approach in the fight against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, paying special attention to gender-based violence;
14. Calls upon States to ensure that the rights of persons with disabilities, bearing in mind the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,306 are fully integrated into torture prevention and protection, and welcomes
the efforts of the Special Rapporteur in this regard;
15. Encourages all States to ensure that persons convicted of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment have no subsequent involvement in the custody, interrogation or treatment of any person
under arrest, detention, imprisonment or other deprivation of liberty and that persons charged with torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment have no involvement in the custody, interrogation or
treatment of any person under arrest, detention, imprisonment or other deprivation of liberty while such charges
are pending;
16. Emphasizes that acts of torture in armed conflict are serious violations of international humanitarian law
and in this regard constitute war crimes, that acts of torture can constitute crimes against humanity and that the
perpetrators of all acts of torture must be prosecuted and punished, and in this regard notes the efforts of the
International Criminal Court to end impunity by seeking to ensure accountability and punishment of perpetrators of
such acts, in accordance with the Rome Statute,300 bearing in mind its principle of complementarity, and encourages
States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Rome Statute;
17. Strongly urges States to ensure that no statement that is established to have been made as a result of
torture is invoked as evidence in any proceedings, except against a person accused of torture as evidence that the
statement was made, encourages States to extend that prohibition to statements made as a result of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, and recognizes that adequate corroboration of statements, including
confessions, used as evidence in any proceedings constitutes one safeguard for the prevention of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
18. Stresses that States must not punish personnel for not obeying orders to commit or conceal acts
amounting to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
19. Urges States not to expel, return (“refouler”), extradite or in any other way transfer a person to another
State where there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to
_______________
305
306

580

See A/HRC/16/52.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

torture, stresses the importance of effective legal and procedural safeguards in this regard, and recognizes that
diplomatic assurances, where given, do not release States from their obligations under international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law, in particular the principle of non-refoulement;
20. Recalls that, for the purpose of determining whether there are such grounds, the competent authorities
shall take into account all relevant considerations, including, where applicable, the existence in the State concerned
of a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights;
21. Calls upon States parties to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment298 to fulfil their obligation to submit for prosecution or extradite those alleged to have
committed acts of torture, and encourages other States to do likewise, bearing in mind the need to fight impunity;
22. Stresses that national legal systems must ensure that victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment have effective access to justice and obtain redress without suffering any
retribution for bringing complaints or giving evidence;
23. Calls upon States to provide redress for victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, encompassing effective remedy and adequate, effective and prompt reparation, which should include
restitution, fair and adequate compensation, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition, taking into
full account the specific needs of the victim;
24. Urges States to ensure that appropriate rehabilitation services are promptly available to all victims
without discrimination of any kind and without limitation in time until the fullest rehabilitation possible is achieved,
provided either directly by the public health system or through the funding of private rehabilitation facilities,
including those administered by civil society organizations, and to consider making rehabilitation available to the
immediate family or dependants of the victim and persons who have suffered harm in intervening to assist victims
in distress or to prevent victimization;
25. Also urges States to establish, maintain, facilitate or support rehabilitation centres or facilities where
victims can receive such treatment and where effective measures for ensuring the safety of their staff and patients
are taken;
26. Recalls its resolution 43/173 of 9 December 1988 on the Body of Principles for the Protection of All
Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, and in this context stresses that ensuring that any individual
arrested or detained is promptly brought before a judge or other independent judicial officer in person and
permitting prompt and regular medical care and legal counsel throughout all stages of detention, as well as visits by
family members and independent monitoring mechanisms, are effective measures for the prevention of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
27. Reminds all States that prolonged incommunicado detention or detention in secret places can facilitate
the perpetration of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and can in itself constitute
a form of such treatment, and urges all States to respect the safeguards concerning the liberty, security and dignity of
the person and to ensure that secret places of detention and interrogation are abolished;
28. Emphasizes that conditions of detention must respect the dignity and human rights of persons deprived
of their liberty, highlights the importance of reflecting on this in efforts to promote respect for and protection of the
rights of persons deprived of their liberty, calls upon States to address and prevent detention conditions that amount
to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and notes in this regard concerns about solitary
confinement, which may amount to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
29. Encourages States to take effective measures to address overcrowding in detention facilities, which may
impact the dignity and human rights of persons deprived of their liberty, including through enhancing the use of
alternatives to pretrial detention and custodial sentences and reducing pretrial detention, by, inter alia, adopting and
effectively implementing both new and existing legislative and administrative measures and policies on its
preconditions, limitations, duration and alternatives and by taking measures aimed at the implementation of existing
legislation, as well as by ensuring access to justice and legal advice and assistance, and invites States to make use of
technical assistance offered by the relevant United Nations entities and programmes in order to strengthen national
capacities and infrastructures in this regard;
581

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

30. Calls upon all States to take appropriate effective legislative, administrative, judicial and other measures
to prevent and prohibit the production, trade, export, import and use of equipment that has no practical use other
than for the purpose of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
31. Urges all States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention and to give early
consideration to signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol thereto as a matter of priority;
32. Urges all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to make the declarations provided for
in articles 21 and 22 of the Convention concerning inter-State and individual communications, to consider the
possibility of withdrawing their reservations to article 20 and to notify the Secretary-General of their acceptance of
the amendments to articles 17 and 18, with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the Committee as soon as
possible;
33. Urges States parties to comply strictly with their obligations under the Convention, including, in view of
the high number of reports not submitted in time, their obligation to submit reports in accordance with article 19 of
the Convention, and invites States parties to incorporate a gender perspective and information concerning children
and juveniles and persons with disabilities when submitting reports to the Committee;
34. Welcomes the work of the Committee and of the Subcommittee and their reports, recommends that they
continue to include information on the follow-up by States parties to their recommendations, and supports the
Committee and the Subcommittee in their efforts to further improve the effectiveness of their working methods;
35. Invites the Chairs of the Committee and the Subcommittee to present oral reports on the work of the
committees and to engage in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth and seventieth
sessions under the sub-item entitled “Implementation of human rights instruments” of the item entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights”;
36. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in conformity with her mandate
established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, to continue to provide, at the
request of States, advisory services for the prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, including for the preparation of national reports to the Committee and for the establishment and
operation of national preventive mechanisms, as well as technical assistance for the development, production and
distribution of teaching material for this purpose, and to provide the support necessary to enable the Subcommittee
to provide advice and assistance to States parties to the Optional Protocol;
37. Welcomes the interim report of the Special Rapporteur,307 and encourages him to continue to include in
his recommendations proposals on the prevention and investigation of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, including its gender-based manifestations;
38. Notes the work of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group on the revision of the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,308 reiterating that any changes should not lower any existing
standards but should improve them so that they reflect recent advances in correctional science and best practices as
well as international human rights obligations and commitments, and in this regard acknowledges that the expert
group can benefit from the expertise of United Nations entities and other relevant stakeholders;
39. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue to consider including in his report information on the
follow-up by States to his recommendations, visits and communications, including progress made and problems
encountered, and on other official contacts;
40. Calls upon all States to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in the performance of his task,
to supply all necessary information requested by the Special Rapporteur, to fully and expeditiously respond to and
follow up on his urgent appeals, to give serious consideration to responding favourably to requests by the Special
Rapporteur to visit their countries and to enter into a constructive dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on requested
visits to their countries as well as with respect to the follow-up to his recommendations;
41. Stresses the need for the continued regular exchange of views among the Committee, the Subcommittee,
the Special Rapporteur and other relevant United Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as for the pursuance of
_______________
307

A/68/295.
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal Instruments (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
308

582

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

cooperation with relevant United Nations programmes, notably the United Nations crime prevention and criminal
justice programme, with regional organizations and mechanisms, as appropriate, and with civil society
organizations, including non-governmental organizations, with a view to enhancing further their effectiveness and
cooperation on issues relating to the prevention and eradication of torture, inter alia, by improving their
coordination;
42. Recognizes the global need for international assistance to victims of torture, stresses the importance of
the work of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, appeals to all States
and organizations to contribute annually to the Fund, preferably with a substantial increase in the level of
contributions, welcomes the establishment of and encourages contributions to the Special Fund established by the
Optional Protocol to support the implementation of the recommendations made by the Subcommittee as well as
education programmes of the national preventive mechanisms;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to transmit to all States the appeals of the General Assembly
for contributions to the Funds and to include the Funds, on an annual basis, among the programmes for which funds
are pledged at the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities;
44. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Human Rights Council, and to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth and seventieth sessions, a report on the operations of the Funds;
45. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure, within the overall budgetary framework of the United
Nations, the provision of adequate staff and facilities for the bodies and mechanisms involved in preventing and
combating torture and assisting victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including, in particular, the Committee, the Subcommittee and the Special Rapporteur, commensurate with the
strong support expressed by Member States for preventing and combating torture and assisting victims of torture, in
order to enable them to discharge their mandates in a comprehensive, sustained and effective manner and taking
fully into account the specific nature of their mandates;
46. Calls upon all States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as relevant intergovernmental and civil society organizations, including
non-governmental organizations, to commemorate, on 26 June, the United Nations International Day in Support of
Victims of Torture;
47. Decides to consider at its sixty-ninth and seventieth sessions the reports of the Secretary-General,
including the report on the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture and the Special Fund established
by the Optional Protocol, the report of the Committee, the report of the Subcommittee and the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur;
48. Also decides to give its full consideration to the subject matter at its seventieth session.
RESOLUTION 68/157
A/RES/68/157

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)309

68/157. The human right to safe drinking water and sanitation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/292 of 28 July 2010, in which it recognized the right to safe and clean drinking
water and sanitation as a human right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights,
_______________
309

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Namibia, Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United States of America, Togo, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay and Zambia.

583

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the previous resolutions of the Human Rights Council regarding the human right to safe drinking
water and sanitation, inter alia, Council resolution 24/18 of 27 September 2013,310
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,311 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,312 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,312 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 313 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,314 the Convention on the Rights of the Child315 and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,316
Reaffirming its commitments to human rights as expressed in its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, entitled
“United Nations Millennium Declaration”, and its follow-up resolutions 60/1 of 16 September 2005, entitled “2005
World Summit Outcome”, and 65/1 of 22 September 2010, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals”,
Reaffirming also its resolutions 58/217 of 23 December 2003, by which it proclaimed the period from 2005 to
2015 the International Decade for Action, “Water for Life”, and 65/154 of 20 December 2010, by which it declared
2013 the International Year of Water Cooperation,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of June 1992317 and its resolution 66/288 of
27 July 2012, entitled “The future we want”, and emphasizing the critical importance of water and sanitation within
the three dimensions of sustainable development,
Welcoming the holding of the plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the human right to water and
sanitation, on 27 July 2011,
Welcoming also the designation of 19 November as World Toilet Day, in the context of Sanitation for All,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 67/291 of 24 July 2013,
Recalling general comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on the
right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights),318 and the
statement on the right to sanitation of the Committee of 19 November 2010,319 as well as the reports of the Special
Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Deeply concerned that approximately 768 million people still lack access to improved drinking water sources
and that more than 2.5 billion do not have access to improved sanitation facilities, including more than 1.04 billion
people who still practice open defecation, as defined by the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Children’s Fund in their 2013 update on the Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation, and that
these figures do not fully capture the dimensions of water safety, the affordability of services and the safe
management of excreta and wastewater, as well as equality, non-discrimination and differences between urban and
rural areas, and therefore underestimate the numbers of those without access to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Noting that the target of the Millennium Development Goals of halving, by 2015, the proportion of people
without access to improved sources of water was formally met five years ahead of schedule, and deeply concerned
that the world remains off track to meet the sanitation component of the same target, which called for halving the
_______________
310

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap III.
Resolution 217 A (III).
312
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
313
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
314
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
315
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
316
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
317
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
318
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.
319
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 2 (E/2011/22), annex VI.
311

584

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

proportion of the population without sustainable access to an improved sanitation facility, that by 2015, if current
trends continue, the world is set to miss the target by more than half a billion people, and that inexistent or
inadequate sanitation facilities and serious deficiencies in water management and wastewater treatment can have a
negative impact on water provision and sustainable access to safe drinking water,
Deeply concerned that women and girls often face particular barriers in accessing water and sanitation and
that they shoulder the main burden of collecting household water in many parts of the world, restricting their time
for other activities,
Deeply alarmed that, every year, almost 700,000 children under 5 years of age die, and millions of schooldays
are lost, as a result of water- and sanitation-related diseases, and that girls in many parts of the world do not go to
school as a result of the lack of separate toilets for girls,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States to ensure the promotion and protection of all human rights, which are
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated, and must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on
the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Recalling that the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation is derived from the right to an adequate
standard of living and is inextricably related to the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health, as well as to the right to life and human dignity,
Acknowledging the importance of equal access to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation as an integral
component of the realization of all human rights,
1. Reaffirms the recognition of the right to safe drinking water and sanitation as a human right that is
essential for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights;
2. Recognizes the need to give due consideration to the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation in
the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda, in particular while defining concrete goals, targets and
indicators, taking into account an approach that supports the promotion and protection of human rights;
3. Welcomes the extension of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking
water and sanitation by the Human Rights Council;310
4. Also welcomes the work of the Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation, and takes note with appreciation in particular of her reports320 and her contributions to shaping the
post-2015 development agenda and to progressively eliminating inequalities in access to safe drinking water and
sanitation;
5. Takes note of the recommendation in the report of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the
Post-2015 Development Agenda,321 commissioned by the Secretary-General, in which the Panel lists water
and sanitation among the illustrative goals in the post-2015 development agenda, and also takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General entitled “A life of dignity for all: accelerating progress towards the
Millennium Development Goals and advancing the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015”,322 in
which the Secretary-General recognizes the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation as one of the
foundations for a decent life;
6.

Calls upon States:

(a)

To ensure the progressive realization of the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation;

(b) To continuously monitor and regularly analyse the status of the realization of the human right to safe
drinking water;
(c) To give due consideration to the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation and the principles of
equality and non-discrimination in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
_______________
320

A/67/270 and A/68/264.
See A/67/890, annex.
322
A/68/202 and Corr.1.
321

585

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(d) To ensure the progressive realization of the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation for all
in a non-discriminatory manner while eliminating inequalities in access, including for individuals belonging to
vulnerable and marginalized groups, on the grounds of race, gender, age, disability, ethnicity, culture, religion
and national or social origin or on any other grounds and with a view to progressively eliminating inequalities
based on factors such as rural-urban disparities, residence in a slum, income levels and other relevant
considerations;
(e) To consult with communities on adequate solutions to ensure sustainable access to safe drinking water
and sanitation;
(f) To provide for effective accountability mechanisms for all water and sanitation service providers to
ensure that they respect human rights and do not cause human rights violations or abuses;
7. Invites regional and international organizations to complement efforts by States to progressively realize
the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation;
8. Encourages Member States to intensify global partnerships for development as means to achieve and
sustain the targets of the Millennium Development Goals on water and sanitation;
9. Reaffirms that States have the primary responsibility to ensure the full realization of all human rights and
to endeavour to take steps, individually and through international assistance and cooperation, especially economic
and technical, to the maximum of their available resources, with a view to progressively achieving the full
realization of the right to safe drinking water and sanitation by all appropriate means, including in particular the
adoption of legislative measures;
10. Stresses the important role of the international cooperation and technical assistance provided by States,
specialized agencies of the United Nations system and international and development partners, as well as by donor
agencies, in particular in the timely achievement of the relevant Millennium Development Goals, and urges
development partners to adopt a human rights-based approach when designing and implementing development
programmes in support of national initiatives and plans of action related to the right to safe drinking water and
sanitation;
11.

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/158

A/RES/68/158

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.2,
para. 146),323 by a recorded vote of 158 to 4, with 28 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

_______________
323

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Cuba (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).

586

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Abstaining: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Slovakia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine

68/158. The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in particular, the determination to promote
social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom and, to that end, to employ international mechanisms
for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,324 as well as the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights325 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,325
Recalling also the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and
social fields,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986, which confirmed that the right to development is an inalienable human right
and that equality of opportunity for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who make up
nations, and that the individual is the central subject and beneficiary of development,
Stressing that 2013 marks the twentieth anniversary of the World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna, and
that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action326 reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and
inalienable right and an integral part of fundamental human rights, and the individual as the central subject and
beneficiary of development,
Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality for everyone, as set out in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the General Assembly on 8 September 2000,327
Deeply concerned that the majority of indigenous peoples in the world live in conditions of poverty, and
recognizing the critical need to address the negative impact of poverty and inequity on indigenous peoples by
ensuring their full and effective inclusion in development and poverty eradication programmes,
Reaffirming the universality, indivisibility, interrelatedness, interdependence and mutually reinforcing nature
of all civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights, including the right to development,
Expressing deep concern over the lack of progress in the trade negotiations of the World Trade Organization,
and reaffirming the need for a successful outcome of the Doha Development Round in key areas such as agriculture,
market access for non-agricultural products, trade facilitation, development and services,
Recalling the outcome of the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008, on the theme “Addressing the opportunities and challenges of globalization
for development”,328
Recalling also all its previous resolutions, Human Rights Council resolution 21/32 of 28 September 2012,329
previous resolutions of the Council and those of the Commission on Human Rights on the right to development, in
particular Commission resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998330 on the urgent need to make further progress towards
the realization of the right to development as set out in the Declaration on the Right to Development,
_______________
324

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
326
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
327
Resolution 55/2.
328
See TD/442 and Corr.1 and 2.
329
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
330
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A.
325

587

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling further the outcome of the eleventh session of the Working Group on the Right to Development of
the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva from 26 to 30 April 2010, as contained in the report of the Working
Group331 and as referred to in the report of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights,332
Recalling the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012, and the previous summits and conferences at which the States members of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries stressed the need to operationalize the right to development as a
priority,
Reiterating its continuing support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development333 as a development
framework for Africa,
Expressing its appreciation for the efforts of the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group on the Right to
Development of the Human Rights Council and the members of the high-level task force on the implementation of
the right to development in completing the 2008–2010 three-phase road map established by the Council in its
resolution 4/4 of 30 March 2007,334
Deeply concerned about the negative impacts of the global economic and financial crises on the realization of
the right to development,
Recognizing that, while development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, the lack of development
may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of internationally recognized human rights,
Recognizing also that Member States should cooperate with each other in ensuring development and
eliminating obstacles to development, that the international community should promote effective international
cooperation for the realization of the right to development and the elimination of obstacles to development and that
lasting progress towards the implementation of the right to development requires effective development policies at
the national level, as well as equitable economic relations and a favourable economic environment at the
international level,
Recognizing further that poverty is an affront to human dignity,
Recognizing that extreme poverty and hunger are one of the greatest global threats and require the collective
commitment of the international community for its eradication, pursuant to Millennium Development Goal 1, and
therefore calling upon the international community, including the Human Rights Council, to contribute towards
achieving that goal,
Recognizing also that historical injustices have undeniably contributed to the poverty, underdevelopment,
marginalization, social exclusion, economic disparity, instability and insecurity that affect many people in different
parts of the world, in particular in developing countries,
Stressing that poverty eradication is one of the critical elements in the promotion and realization of the
right to development and that poverty is a multifaceted problem that requires a multifaceted and integrated
approach in addressing economic, political, social, environmental and institutional dimensions at all levels,
especially in the context of the Millennium Development Goal of halving, by 2015, the proportion of the
world’s people whose income is less than one United States dollar a day and the proportion of people who
suffer from hunger,
1. Takes note of the consolidated report of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights,335 which provides information on the activities undertaken by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights relating to the promotion and realization of the right to
development;
_______________
331

A/HRC/15/23.
A/HRC/15/24.
333
A/57/304, annex.
334
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. III, sect. A.
335
A/HRC/24/27.
332

588

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Recognizes the significance of all the events held to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration on the Right to Development,336 including the panel discussion on the theme “The way forward in the
realization of the right to development: between policy and practice”, held during the eighteenth session of the
Human Rights Council;
3. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Working Group on the Right to Development, as renewed
by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 9/3 of 24 September 2008,337 with the recognition that the Working
Group may convene annual sessions of five working days and submit its reports to the Council;
4. Endorses the recommendations adopted by the Working Group at its fourteenth session,338 and, while
reaffirming them, calls for their immediate, full and effective implementation by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other relevant actors, noting also the efforts under way within the framework
of the Working Group with a view to completing the tasks entrusted to it by the Council in its resolution 4/4;334
5. Emphasizes the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006
establishing the Human Rights Council, and in this regard calls upon the Council to implement the agreement to
continue to act to ensure that its agenda promotes and advances sustainable development and the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, and also in this regard to lead to raising the right to development, as set out in
paragraphs 5 and 10 of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,326 to the same level as and on a par with
all other human rights and fundamental freedoms;
6. Welcomes the launching, in the Working Group, of the process for considering, revising and refining the
draft right-to-development criteria and corresponding operational subcriteria,339 with the first reading of the draft
criteria and operational subcriteria;
7. Stresses that the above-mentioned compilations of views, criteria and corresponding operational
subcriteria, once considered, revised and endorsed by the Working Group, should be used, as appropriate, in the
elaboration of a comprehensive and coherent set of standards for the implementation of the right to development;
8. Emphasizes the importance of the Working Group taking appropriate steps to ensure respect for and
practical application of the above-mentioned standards, which could take various forms, including the elaboration of
guidelines on the implementation of the right to development, and evolve into a basis for the consideration of an
international legal standard of a binding nature through a collaborative process of engagement;
9. Stresses the importance of the core principles contained in the conclusions of the Working Group at its
third session, 340 congruent with the purpose of international human rights instruments, such as equality, nondiscrimination, accountability, participation and international cooperation, as critical to mainstreaming the right to
development at the national and international levels, and underlines the importance of the principles of equity and
transparency;
10. Also stresses that it is important that the Chair-Rapporteur and the Working Group, in the discharge of
their mandates, take into account the need:
(a) To promote the democratization of the system of international governance in order to increase the
effective participation of developing countries in international decision-making;
(b) To also promote effective partnerships such as the New Partnership for Africa’s Development333 and
other similar initiatives with the developing countries, particularly the least developed countries, for the purpose of
the realization of their right to development, including the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
(c) To strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the right to development at the
international level, while urging all States to undertake at the national level the necessary policy formulation and to
institute the measures required for the implementation of the right to development as an integral part of all human
_______________
336

Resolution 41/128, annex.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53/Add.1), chap. I.
338
A/HRC/24/37.
339
See A/HRC/15/WG.2/TF/2/Add.2.
340
See E/CN.4/2002/28/Rev.1, sect. VIII.A.
337

589

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

rights and fundamental freedoms, and also urging all States to expand and deepen mutually beneficial cooperation in
ensuring development and eliminating obstacles to development in the context of promoting effective international
cooperation for the realization of the right to development, bearing in mind that lasting progress towards the
implementation of the right to development requires effective development policies at the national level and a
favourable economic environment at the international level;
(d)
priority;

To consider ways and means to continue to ensure the operationalization of the right to development as a

(e) To mainstream the right to development in the policies and operational activities of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies, funds and programmes, as well as in the policies and strategies of the international
financial and multilateral trading systems, bearing in mind in this regard that the core principles of the international
economic, commercial and financial spheres, such as equity, non-discrimination, transparency, accountability,
participation and international cooperation, including effective partnerships for development, are indispensable in
achieving the right to development and preventing discriminatory treatment arising from political or other noneconomic considerations in addressing the issues of concern to the developing countries;
11. Encourages the Human Rights Council to continue considering how to ensure follow-up to the work of
the former Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights on the right to development, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Commission on
Human Rights and in compliance with decisions to be taken by the Council;
12. Invites Member States and all other stakeholders to participate actively in future sessions of the Social
Forum, while recognizing the strong support extended to the Forum at its first four sessions by the Subcommission
on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights;
13. Reaffirms the commitment to implement the goals and targets set out in all the outcome documents of
the major United Nations conferences and summits and their review processes, in particular those relating to the
realization of the right to development, recognizing that the realization of the right to development is critical to
achieving the objectives, goals and targets set in those outcome documents;
14. Also reaffirms that the realization of the right to development is essential to the implementation of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, which regards all human rights as universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, places the human person at the centre of development and recognizes that, while
development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, lack of development may not be invoked to justify the
abridgement of internationally recognized human rights;
15. Stresses that the primary responsibility for the promotion and protection of all human rights lies with the
State, and reaffirms that States have the primary responsibility for their own economic and social development and
that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
16. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to create national and international conditions favourable
to the realization of the right to development, as well as their commitment to cooperate with each other to that end;
17. Also reaffirms the need for an international environment that is conducive to the realization of the right
to development;
18. Stresses the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the right to
development at the international and national levels, and calls upon all States to institute the measures required for
the implementation of the right to development as an integral part of all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
19. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing obstacles impeding the full realization
of the right to development at both the national and international levels;
20. Affirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and challenges, the process of globalization
remains deficient in achieving the objectives of integrating all countries into a globalized world, and stresses the
need for policies and measures at the national and global levels to respond to the challenges and opportunities of
globalization if this process is to be made fully inclusive and equitable;
21. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the international community, the gap
between developed and developing countries remains unacceptably wide, that most of the developing
590

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

countries continue to face difficulties in participating in the globalization process and that many risk being
marginalized and effectively excluded from its benefits;
22. Expresses its deep concern, in this regard, about the negative impact on the realization of the right to
development due to the further aggravation of the economic and social situation, in particular of developing
countries, as a result of the ongoing international energy, food and financial crises, as well as the increasing
challenges posed by global climate change and the loss of biodiversity, which have increased vulnerabilities and
inequalities and have adversely affected development gains, in particular in developing countries;
23. Underlines the fact that the international community is far from meeting the target set in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration327 of halving the number of people living in poverty by 2015, reaffirms the
commitment made to meet that target, and emphasizes the principle of international cooperation, including
partnership and commitment, between developed and developing countries towards achieving the goal;
24. Urges developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete efforts towards meeting the
targets of 0.7 per cent of their gross national product for official development assistance to developing countries and
0.15 to 0.2 per cent of their gross national product to least developed countries, and encourages developing countries
to build on the progress achieved in ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help to meet
development goals and targets;
25. Recognizes the need to address market access for developing countries, including in the sectors of
agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in particular those of interest to developing countries;
26. Calls once again for the implementation of a desirable pace of meaningful trade liberalization, including
in areas under negotiation in the World Trade Organization, the implementation of commitments on
implementation-related issues and concerns, a review of special and differential treatment provisions, with a view to
strengthening them and making them more precise, effective and operational, the avoidance of new forms of
protectionism, and capacity-building and technical assistance for developing countries as important issues in making
progress towards the effective implementation of the right to development;
27. Recognizes the important link between the international economic, commercial and financial spheres
and the realization of the right to development, stresses in this regard the need for good governance and for
broadening the base of decision-making at the international level on issues of development concern and the need to
fill organizational gaps, as well as to strengthen the United Nations system and other multilateral institutions, and
also stresses the need to broaden and strengthen the participation of developing countries and countries with
economies in transition in international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
28. Also recognizes that good governance and the rule of law at the national level assist all States in the
promotion and protection of human rights, including the right to development, and agrees on the value of the
ongoing efforts being made by States to identify and strengthen good governance practices, including transparent,
responsible, accountable and participatory government, that are responsive and appropriate to their needs and
aspirations, including in the context of agreed partnership approaches to development, capacity-building and
technical assistance;
29. Further recognizes the important role and the rights of women and the application of a gender
perspective as a cross-cutting issue in the process of realizing the right to development, and notes in particular the
positive relationship between the education of women and their equal participation in the civil, cultural, economic,
political and social activities of the community and the promotion of the right to development;
30. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, girls and boys alike, in all policies and
programmes and for ensuring the promotion and protection of those rights, especially in areas relating to health,
education and the full development of their capacities;
31. Recalls the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and
AIDS, adopted on 10 June 2011 at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on HIV and AIDS,341 stresses
_______________
341

Resolution 65/277, annex.

591

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

that further and additional measures must be taken at the national and international levels to fight HIV and AIDS
and other communicable diseases, taking into account ongoing efforts and programmes, and reiterates the need for
international assistance in this regard;
32. Welcomes the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases, adopted on 19 September 2011, 342 with its particular focus on
development and other challenges and social and economic impacts, particularly for developing countries;
33. Recalls the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”;343
34. Also recalls the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,344 which entered into force on
3 May 2008, and stresses the need to take into consideration the rights of persons with disabilities and the
importance of international cooperation in support of national efforts in the realization of the right to development;
35. Stresses its commitment to indigenous peoples in the process of the realization of the right to
development, reaffirms the commitment to promote their rights in the areas of education, employment, vocational
training and retraining, housing, sanitation, health and social security, in accordance with recognized international
human rights obligations and taking into account, as appropriate, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 61/295 of 13 September 2007, and in this
regard looks forward to the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, to be held in 2014;
36. Recognizes the need for strong partnerships with civil society organizations and the private sector in
pursuit of poverty eradication and development, as well as for corporate social responsibility;
37. Emphasizes the urgent need for taking concrete and effective measures to prevent, combat and criminalize
all forms of corruption at all levels, to prevent, detect and deter in a more effective manner international transfers of
illicitly acquired assets and to strengthen international cooperation in asset recovery, consistent with the principles of the
United Nations Convention against Corruption,345 particularly chapter V thereof, stresses the importance of a genuine
political commitment on the part of all Governments through a firm legal framework, and in this context urges States to
sign and ratify the Convention as soon as possible and States parties to implement it effectively;
38. Also emphasizes the need to strengthen further the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the promotion and realization of the right to development, including by ensuring effective use of
the financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its mandate, and calls upon the Secretary-General to provide
the Office of the High Commissioner with the necessary resources;
39. Reaffirms the request to the High Commissioner for Human Rights, in mainstreaming the right to
development, to undertake effectively activities aimed at strengthening the global partnership for development
among Member States, development agencies and the international development, financial and trade institutions and
to reflect those activities in detail in her next report to the Human Rights Council;
40. Calls upon the United Nations funds and programmes, as well as the specialized agencies, to mainstream
the right to development in their operational programmes and objectives, and stresses the need for the international
financial and multilateral trading systems to mainstream the right to development in their policies and objectives;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, United
Nations organs and bodies, specialized agencies, funds and programmes, international development and financial
institutions, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-governmental organizations;
42. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session
and an interim report to the Human Rights Council on the implementation of the present resolution, including
efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international levels in the promotion and realization of the right to
development, and invites the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group to present an oral report and to engage in an
interactive dialogue with the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
_______________
342

Resolution 66/2, annex.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
344
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
345
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
343

592

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/159
A/RES/68/159

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.2,
para. 146),346 by a recorded vote of 136 to 54, with no abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: None

68/159. Human rights and cultural diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,347 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights348 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,348 as well as other pertinent human
rights instruments,
Recalling also its resolutions 54/160 of 17 December 1999, 55/91 of 4 December 2000, 57/204 of
18 December 2002, 58/167 of 22 December 2003, 60/167 of 16 December 2005, 62/155 of 18 December 2007,
64/174 of 18 December 2009 and 66/154 of 19 December 2011, and recalling further its resolutions 54/113 of
10 December 1999, 55/23 of 13 November 2000 and 60/4 of 20 October 2005 concerning the United Nations Year
of Dialogue among Civilizations,
Noting that numerous instruments within the United Nations system promote cultural diversity, as well as the
conservation and development of culture, in particular the Declaration of the Principles of International Culture
Cooperation proclaimed on 4 November 1966 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its fourteenth session,349
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,350
Recalling that, as stated in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the annex to its
resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, States have the duty to cooperate with one another, irrespective of the
differences in their political, economic and social systems, in the various spheres of international relations, in the
promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and in the
elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and all forms of religious intolerance,
_______________
346

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Brazil, China, and Cuba (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
347
Resolution 217 A (III).
348
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
349
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Fourteenth Session, Paris,
1966, Resolutions.
350
A/68/277.

593

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the adoption, by its resolution 56/6 of 9 November 2001, of the Global Agenda for Dialogue
among Civilizations,
Welcoming also the contribution of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review
Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009, and the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, held on
22 September 2011, to the promotion of respect for cultural diversity,
Welcoming further the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization,351 together with its Action Plan,352 adopted on 2 November 2001 by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirty-first
session, in which member States invited the United Nations system and other intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations concerned to cooperate with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in the promotion of the principles set forth in the Declaration and its Action Plan, with a view to
enhancing the synergy of actions in favour of cultural diversity,
Recalling the Ministerial Meeting on Human Rights and Cultural Diversity of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Tehran on 3 and 4 September 2007,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with
the same emphasis, and that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical,
cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their political,
economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Expressing concern over the adverse impacts of lack of respect for and recognition of cultural diversity on
human rights, justice, friendship and the fundamental right to development,
Recognizing that cultural diversity and the pursuit of cultural development by all peoples and nations are a
source of mutual enrichment for the cultural life of humankind,
Recognizing also the contribution that diverse cultures have been making to the development and promotion
of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Taking into account that a culture of peace actively fosters non-violence and respect for human rights and
strengthens solidarity among peoples and nations and dialogue between cultures,
Reaffirming that discriminatory treatment against different cultures and religions is detrimental to the principle
of the equality of human beings,
Recognizing that all cultures and civilizations share a common set of universal values,
Recognizing also that the promotion of the rights of indigenous people and their cultures and traditions will
contribute to the respect for and observance of cultural diversity among all peoples and nations,
Considering that tolerance of cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic diversities, as well as dialogue among
and within civilizations, is essential for peace, understanding and friendship among individuals and people of
different cultures and nations of the world, while manifestations of cultural prejudice, intolerance and xenophobia
towards different cultures and religions generate hatred, violence and extremism among peoples and nations
throughout the world,
Recognizing in each culture a dignity and value that deserve recognition, respect and preservation, and
convinced that, in their rich variety and diversity, and in the reciprocal influences that they exert on one another, all
cultures form part of the common heritage belonging to all humankind,
_______________
351
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-first Session, Paris,
15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25, annex I.
352
Ibid., annex II.

594

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Convinced that the promotion of cultural pluralism and tolerance towards and dialogue among various cultures
and civilizations would contribute to the efforts of all peoples and nations to enrich their cultures and traditions by
engaging in a mutually beneficial exchange of knowledge and intellectual, moral and material achievements,
Acknowledging the diversity of the world, recognizing that all cultures and civilizations contribute to the
enrichment of humankind, acknowledging the importance of respect and understanding for religious and cultural
diversity throughout the world, and, in order to promote international peace and security, committing itself to
advancing human welfare, freedom and progress everywhere, as well as to encouraging tolerance, respect, dialogue
and cooperation among different cultures, civilizations and peoples,
1. Affirms the importance for all peoples and nations to hold, develop and preserve their cultural heritage
and traditions in a national and international atmosphere of peace, tolerance and mutual respect;
2. Emphasizes the important contribution of culture to development and the achievement of national
development objectives and internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
3. Welcomes the adoption on 8 September 2000 of the United Nations Millennium Declaration,353 in which
Member States consider, inter alia, that tolerance is one of the fundamental values essential to international relations
in the twenty-first century and that it should include the active promotion of a culture of peace and dialogue among
civilizations, with human beings respecting one another in all their diversity of belief, culture and language, neither
fearing nor repressing differences within and between societies but cherishing them as a precious asset of humanity;
4. Recognizes the right of everyone to take part in cultural life and to enjoy the benefits of scientific
progress and its applications;
5. Affirms that the international community should strive to respond to the challenges and opportunities
posed by globalization in a manner that ensures respect for the cultural diversity of all;
6. Expresses its determination to prevent and mitigate cultural homogenization in the context of
globalization, through increased intercultural exchange guided by the promotion and protection of cultural diversity;
7. Affirms that intercultural dialogue essentially enriches the common understanding of human rights and
that the benefits to be derived from the encouragement and development of international contacts and cooperation in
the cultural fields are important;
8. Welcomes the recognition at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance of the necessity of respecting and maximizing the benefits of diversity within and among all
nations in working together to build a harmonious and productive future by putting into practice and promoting
values and principles such as justice, equality and non-discrimination, democracy, fairness and friendship, tolerance
and respect within and among communities and nations, in particular through public information and educational
programmes to raise awareness and understanding of the benefits of cultural diversity, including programmes in
which the public authorities work in partnership with international and non-governmental organizations and other
sectors of civil society;
9. Emphasizes that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations on the basis of equal dignity should
be enhanced, through supporting efforts made at the international level towards reducing confrontation, suppressing
xenophobia and promoting respect for diversity, and in that regard also emphasizes that States should oppose all
attempts at uniculturalism or the imposition of particular models of social or cultural systems and promote dialogue
among civilizations, a culture of peace and interfaith dialogue, which will contribute towards peace, security and
development;
10. Welcomes the activities of the Non-Aligned Movement Centre for Human Rights and Cultural Diversity
in Tehran, and acknowledges the important role that the Centre plays in the promotion of the universality of all
human rights as well as their realization;
11. Recognizes that respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all enhances cultural pluralism,
contributing to a wider exchange of knowledge and understanding of cultural background, advancing the
application and enjoyment of universally accepted human rights throughout the world and fostering stable, friendly
relations among peoples and nations worldwide;
_______________
353

Resolution 55/2.

595

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Emphasizes that the promotion of cultural pluralism and tolerance at the national, regional and
international levels is important for enhancing respect for cultural rights and cultural diversity;
13. Also emphasizes that tolerance and respect for diversity facilitate the universal promotion and protection
of human rights, including gender equality and the enjoyment of all human rights by all, and underlines the fact that
tolerance and respect for cultural diversity and the universal promotion and protection of human rights are mutually
supportive;
14. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, justice,
equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and
universal human rights, and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance;
15. Calls upon States, relevant international organizations and non-governmental organizations to support
and embark on intercultural initiatives on human rights in order to promote all human rights, thereby enriching their
universality;
16. Urges States to ensure that their political and legal systems reflect the multicultural diversity within their
societies and, where necessary, to improve democratic institutions so that they are more fully participatory and avoid
marginalization and exclusion of, and discrimination against, specific sectors of society;
17. Calls upon States, international organizations and United Nations agencies, and invites civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, to recognize and promote respect for cultural diversity for the purpose of
advancing the objectives of peace, development and universally accepted human rights;
18. Stresses the necessity of freely using the media and new information and communications technologies
to create the conditions for a renewed dialogue among cultures and civilizations;
19. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to bear in
mind fully the issues raised in the present resolution in the course of its activities for the promotion and protection of
human rights;
20. Also requests the Office of the High Commissioner, and invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to support initiatives aimed at promoting intercultural dialogue on human rights;
21. Urges relevant international organizations to conduct studies on how respect for cultural diversity
contributes to fostering international solidarity and cooperation among all nations;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution,
including efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international levels regarding the recognition and
importance of cultural diversity among all peoples and nations in the world and taking into account the views of
Member States, relevant United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations, and to submit the report to
the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
23. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its seventieth session under the sub-item entitled
“Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/160
A/RES/68/160

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)354

68/160. Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as well as relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and
_______________
354

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Brazil, China, Cuba (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries), El Salvador and Russian Federation.

596

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993355 for enhancing
genuine cooperation among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recalling its adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration on 8 September 2000 356 and its
resolution 67/169 of 20 December 2012, Human Rights Council resolution 19/33 of 23 March 2012357 and the
resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights,
Recalling also the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review Conference,
held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009, and the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action,358 and their role in the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights is essential for the
full achievement of the purposes of the United Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Recognizing also that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based on the principle of
cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their
human rights obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the field of human rights could
contribute greatly to the enhancement of international cooperation in this field,
Emphasizing the need for further progress in the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation, transparency and confidence-building
are important elements in all activities for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the adoption of resolution 2000/22 of 18 August 2000, on the promotion of dialogue on human
rights issues, by the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-second session,359
1. Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the responsibility of all Member States
to promote, protect and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia,
international cooperation;
2. Recognizes that, in addition to their separate responsibilities to their individual societies, States have a
collective responsibility to uphold the principles of human dignity, equality and equity at the global level;
3. Reaffirms that dialogue among cultures and civilizations facilitates the promotion of a culture of
tolerance and respect for diversity, and welcomes in this regard the holding of conferences and meetings at the
national, regional and international levels on dialogue among civilizations;
4. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, justice,
equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and
universal human rights, and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance;
5. Reaffirms the importance of the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion and
protection of human rights and for the achievement of the objectives of the fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
_______________
355

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution 55/2.
357
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. III, sect. A.
358
Resolution 66/3.
359
See E/CN.4/2001/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/46, chap. II, sect. A.
356

597

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Considers that international cooperation in the field of human rights, in conformity with the purposes
and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations and international law, should make an effective and
practical contribution to the urgent task of preventing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
7. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms should be guided by the principles of universality, non-selectivity, objectivity and transparency, in a
manner consistent with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter;
8. Emphasizes the role of international cooperation in support of national efforts and in increasing the
capacities of Member States in the field of human rights through, inter alia, the enhancement of their cooperation
with human rights mechanisms, including through the provision of technical assistance, upon the request of and in
accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned;
9. Calls upon Member States, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations to continue to
carry out a constructive dialogue and consultations for the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and encourages non-governmental organizations to
contribute actively to this endeavour;
10. Urges States to take measures necessary to enhance bilateral, regional and international cooperation
aimed at addressing the adverse impact of consecutive and compounded global crises, such as financial and
economic crises, food crises, climate change and natural disasters, on the full enjoyment of human rights;
11. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and procedures to continue to pay
attention to the importance of mutual cooperation, understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and
protection of all human rights;
12. Takes note of the holding of the seminar on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights on 15 February 2013, with the participation of States, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and other stakeholders, including academic experts and civil society;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, to consult States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations on ways and means, as
well as obstacles and challenges and possible proposals to overcome them, for the enhancement of international
cooperation and dialogue in the United Nations human rights machinery, including the Human Rights Council;
14. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/161
A/RES/68/161

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.2,
para. 146),360 by a recorded vote of 135 to 54, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

_______________
360

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Brazil, China, Cuba (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries) and Russian Federation.

598

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Against: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Chile

68/161. Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this question,
Reaffirming the importance of the goal of universal ratification of the United Nations human rights
instruments,
Welcoming the significant increase in the number of ratifications of United Nations human rights instruments
and the movement of some treaties towards universal ratification,
Reiterating the importance of the effective functioning of treaty bodies established pursuant to United Nations
human rights instruments for the full and effective implementation of those instruments,
Recognizing that the equitable geographical distribution of membership is an essential requirement for the
effective functioning of the treaty bodies,
Recalling that, with regard to the election of the members of the human rights treaty bodies, the General
Assembly and the former Commission on Human Rights recognized the importance of giving consideration in their
membership to equitable geographical distribution, gender balance and representation of the principal legal systems
and of bearing in mind that the members shall be elected and shall serve in their personal capacity, and shall be of
high moral character, acknowledged impartiality and recognized competence in the field of human rights,
Reaffirming the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and
religious backgrounds, as well as of different political, economic and legal systems,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,361
Recognizing that the United Nations pursues multilingualism as a means of promoting, protecting and
preserving diversity of languages and cultures globally and that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity
and international understanding,
Recalling that the General Assembly and the former Commission on Human Rights encouraged States parties
to United Nations human rights treaties, individually and through meetings of States parties, to consider how to give
better effect, inter alia, to the principle of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of treaty bodies,
Expressing concern at the regional imbalance in the current composition of the membership of the human
rights treaty bodies, as indicated in the report of the Secretary-General,
Reaffirming the importance of increasing efforts to address that imbalance,
Convinced that the goal of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of human rights treaty
bodies is perfectly compatible and can be fully realized and achieved in harmony with the need to achieve gender
balance and the representation of the principal legal systems in those bodies and the high moral character,
acknowledged impartiality and recognized competence in the field of human rights of their members,
1. Reiterates that the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments should take into
account, in their nomination of members to the human rights treaty bodies, that these committees shall be composed
of persons of high moral character and recognized competence in the field of human rights, consideration being
given to the usefulness of the participation of some persons having legal experience and to equal representation of
_______________
361

A/68/323.

599

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

women and men, and that members shall serve in their personal capacity, and also reiterates that, in the elections to
the human rights treaty bodies, consideration shall be given to equitable geographical distribution of membership
and to the representation of the different forms of civilization and of the principal legal systems;
2. Urges the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments, including the bureau members,
to include this matter in the agenda of each meeting and/or conference of States parties to those instruments in order
to initiate a debate on ways and means to ensure equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the
human rights treaty bodies, based on previous recommendations of the Commission on Human Rights and the
Economic and Social Council and the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Encourages the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments to consider and adopt
concrete actions, inter alia, the possible establishment of quotas by geographical region for membership of the treaty
bodies, thereby ensuring the paramount objective of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of those
human rights bodies;
4. Recommends, when considering the possible allocation of seats on each treaty body on a regional basis,
the introduction of flexible procedures that encompass the following criteria:
(a) Each of the five regional groups established by the General Assembly is allocated seats on each treaty
body in equivalent proportion to the number of States parties to the instrument in that group;
(b) There must be provision for periodic revisions of the allocation of seats in order to reflect relative
changes in the level of treaty ratification in each regional group;
(c) Automatic periodic revisions should be envisaged in order to avoid amending the text of the instrument
when the quotas are revised;
5. Stresses that the process needed to achieve the goal of equitable geographical distribution in the
membership of human rights treaty bodies can contribute to raising awareness of the importance of gender balance,
the representation of the principal legal systems and the principle that the members of the treaty bodies shall be
elected and shall serve in their personal capacity, and shall be of high moral character, acknowledged impartiality
and recognized competence in the field of human rights;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a comprehensive
updated report in this regard, including information on any steps taken by States parties at meetings or conferences
of States parties to address the matter of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies, as well as concrete recommendations on the implementation of the present resolution;
7. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventieth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/162
A/RES/68/162

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.2,
para. 146),362 by a recorded vote of 135 to 55, with no abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,

_______________
362

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Brazil, China, and Cuba (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).

600

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: None

68/162. Human rights and unilateral coercive measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on this subject, the most recent of which was resolution 67/170 of
20 December 2012, and Human Rights Council decision 18/120 of 30 September 2011363 and resolution 24/14 of
27 September 2013,364 as well as previous resolutions of the Council and the Commission on Human Rights,
Reaffirming the pertinent principles and provisions contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, in particular
article 32 thereof, in which it declared that no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other
type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign
rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
67/170,365 and recalling the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Assembly resolutions 52/120
of 12 December 1997366 and 55/110 of 4 December 2000,367
Stressing that unilateral coercive measures and legislation are contrary to international law, international
humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations
among States,
Recognizing the universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated character of all human rights, and in this
regard reaffirming the right to development as an integral part of all human rights,
Recalling the Final Document of the Sixteenth Ministerial Conference and Commemorative Meeting of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011,368 the Final Document of the
Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran from 26 to
31 August 2012, 369 and those adopted at previous summits and conferences, in which States members of the
Movement agreed to oppose and condemn those measures or laws and their continued application, persevere with
efforts to effectively reverse them and urge other States to do likewise, as called for by the General Assembly and other
United Nations organs, and request States applying those measures or laws to revoke them fully and immediately,
Recalling also that, at the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993,
States were called upon to refrain from any unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the
Charter that creates obstacles to trade relations among States and impedes the full realization of all human rights370
and also severely threatens the freedom of trade,
_______________
363

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1),
chap. III.
364
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
365
A/68/211.
366
A/53/293 and Add.1.
367
A/56/207 and Add.1.
368
A/65/896-S/2011/407, annex I.
369
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.
370
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

601

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind all the references to this question in the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development
adopted by the World Summit for Social Development on 12 March 1995,371 the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995,372 the Istanbul Declaration
on Human Settlements and the Habitat Agenda adopted by the second United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) on 14 June 1996,373 and in their five-year reviews,
Expressing concern about the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on international relations, trade,
investment and cooperation,
Expressing grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children is adversely affected by unilateral
coercive measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations
among States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder the well-being of the
population in the affected countries, with particular consequences for women, children, including adolescents, the
elderly and persons with disabilities,
Deeply concerned that, despite the recommendations adopted on this question by the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council, the Commission on Human Rights and recent major United Nations conferences, and
contrary to general international law and the Charter, unilateral coercive measures continue to be promulgated and
implemented, with all their negative implications for the social- humanitarian activities and economic and social
development of developing countries, including their extraterritorial effects, thereby creating additional obstacles to
the full enjoyment of all human rights by peoples and individuals under the jurisdiction of other States,
Bearing in mind all the extraterritorial effects of any unilateral legislative, administrative and economic
measures, policies and practices of a coercive nature against the development process and the enhancement of
human rights in developing countries, which create obstacles to the full realization of all human rights,
Reaffirming that unilateral coercive measures are a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration on
the Right to Development,374
Recalling article 1, paragraph 2, common to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights375 and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,375 which provides, inter alia, that in no case
may a people be deprived of its own means of subsistence,
Noting the continuing efforts of the open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human
Rights Council, and reaffirming in particular its criteria, according to which unilateral coercive measures are one of
the obstacles to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
1. Urges all States to cease adopting or implementing any unilateral measures not in accordance with
international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles
governing peaceful relations among States, in particular those of a coercive nature, with all their extraterritorial
effects, which create obstacles to trade relations among States, thus impeding the full realization of the rights set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 376 and other international human rights instruments, in
particular the right of individuals and peoples to development;
2. Strongly urges States to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral economic, financial or
trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of
economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
3. Urges all States not to adopt any unilateral measures not in accordance with international law and the
Charter that impede the full achievement of economic and social development by the population of the affected
_______________
371
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
372
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
373
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
374
Resolution 41/128, annex.
375
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
376
Resolution 217 A (III).

602

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

countries, in particular children and women, that hinder their well-being and that create obstacles to the full
enjoyment of their human rights, including the right of everyone to a standard of living adequate for his or her health
and well-being and his or her right to food, medical care and education and the necessary social services, as well as
to ensure that food and medicine are not used as tools for political pressure;
4. Strongly objects to the extraterritorial nature of those measures which, in addition, threaten the
sovereignty of States, and in this context calls upon all Member States neither to recognize those measures nor to
apply them, as well as to take administrative or legislative measures, as appropriate, to counteract the extraterritorial
applications or effects of unilateral coercive measures;
5. Condemns the continuing unilateral application and enforcement by certain Powers of unilateral
coercive measures, and rejects those measures, with all their extraterritorial effects, as being tools for political or
economic pressure against any country, in particular against developing countries, adopted with a view to preventing
those countries from exercising their right to decide, of their own free will, their own political, economic and social
systems, and because of the negative effects of those measures on the realization of all the human rights of vast
sectors of their populations, in particular children, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities;
6. Expresses grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children is adversely affected by
unilateral coercive measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade
relations among States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder the well-being of
the population in the affected countries, with particular consequences for women, children, including adolescents,
the elderly and persons with disabilities;
7. Reaffirms that essential goods such as food and medicines should not be used as tools for political
coercion and that under no circumstances should people be deprived of their own means of subsistence and
development;
8. Calls upon Member States that have initiated such measures to abide by the principles of international
law, the Charter, the declarations of the United Nations and world conferences and relevant resolutions and to
commit themselves to their obligations and responsibilities arising from the international human rights instruments
to which they are parties by revoking such measures at the earliest possible time;
9. Reaffirms, in this context, the right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they freely
determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development;
10. Recalls that, according to the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the
annex to General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and the relevant principles and provisions
contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States proclaimed by the Assembly in its resolution
3281 (XXIX), in particular article 32 thereof, no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any
other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its
sovereign rights and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
11. Rejects all attempts to introduce unilateral coercive measures, and urges the Human Rights Council to
take fully into account the negative impact of those measures, including through the enactment of national laws and
their extraterritorial application which are not in conformity with international law, in its task concerning the
implementation of the right to development;
12. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in discharging her functions
relating to the promotion, realization and protection of the right to development and bearing in mind the continuing
impact of unilateral coercive measures on the population of developing countries, to give priority to the present
resolution in her annual report to the General Assembly;
13. Underlines the fact that unilateral coercive measures are one of the major obstacles to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,374 and in this regard calls upon all States to avoid
the unilateral imposition of economic coercive measures and the extraterritorial application of national laws that run
counter to the principles of free trade and hamper the development of developing countries, as recognized by the
Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights Council;
603

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Recognizes that, in the Declaration of Principles adopted at the first phase of the World Summit on the
Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003,377 States were strongly urged to avoid and
refrain from any unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations
in building the information society;
15. Welcomes the increased attention paid by the Human Rights Council and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to the negative impact of the application of unilateral coercive
measures, and invites the Council to continue to explore ways to address this issue;
16. Reiterates its support for the invitation of the Human Rights Council to all special rapporteurs and existing
thematic mechanisms of the Council in the field of economic, social and cultural rights to pay due attention, within the
scope of their respective mandates, to the negative impact and consequences of unilateral coercive measures;
17. Reaffirms the request of the Human Rights Council that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights organize a workshop on the impact of the application of unilateral coercive
measures on the enjoyment of human rights by the affected populations, in particular their socioeconomic impact on
women and children, in the States targeted;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, to
continue to collect their views and information on the implications and negative effects of unilateral coercive
measures on their populations and to submit an in-depth and comprehensive report on the negative impacts of
unilateral coercive measures on the full enjoyment of human rights to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session, while reiterating once again the need to highlight the practical and preventive measures in this respect;
19. Decides to examine the question on a priority basis at its sixty-ninth session, under the sub-item entitled
“Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/163
A/RES/68/163

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)378

68/163. The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights379 and recalling relevant international human rights
treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights380 and the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,381 as well as the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949382 and the Additional Protocols thereto,383
_______________
377

A/C.2/59/3, annex, chap. I, sect. A.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Uruguay.
379
Resolution 217 A (III).
380
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
381
Resolution 61/177, annex.
382
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
383
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
378

604

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, endorsed
by the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on 12 April 2012, in which United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes were invited to work with Member States towards a free and safe environment for
journalists and media workers in both conflict and non-conflict situations, with a view to strengthening peace,
democracy and development worldwide,
Recalling also Human Rights Council resolutions 20/8 of 5 July 2012 on the promotion, protection and
enjoyment of human rights on the Internet,384 21/12 of 27 September 2012 on the safety of journalists,385and 24/15
of 27 September 2013 on the World Programme for Human Rights Education386 and Council decision 24/116 of
26 September 2013 on a panel discussion on the safety of journalists,387 as well as Security Council resolution
1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006,
Taking note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression 388 and the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, 389
submitted to the Human Rights Council at its twentieth session,
Commending the role and the activities of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization with regard to the safety of
journalists and the issue of impunity,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on good
practices concerning the safety of journalists,390 submitted to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fourth session,
Noting with appreciation the international conference on the safety of journalists, held in Warsaw on 23 and
24 April 2013, and its specific recommendations,391
Acknowledging that journalism is continuously evolving to include inputs from media institutions, private
individuals and a range of organizations that seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, online as
well as offline, in the exercise of freedom of opinion and expression, in accordance with article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, thereby contributing to shape public debate,
Recognizing the relevance of freedom of expression and of free media in building inclusive knowledge
societies and democracies and in fostering intercultural dialogue, peace and good governance,
Recognizing also that the work of journalists often puts them at specific risk of intimidation, harassment and
violence,
Taking note of the good practices of different countries aimed at the protection of journalists, as well as, inter
alia, those designed for the protection of human rights defenders that can, where applicable, be relevant to the
protection of journalists,
Recognizing that the number of people whose lives are influenced by the way information is presented is
significant and that journalism influences public opinion,
Bearing in mind that impunity for attacks against journalists constitutes one of the main challenges to
strengthening the protection of journalists,
Recalling in this regard that journalists, media professionals and associated personnel engaged in dangerous
professional missions in areas of armed conflict shall be considered as civilians and shall be respected and protected
as such, provided that they take no action adversely affecting their status as civilians,
_______________
384

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. IV, sect. A.
385
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
386
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
387
Ibid., chap. IV.
388
A/HRC/20/17.
389
A/HRC/20/22 and Corr.1.
390
A/HRC/24/23.
391
See S/2013/422, annex.

605

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing concern at the threat to the safety of journalists posed by non-State actors, including terrorist
groups and criminal organizations,
Acknowledging the specific risks faced by women journalists in the exercise of their work, and underlining, in
this context, the importance of taking a gender-sensitive approach when considering measures to address the safety
of journalists,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the
Issue of Impunity;
2. Condemns unequivocally all attacks and violence against journalists and media workers, such as torture,
extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances and arbitrary detention, as well as intimidation and harassment in
both conflict and non-conflict situations;
3. Decides to proclaim 2 November as the International Day to End Impunity for Crimes against
Journalists;
4. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in consultation with
relevant entities of the United Nations system, and mindful of the provisions of the annex to Economic and Social
Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980, to facilitate the implementation of the International Day in
collaboration with Governments and relevant stakeholders;
5. Urges Member States to do their utmost to prevent violence against journalists and media workers, to
ensure accountability through the conduct of impartial, speedy and effective investigations into all alleged violence
against journalists and media workers falling within their jurisdiction and to bring the perpetrators of such crimes to
justice and ensure that victims have access to appropriate remedies;
6. Calls upon States to promote a safe and enabling environment for journalists to perform their work
independently and without undue interference, including by means of: (a) legislative measures; (b) awarenessraising in the judiciary and among law enforcement officers and military personnel, as well as among journalists and
in civil society, regarding international human rights and humanitarian law obligations and commitments relating to
the safety of journalists; (c) the monitoring and reporting of attacks against journalists; (d) publicly condemning
attacks; and (e) dedicating the resources necessary to investigate and prosecute such attacks;
7. Invites the relevant agencies, organizations, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to
consider identifying focal points for the exchange of information about the implementation of the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, in cooperation with Member States and under
the overall coordination of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/164
A/RES/68/164

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)392

68/164. Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and genuine elections and the
promotion of democratization
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that democracy is a universal value based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine
their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives,
_______________
392

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Zambia.

606

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also that, while democracies share common features, there is no single model of democracy and
that democracy does not belong to any country or region, and reaffirming further the necessity of due respect for
sovereignty and the right to self-determination,
Stressing that democracy, development and respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming that Member States are responsible for organizing, conducting and ensuring free and fair electoral
processes and that Member States, in the exercise of their sovereignty, may request that international organizations
provide advisory services or assistance for strengthening and developing their electoral institutions and processes,
including sending preliminary missions for that purpose,
Recognizing the importance of fair, periodic and genuine elections, including in new democracies and
countries undergoing democratization, in order to empower citizens to express their will and to promote successful
transition to long-term sustainable democracies,
Recognizing also that Member States are responsible for ensuring free and fair elections, free of intimidation,
coercion and tampering of vote counts, and that all such acts are sanctioned accordingly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in particular resolution 66/163 of 19 December 2011,
Recalling also all relevant Human Rights Council resolutions on the topic, including resolutions 19/11 of
22 March 2012,393 19/36 of 23 March 2012,393 22/10 of 21 March 2013394 and 24/8 of 26 September 2013,395
Reaffirming that United Nations electoral assistance and support for the promotion of democratization are
provided only at the specific request of the Member State concerned,
Noting with satisfaction that increasing numbers of Member States are using elections as a peaceful means of
discerning the will of the people, which builds confidence in representational governance and contributes to greater
national peace and stability, and which may contribute to regional stability,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted on 10 December 1948,396 in particular the
principle that the will of the people, as expressed through periodic and genuine elections, shall be the basis of
government authority, as well as the right freely to choose representatives through periodic and genuine elections,
which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures,
Reaffirming the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,397 the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,398 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination 399 and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,400 and reaffirming in
particular that citizens, without distinction of any kind, have the right and the opportunity to take part in the conduct
of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives, and to vote and to be elected in genuine periodic
elections, which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret ballot, guaranteeing the free
expression of the will of the electors,
Reaffirming also that the active participation of women, on equal terms with men, at all levels of decisionmaking is essential to the achievement of equality, sustainable development, peace and democracy,
Stressing the importance, generally and in the context of promoting fair and free elections, of respect for the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information, in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and noting in particular the fundamental importance of access to information and media freedom,
_______________
393

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. III, sect. A.
394
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
395
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
396
Resolution 217 A (III).
397
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
398
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
399
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
400
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.

607

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the need for strengthening democratic processes, electoral institutions and national capacity-building
in requesting countries, including the capacity to administer fair elections, promote voter education, the development of
electoral expertise and technology and the participation of women on equal terms with men, provide the necessary
conditions to ensure the effective and full participation of all persons with disabilities on an equal basis with others,
increase citizen participation and provide civic education, including to youth, in requesting countries in order to
consolidate and regularize the achievements of previous elections and support subsequent elections,
Noting the importance of ensuring orderly, open, fair and transparent democratic processes that protect the
rights to peaceful assembly, association and freedom of expression and opinion,
Noting also that the international community can contribute to the creation of conditions which could foster
stability and security throughout the pre-election, election and post-election periods in transitional and post-conflict
situations,
Reiterating that transparency is a fundamental basis for free and fair elections, which contribute to the
accountability of Governments to their citizens, which, in turn, is an underpinning of democratic societies,
Acknowledging, in this regard, the importance of international observation of elections for the promotion of
free and fair elections and its contribution to enhancing the integrity of election processes in requesting countries, to
promoting public confidence and electoral participation and to mitigating the potential for election-related
disturbances,
Acknowledging also that extending invitations regarding international electoral assistance and/or observation
is the sovereign right of Member States, and welcoming the decisions of those States that have requested such
assistance and/or observation,
Welcoming the support provided by Member States to the electoral assistance activities of the United Nations,
inter alia, through the provision of electoral experts, including electoral commission staff, and observers, as well as
through contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for Electoral Assistance, the Democratic Governance
Thematic Trust Fund of the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Democracy Fund,
Recognizing that electoral assistance, particularly through appropriate, sustainable and cost-effective electoral
technology, supports the electoral processes of developing countries,
Recognizing also the coordination challenges posed by the multiplicity of actors involved in electoral
assistance both within and outside the United Nations,
Welcoming the contributions made by international and regional organizations and also by non-governmental
organizations to enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization,
Recognizing that the importance of the links that exist between development, peace, human rights, the rule of
law and democratic governance, including the holding of free and fair elections, should be given due consideration
in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;401

2. Commends the electoral assistance provided upon request to Member States by the United Nations, and
requests that such assistance continue on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the evolving needs and legislation
of requesting countries to develop, improve and refine their electoral institutions and processes, recognizing that the
responsibility for organizing free and fair elections lies with Governments;
3. Reaffirms that the electoral assistance provided by the United Nations should continue to be carried out
in an objective, impartial, neutral and independent manner;
4. Requests the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, in his role as United Nations focal point for
electoral assistance matters, to continue to regularly inform Member States about the requests received and the
nature of any assistance provided;
_______________
401

608

A/68/301.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Requests that the United Nations continue its efforts to ensure, before undertaking to provide electoral
assistance to a requesting State, that there is adequate time to organize and carry out an effective mission providing
such assistance, including the provision of long-term technical cooperation, that conditions exist to allow a free and
fair election and that the results of the mission will be reported comprehensively and consistently;
6. Notes the importance of adequate resources for the administration of efficient and transparent elections
at the national and local levels, and recommends that Member States provide adequate resources for those elections,
including considering the possibility of establishing internal funding, where feasible;
7. Reaffirms the obligation of all States to take all appropriate measures to ensure that every citizen has the
effective right and opportunity to participate in elections on an equal basis;
8. Calls upon all States to enhance the political participation of women, accelerate the achievement of
equality between men and women and, in all situations, promote and protect the human rights of women with
respect to voting in elections and public referendums and being eligible for election to publicly elected bodies on
equal terms with men;
9. Recommends that, throughout the timespan of the entire electoral cycle, including before and after
elections, as appropriate, on the basis of a needs assessment and in accordance with the evolving needs of requesting
Member States, bearing in mind sustainability and cost-effectiveness, the United Nations continue to provide
technical advice and other assistance to requesting States and electoral institutions in order to help strengthen their
democratic processes, also bearing in mind that the relevant office may provide additional assistance in the form of
mediation and good offices, upon the request of Member States;
10. Notes with appreciation the additional efforts being made to enhance cooperation with other
international, governmental and non-governmental organizations in order to facilitate more comprehensive and
needs-specific responses to requests for electoral assistance, encourages those organizations to share knowledge and
experience in order to promote best practices in the assistance they provide and in their reporting on electoral
processes, and expresses its appreciation to those Member States, regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations that have provided observers or technical experts in support of United Nations electoral assistance
efforts;
11. Acknowledges the aim of harmonizing the methods and standards of the many intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations engaged in observing elections, and in this regard expresses appreciation for the
Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation and the Code of Conduct for International Election
Observers, which elaborate guidelines for international electoral observation;
12. Recalls the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Trust Fund for Electoral
Assistance, and, bearing in mind that the Fund is currently close to depletion, calls upon Member States to consider
contributing to the Fund;
13. Encourages the Secretary-General, through the United Nations focal point for electoral assistance
matters and with the support of the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political Affairs of the
Secretariat, to continue responding to the evolving nature of requests for assistance and the growing need for
specific types of medium-term expert assistance aimed at supporting and strengthening the existing capacity of the
requesting Government, in particular by enhancing the capacity of national electoral institutions;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Electoral Assistance Division with adequate human and
financial resources to allow it to carry out its mandate, including to enhance the accessibility and diversity of the
roster of electoral experts and the Organization’s electoral institutional memory, and to continue to ensure that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is able to respond, within its mandate and in
close coordination with the Division, to the numerous and increasingly complex and comprehensive requests from
Member States for advisory services;
15. Reiterates the need for ongoing comprehensive coordination, under the auspices of the United Nations
focal point for electoral assistance matters, between the Electoral Assistance Division, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support of the
Secretariat and the Office of the High Commissioner to ensure coordination and coherence and avoid duplication of
United Nations electoral assistance;
609

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

16. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to continue its democratic governance assistance
programmes in cooperation with other relevant organizations, in particular those that promote the strengthening of
democratic institutions and linkages between civil society and Governments;
17. Reiterates the role of civil society and the importance of its active engagement in the promotion of
democratization, and invites Member States to facilitate the full participation of civil society in electoral
processes;
18. Also reiterates the importance of reinforced coordination within and outside the United Nations system,
and reaffirms the clear leadership role within the United Nations system of the United Nations focal point for
electoral assistance matters, including in ensuring system-wide coherence and consistency and in strengthening the
institutional memory and the development, dissemination and issuance of United Nations electoral assistance
policies;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, in particular on the status of requests from Member States for
electoral assistance, and on his efforts to enhance support by the Organization for the democratization process
in Member States.
RESOLUTION 68/165
A/RES/68/165

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)402

68/165. Right to the truth
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,403 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 404 the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 405 and the Additional
Protocols thereto of 1977,406 and other relevant instruments of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,407
Recalling article 32 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 relating to the protection of
victims of international armed conflicts, which recognizes the right of families to know the fate of their relatives,
and article 33 of Additional Protocol I, which provides that the parties to an armed conflict shall search for the
persons who have been reported missing, as soon as circumstances permit,
Recalling also its resolution 60/147 of 16 December 2005, in which it adopted the Basic Principles and
Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights
Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law,
Recognizing the universality, indivisibility, interdependence and interrelatedness of civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights,
_______________
402

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia, Ukraine, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
403
Resolution 217 A (III).
404
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
405
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
406
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
407
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

610

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking into account Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/66 of 20 April 2005,408 Human Rights
Council decision 2/105 of 27 November 2006409 and resolutions 9/11 of 18 September 2008,410 12/12 of 1 October
2009411 and 21/7 of 27 September 2012412 on the right to the truth,
Welcoming the creation of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation
and guarantees of non-recurrence of the Human Rights Council by its resolution 18/7 of 29 September 2011,413 and
the appointment of a mandate holder by the Council at its nineteenth session,
Taking into account Human Rights Council resolutions 10/26 of 27 March 2009414 and 15/5 of 29 September
2010 on forensic genetics and human rights, in which the Council recognized the importance of the utilization of
forensic genetics to deal with the issue of impunity within the framework of investigations relating to gross human
rights violations and serious violations of international humanitarian law,
415

Recalling General Assembly resolution 65/196 of 21 December 2010, in which it proclaimed the International
Day for the Right to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims,
Recalling also the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 61/177 of 20 December 2006, in particular article 24, paragraph 2,
thereof, which sets out the right of victims to know the truth regarding the circumstances of the enforced
disappearance, the progress and the results of the investigation and the fate of the disappeared person, article 24,
paragraph 3, which sets forth State party obligations to take appropriate measures in this regard, and the preamble,
which reaffirms the right to freedom to seek, receive and impart information to that end, and welcoming the entry
into force of the Convention on 23 December 2010,
Noting that the Human Rights Committee and the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
have recognized the right of the victims of gross violations of human rights and their relatives to the truth about the
events that have taken place, including the identification of the perpetrators of the acts that gave rise to such
violations,
Recalling the set of principles for the protection and promotion of human rights through action to combat
impunity,416 and taking note with appreciation of the updated version of those principles,417
Stressing that adequate steps should also be taken to identify victims in situations that do not amount to armed
conflict, especially in cases of massive or systematic violations of human rights,
Convinced that States should preserve archives and other evidence concerning gross violations of human
rights and serious violations of international humanitarian law to facilitate knowledge of such violations, the
investigation of allegations and the provision for victims of access to an effective remedy in accordance with
international law,
Recalling that a specific right to the truth may be characterized differently in some legal systems as the right to
know or the right to be informed or to freedom of information,

_______________
408

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2),
chap. II, sect. A.

409

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. I, sect. B.

410

Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53/Add.1), chap. I.

411

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A.

412

Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.

413

Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.

414

Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/64/53), chap. II, sect. A.

415

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II.

416

E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/20/Rev.1, annex II.

417

E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1.

611

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Acknowledging, in cases of gross violations of human rights and serious violations of international
humanitarian law, the need to study the interrelationships among the right to the truth and the right to access to
justice, the right to obtain effective remedy and reparation and other relevant human rights,
Emphasizing that the public and individuals are entitled to have access, to the fullest extent practicable, to
information regarding the actions and decision-making processes of their Governments, within the framework of the
national legal system of each State,
Recognizing the fundamental role of civil society, through its engagement, advocacy and participation in
decision-making processes, in promoting and achieving respect for the right to the truth,
1. Recognizes the importance of respecting and ensuring the right to the truth so as to contribute to ending
impunity and to promote and protect human rights;
2. Welcomes the establishment in several States of specific judicial mechanisms and non-judicial
mechanisms, such as truth and reconciliation commissions, that complement the justice system, to investigate
violations of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, and appreciates the elaboration and
publication of the reports and decisions of these bodies;
3. Encourages the States concerned to disseminate, implement and monitor the implementation of the
recommendations of non-judicial mechanisms, such as truth and reconciliation commissions, and to provide
information regarding compliance with the decisions of judicial mechanisms;
4. Encourages other States to consider establishing specific judicial mechanisms and, where appropriate,
truth and reconciliation commissions to complement the justice system to investigate and address gross violations of
human rights and serious violations of international humanitarian law;
5. Encourages States and international organizations to provide requesting States with necessary and
appropriate assistance regarding the right to the truth by means of, among other actions, technical cooperation and
the exchange of information concerning administrative, legislative and judicial and non-judicial measures, as well as
experiences and best practices that have as a purpose the protection, promotion and implementation of this right,
including practices regarding the protection of witnesses and the preservation and management of archives;
6. Also encourages States and international organizations to acknowledge the important role of civil
society in monitoring the implementation of recommendations of truth commissions, and encourages donors to
make the training, support and strengthening of civil society organizations a priority within a comprehensive
transitional justice approach;
7. Urges all States that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance;
8. Calls upon States to work in cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence in accordance with his mandate, including by extending invitations to
the Special Rapporteur;
9. Welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and
guarantees of non-recurrence to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fourth session on selected challenges faced
by truth commissions in transitional periods,418 and takes note of the recommendations contained in the report;
10. Encourages States that have not yet done so to establish a national archival policy that ensures that
all archives pertaining to human rights are preserved and protected and to enact legislation that declares that
the documentary heritage of the nation is to be retained and preserved and that creates a framework for
managing State records from their creation to their destruction or preservation, and takes note in this regard of
ongoing efforts by the Human Rights Council, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, regional organizations
_______________
418

612

A/HRC/24/42.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and other stakeholders to systematize existing standards in the area of access to information, the protection
and preservation of records and the management of archives;
11. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to invite,
from within existing resources, Member States, United Nations organs, intergovernmental organizations, national
human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations to provide information on good practices in the
establishment, preservation and provision of access to national archives on human rights, and to make the
information received publicly available in an online database;
12. Invites special procedures and other mechanisms of the Human Rights Council, within the framework of
their mandates, to take into account, as appropriate, the issue of the right to the truth;
13. Encourages United Nations agencies, Member States and civil society organizations to exchange
experiences and good practices on the subject of the right to the truth, with a view to improving the effectiveness of
relevant mechanisms and procedures empowered to seek information, assert facts and effectively reveal the truth
about what has happened in the aftermath of gross human rights violations and serious violations of international
humanitarian law;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to organize an event in observance of the International Day for the Right
to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims, subject to availability of
resources, in order to exchange experiences and good practices on the subject of the right to the truth, with the
participation of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of nonrecurrence.
RESOLUTION 68/166
A/RES/68/166

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)419

68/166. International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 61/177 of 20 December 2006, by which it adopted and opened for signature,
ratification and accession the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance,
Recalling its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a body of principles for all States,
Recalling also its resolution 67/180 of 20 December 2012, as well as relevant resolutions adopted by the
Human Rights Council, including resolution 21/4 of 27 September 2012,420
Recalling further that no one shall be subjected to enforced disappearance,
Recalling that no exceptional circumstance whatsoever may be invoked as a justification for enforced
disappearance,
_______________
419

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
420
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.

613

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also that no one shall be held in secret detention,
Deeply concerned, in particular, by the increase in enforced or involuntary disappearances in various regions
of the world, including arrest, detention and abduction, when these are part of or amount to enforced
disappearances, and by the growing number of reports concerning harassment, ill-treatment and intimidation of
witnesses of disappearances or relatives of persons who have disappeared,
Recalling that the Convention sets out the right of victims to know the truth regarding the circumstances of the
enforced disappearance, the progress and results of the investigation and the fate of the disappeared person, and sets
forth State party obligations to take appropriate measures in this regard,
Recalling also that the Convention defines the victim of enforced disappearance as the disappeared person and
any individual who has suffered harm as the direct result of an enforced disappearance,
Acknowledging that acts of enforced disappearance are recognized in the Convention as crimes against
humanity, in certain circumstances,
Stressing the importance of the work of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, and
welcoming in this regard the holding of its 100th session in New York from 15 to 19 July 2013,
Acknowledging the valuable work of the International Committee of the Red Cross in promoting compliance
with international humanitarian law in this field,
1. Recognizes the importance of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance,421 the ratification and the implementation of which will be a significant contribution to
ending impunity and to promoting and protecting all human rights for all;
2. Welcomes the fact that 93 States have signed the Convention and 41 have ratified or acceded to it, and
calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention as a matter of
priority, as well as to consider the option provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention regarding the
Committee on Enforced Disappearances;
3. Also welcomes the holding of the second meeting of the States parties to the Convention on 28 May
2013, and welcomes the panel discussion held on that occasion;
4.

Further welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;422

5. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
increase their intensive efforts to assist States in becoming parties to the Convention, with a view to achieving
universal adherence;
6. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, to continue
making efforts to disseminate information on the Convention, to promote understanding of it and to assist States
parties in implementing their obligations under this instrument;
7. Welcomes the work achieved by the Committee on Enforced Disappearances, and in particular the
consideration, during its fourth session, of the first reports submitted by States parties under article 29 of the
Convention, and encourages all States parties to the Convention to submit their reports, to support and promote the
work of the Committee and to implement its recommendations;
8. Recognizes the importance of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance423 as a body of principles for all States designed to punish enforced disappearances, to prevent
their commission and to help victims of such acts and their families to seek fair, prompt and adequate
reparation;

_______________
421

Resolution 61/177, annex.
A/68/210 and Add.1.
423
Resolution 47/133.
422

614

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Working Group and the Committee, within the
framework of their respective mandates, and encourages further cooperation in the future;
10. Takes note with interest of all the general comments of the Working Group, including the most
recent comments on children424 and women425 affected by enforced disappearances, and recognizes in this
regard that enforced disappearances have special consequences for women and vulnerable groups, especially
children, as they most often bear the serious economic hardships that usually accompany such disappearances
and, when subjected to enforced disappearances themselves, may become particularly vulnerable to sexual
and other forms of violence;
11. Invites the Chair of the Committee and the Chair of the Working Group to address and engage in an
interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the status of the Convention and the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/167
A/RES/68/167

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)426

68/167. The right to privacy in the digital age
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the human rights and fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights427 and relevant international human rights treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights428 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,428
Reaffirming further the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,429
Noting that the rapid pace of technological development enables individuals all over the world to use new
information and communication technologies and at the same time enhances the capacity of governments,
companies and individuals to undertake surveillance, interception and data collection, which may violate or abuse
human rights, in particular the right to privacy, as set out in article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and is therefore an issue of increasing
concern,
Reaffirming the human right to privacy, according to which no one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful
interference with his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence, and the right to the protection of the law
against such interference, and recognizing that the exercise of the right to privacy is important for the realization of
the right to freedom of expression and to hold opinions without interference, and is one of the foundations of a
democratic society,
_______________
424

A/HRC/WGEID/98/1 and Corr.1.
A/HRC/WGEID/98/2.
426
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine
and Uruguay.
427
Resolution 217 A (III).
428
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
429
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
425

615

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Stressing the importance of the full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information, including
the fundamental importance of access to information and democratic participation,
Welcoming the report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression,430 submitted to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-third session, on the implications of
State surveillance of communications on the exercise of the human rights to privacy and to freedom of opinion and
expression,
Emphasizing that unlawful or arbitrary surveillance and/or interception of communications, as well as
unlawful or arbitrary collection of personal data, as highly intrusive acts, violate the rights to privacy and to freedom
of expression and may contradict the tenets of a democratic society,
Noting that while concerns about public security may justify the gathering and protection of certain sensitive
information, States must ensure full compliance with their obligations under international human rights law,
Deeply concerned at the negative impact that surveillance and/or interception of communications, including
extraterritorial surveillance and/or interception of communications, as well as the collection of personal data, in
particular when carried out on a mass scale, may have on the exercise and enjoyment of human rights,
Reaffirming that States must ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism are in compliance with their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
1. Reaffirms the right to privacy, according to which no one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful
interference with his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence, and the right to the protection of the law
against such interference, as set out in article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights427 and article 17 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;428
2. Recognizes the global and open nature of the Internet and the rapid advancement in information and
communications technologies as a driving force in accelerating progress towards development in its various forms;
3.
privacy;

Affirms that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected online, including the right to

4.

Calls upon all States:

(a)

To respect and protect the right to privacy, including in the context of digital communication;

(b) To take measures to put an end to violations of those rights and to create the conditions to prevent such
violations, including by ensuring that relevant national legislation complies with their obligations under international
human rights law;
(c) To review their procedures, practices and legislation regarding the surveillance of communications, their
interception and the collection of personal data, including mass surveillance, interception and collection, with a view
to upholding the right to privacy by ensuring the full and effective implementation of all their obligations under
international human rights law;
(d) To establish or maintain existing independent, effective domestic oversight mechanisms capable of
ensuring transparency, as appropriate, and accountability for State surveillance of communications, their
interception and the collection of personal data;
5. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to submit a report on the protection
and promotion of the right to privacy in the context of domestic and extraterritorial surveillance and/or the
interception of digital communications and the collection of personal data, including on a mass scale, to the Human
Rights Council at its twenty-seventh session and to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, with views and
recommendations, to be considered by Member States;
6. Decides to examine the question at its sixty-ninth session, under the sub-item entitled “Human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
_______________
430

616

A/HRC/23/40 and Corr.1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/168
A/RES/68/168

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.2,
para. 146),431 by a recorded vote of 136 to 55, with no abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: None

68/168. Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and expressing, in particular, the
need to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,432 as well as the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,433 the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001,434 the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference, adopted on
24 April 2009,435 and the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, entitled “United against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”, of 22 September 2011,436
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights437 and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,437
_______________
431

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
432
Resolution 217 A (III).
433
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
434
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
435
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
436
Resolution 66/3.
437
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

617

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration438 and the outcome documents of the twenty-third439
and twenty-fourth440 special sessions of the General Assembly, held in New York from 5 to 10 June 2000 and in
Geneva from 26 June to 1 July 2000, respectively,
Recalling also its resolutions 66/154 of 19 December 2011 and 67/165 of 20 December 2012,
Recalling further Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/17 of 14 April 2005 on globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights,441
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 17/4 of 16 June 2011442 on human rights and transnational
corporations and other business enterprises and 21/5 of 27 September 2012443 on the contribution of the United
Nations system as a whole to the advancement of the business and human rights agenda and the dissemination and
implementation of the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations
“Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,444
Recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with
the same emphasis,
Realizing that globalization affects all countries differently and makes them more exposed to external
developments, positive as well as negative, inter alia, in the field of human rights,
Realizing also that globalization is not merely an economic process, but that it also has social, political,
environmental, cultural and legal dimensions, which have an impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Emphasizing the need to fully implement the global partnership for development and enhance the momentum
generated by the 2005 World Summit in order to operationalize and implement the commitments made in the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the 2005 World Summit, in the
economic, social and related fields, and reaffirming in particular the commitment contained in paragraphs 19 and 47
of the 2005 World Summit Outcome445 to promote fair globalization and the development of the productive sectors
in developing countries to enable them to participate more effectively in and benefit from the process of
globalization,
Realizing the need to undertake a thorough, independent and comprehensive assessment of the social,
environmental and cultural impact of globalization on societies,
Recognizing in each culture a dignity and value that deserve recognition, respect and preservation, convinced
that, in their rich variety and diversity and in the reciprocal influences that they exert on one another, all cultures
form part of the common heritage belonging to all humankind, and aware of the risk that globalization poses more
of a threat to cultural diversity if the developing world remains poor and marginalized,
Recognizing also that multilateral mechanisms have a unique role to play in meeting the challenges and
opportunities presented by globalization,
Realizing the need to consider the challenges and opportunities linked to globalization with a view to addressing
such challenges and building on possible opportunities in order to achieve the full enjoyment of all human rights,
_______________
438

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
440
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
441
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2),
chap. II, sect. A.
442
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. III, sect. A.
443
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
444
A/HRC/17/31, annex.
445
Resolution 60/1.
439

618

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the importance of international, regional and
bilateral cooperation and the need to protect the human rights of migrants, particularly at a time in which migration
flows have increased in the globalized economy,
Expressing grave concern at the negative impact of international financial turmoil on social and economic
development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly in the light of the continuing global
financial and economic crisis, which has an adverse impact on the realization of the internationally agreed
development goals, particularly the Millennium Development Goals, and recognizing that developing countries are
in a more vulnerable situation when facing such impact and that regional economic cooperation and development
strategies and programmes can play a role in mitigating such impact,
Expressing deep concern at the negative impact of the continuing global food and energy crises and climate
change challenges on social and economic development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights for all,
Recognizing that globalization should be guided by the fundamental principles that underpin the corpus of
human rights, such as equity, participation, accountability, non-discrimination at both the national and the
international levels, respect for diversity, tolerance and international cooperation and solidarity,
Emphasizing that the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the full realization and effective
enjoyment of human rights and that its immediate alleviation and eventual elimination must remain a high priority
for the international community,
Acknowledging that there is greater acceptance that the increasing debt burden faced by the most indebted
developing countries is unsustainable and constitutes one of the principal obstacles to achieving sustainable
development and poverty eradication and that, for many developing countries, excessive debt servicing has severely
constrained their capacity to promote social development and to provide basic services to realize economic, social
and cultural rights,
Strongly reiterating the determination to ensure the timely and full realization of the development goals and
objectives agreed at the major United Nations conferences and summits, including those agreed at the Millennium
Summit, described as the Millennium Development Goals, which have helped to galvanize efforts towards poverty
eradication,
Gravely concerned at the inadequacy of measures to narrow the widening gap between the developed and the
developing countries, and within countries, which has contributed to, inter alia, deepening poverty and has adversely
affected the full enjoyment of all human rights, in particular in developing countries,
Emphasizing that transnational corporations and other business enterprises have a responsibility to respect all
human rights,
Emphasizing also that human beings strive for a world that is respectful of human rights and cultural diversity
and that, in this regard, they work to ensure that all activities, including those affected by globalization, are
consistent with those aims,
1. Recognizes that, while globalization, by its impact on, inter alia, the role of the State, may affect human
rights, the promotion and protection of all human rights is first and foremost the responsibility of the State;
2. Emphasizes that development should be at the centre of the international economic agenda and that
coherence between national development strategies and international obligations and commitments is imperative for
an enabling environment for development and an inclusive and equitable globalization;
3. Reaffirms that narrowing the gap between rich and poor, both within and between countries, is an
explicit goal at the national and international levels, as part of the effort to create an enabling environment for the
full enjoyment of all human rights;
4. Also reaffirms the commitment to create an environment at both the national and the global levels that is
conducive to development and to the eradication of poverty by, inter alia, promoting good governance within each
country and at the international level, eliminating protectionism, enhancing transparency in the financial, monetary
and trading systems and committing to an open, equitable, rules-based, predictable and non-discriminatory
multilateral trading and financial system;
619

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Recognizes the impacts that the global financial and economic crisis is still having on the ability of
countries, particularly developing countries, to mobilize resources for development and to address the impact of this
crisis, and in this context calls upon all States and the international community to alleviate, in an inclusive and
development-oriented manner, any negative impacts of this crisis on the realization and the effective enjoyment of
all human rights;
6. Also recognizes that, while globalization offers great opportunities, the fact that its benefits are very
unevenly shared and its costs unevenly distributed represents an aspect of the process that affects the full enjoyment
of all human rights, in particular in developing countries;
7. Welcomes the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on globalization and
its impact on the full enjoyment of human rights,446 which focuses on the liberalization of agricultural trade and its
impact on the realization of the right to development, including the right to food, and takes note of the conclusions
and recommendations contained therein;
8. Reaffirms the international commitment to eliminating hunger and to securing food for all, today and
tomorrow, and reiterates that the relevant United Nations organizations should be assured the resources needed to
expand and enhance their food assistance and support social safety net programmes designed to address hunger and
malnutrition, when appropriate, through the use of local or regional purchase;
9. Calls upon Member States, relevant agencies of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
organizations and civil society to promote inclusive, equitable and environmentally sustainable economic growth for
managing globalization so that poverty is systematically reduced and the international development targets are
achieved;
10. Recognizes that the responsible operations of transnational corporations and other business enterprises
can contribute to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, in
particular economic, social and cultural rights;
11. Also recognizes that only through broad and sustained efforts, including policies and measures at the
global level to create a shared future based upon our common humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be
made fully inclusive and equitable and have a human face, thus contributing to the full enjoyment of all
human rights;
12. Underlines the urgent need to establish an equitable, transparent and democratic international system to
strengthen and broaden the participation of developing countries in international economic decision-making and
norm-setting;
13. Affirms that globalization is a complex process of structural transformation, with numerous
interdisciplinary aspects, which has an impact on the enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights, including the right to development;
14. Also affirms that the international community should strive to respond to the challenges and
opportunities posed by globalization in a manner that promotes and protects human rights while ensuring respect for
the cultural diversity of all;
15. Underlines, therefore, the need to continue to analyse the consequences of globalization for the full
enjoyment of all human rights;
16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,447 and requests him to continue to seek further the
views of Member States and relevant agencies of the United Nations system and to submit to the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session a substantive report on the subject based on those views, including recommendations on
ways to address the impact of globalization on the full enjoyment of all human rights.

_______________
446
447

620

E/CN.4/2002/54.
A/68/177.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/169
A/RES/68/169

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)448

68/169. Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter of the United Nations to promote and
encourage universal respect for and observance of all human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as
to, inter alia, religion or belief,
Reaffirming also the obligation of States to prohibit discrimination and violence on the basis of religion or
belief and to implement measures to guarantee the equal and effective protection of the law,
Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Reaffirming that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights449 provides, inter alia, that everyone
shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, which shall include freedom to have or
to adopt a religion or belief of one’s choice and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or
private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching,
Reaffirming also the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and full
respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information can play in strengthening democracy and combating
religious intolerance, and reaffirming further that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression carries with it
special duties and responsibilities, in accordance with article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,
Expressing deep concern at those acts that advocate religious hatred and thereby undermine the spirit of
tolerance,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group,
Reaffirming also that violence can never be an acceptable response to acts of intolerance on the basis of
religion or belief,
Welcoming Human Rights Council resolutions 16/18 of 24 March 2011450 and 22/31 of 22 March 2013451 and
General Assembly resolution 67/178 of 20 December 2012,
Deeply concerned about incidents of intolerance, discrimination and violence against persons based on their
religion or belief in all regions of the world,
Deploring any advocacy of discrimination or violence on the basis of religion or belief,
Strongly deploring all acts of violence against persons on the basis of their religion or belief, as well as any
such acts directed against their homes, businesses, properties, schools, cultural centres or places of worship,
Strongly deploring, further, all attacks on and in religious places, sites and shrines in violation of international
law, in particular human rights law and international humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of relics
and monuments,
_______________
448

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Brazil, Djibouti (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation), New Zealand, Thailand and Uruguay.
449
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
450
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
451
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.

621

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Concerned about actions that wilfully exploit tensions or target individuals on the basis of their religion
or belief,
Expressing deep concern at the instances of intolerance, discrimination and acts of violence occurring in the
world, including cases motivated by discrimination against persons belonging to religious minorities, in addition to
the negative projection of the followers of religions and the enforcement of measures that specifically discriminate
against persons on the basis of religion or belief,
Expressing concern at the growing manifestations of intolerance based on religion or belief which can
generate hatred and violence among individuals from and within different nations and which may have serious
implications at the national, regional and international levels, and in this regard emphasizing the importance of
respect for religious and cultural diversity, as well as interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue aimed at
promoting a culture of tolerance and respect among individuals, societies and nations,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of people of all religions or beliefs to humanity and the contribution that
dialogue among religious groups can make towards an improved awareness and understanding of the common
values shared by all humankind,
Underlining the fact that States, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and
the media have an important role to play in promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity and
in the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or belief,
Underlining also the importance of raising awareness about different cultures and religions or beliefs and of
education in the promotion of tolerance, which involves the acceptance by the public of and its respect for religious
and cultural diversity, including with regard to religious expression, and underlining further the fact that education,
in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of
discrimination based on religion or belief,
Recognizing that working together to enhance the implementation of existing legal regimes that protect
individuals against discrimination and hate crimes, increase interreligious, interfaith and intercultural efforts and
expand human rights education is an important first step in combating incidents of intolerance, discrimination and
violence against individuals on the basis of religion or belief,
Welcoming the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
promoting intercultural dialogue, as well as the work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, the Anna
Lindh Foundation and the work of the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna, established on the basis of the purposes and principles enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,452 and acknowledging the important role that the Centre is playing as a platform for
the enhancement of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
Welcoming also, in this regard, all international, regional and national initiatives aimed at promoting
interreligious, intercultural and interfaith harmony and combating discrimination against individuals on the basis of
religion or belief, including the launching of the Istanbul Process,
Welcoming further the continuation of the organization of workshops and meetings in the framework of the
Istanbul Process to discuss the implementation of Human Rights Council resolution 16/18,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on combating intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons, based on religion or belief;453
2. Expresses deep concern at the continued serious instances of derogatory stereotyping, negative profiling
and stigmatization of persons based on their religion or belief, as well as programmes and agendas pursued by
extremist individuals, organizations and groups aimed at creating and perpetuating negative stereotypes about
religious groups, in particular when condoned by Governments;
3. Expresses concern that the number of incidents of religious intolerance, discrimination and related
violence, as well as of negative stereotyping of individuals on the basis of religion or belief, continues to rise around
_______________
452
453

622

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/68/546.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the world, which may have serious implications at the national, regional and international levels, condemns, in this
context, any advocacy of religious hatred against individuals that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility
or violence, and urges States to take effective measures, as set forth in the present resolution and consistent with
their obligations under international human rights law, to address and combat such incidents;
4. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any other means;
5. Recognizes that the open public debate of ideas, as well as interreligious, interfaith and intercultural
dialogue, at the local, national and international levels can be among the best protections against religious
intolerance and can play a positive role in strengthening democracy and combating religious hatred, and
expresses its conviction that a continuing dialogue on these issues can help to overcome existing
misperceptions;
6. Also recognizes the strong need for global awareness about the possible serious implications of
incitement to discrimination and violence, which may have serious implications at the national, regional and
international levels, and urges all Member States to make renewed efforts to develop educational systems that
promote all human rights and fundamental freedoms that enhance tolerance for religious and cultural diversity,
which is fundamental to promoting tolerant, peaceful and harmonious multicultural societies;
7. Calls upon all States to take the following actions, as called for by the Secretary-General of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to foster a domestic environment of religious tolerance, peace and respect by:
(a) Encouraging the creation of collaborative networks to build mutual understanding, promoting dialogue
and inspiring constructive action towards shared policy goals and the pursuit of tangible outcomes, such as servicing
projects in the fields of education, health, conflict prevention, employment, integration and media education;
(b) Creating an appropriate mechanism within Governments to, inter alia, identify and address potential
areas of tension between members of different religious communities, and assisting with conflict prevention and
mediation;
(c)

Encouraging the training of Government officials in effective outreach strategies;

(d) Encouraging the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities the causes of discrimination and
developing strategies to counter those causes;
(e) Speaking out against intolerance, including advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence;
(f)

Adopting measures to criminalize incitement to imminent violence based on religion or belief;

(g) Understanding the need to combat denigration and the negative religious stereotyping of persons, as well
as incitement to religious hatred, by strategizing and harmonizing actions at the local, national, regional and
international levels through, inter alia, education and awareness-raising;
(h) Recognizing that the open, constructive and respectful debate of ideas, as well as interreligious, interfaith
and intercultural dialogue at the local, national, regional and international levels, can play a positive role in
combating religious hatred, incitement and violence;
8.

Also calls upon all States:

(a) To take effective measures to ensure that public functionaries, in the conduct of their public duties, do
not discriminate against an individual on the basis of religion or belief;
(b) To foster religious freedom and pluralism by promoting the ability of members of all religious
communities to manifest their religion and to contribute openly and on an equal footing to society;
(c) To encourage the representation and meaningful participation of individuals, irrespective of their religion
or belief, in all sectors of society;
(d) To make a strong effort to counter religious profiling, which is understood to be the invidious use
of religion as a criterion in conducting questioning, searches and other investigative law enforcement
procedures;
623

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Further calls upon all States to adopt measures and policies to promote full respect for and protection of
places of worship and religious sites, cemeteries and shrines, and to take protective measures in cases where they are
vulnerable to vandalism or destruction;
10. Calls for strengthened international efforts to foster a global dialogue for the promotion of a culture of
tolerance and peace at all levels, based on respect for human rights and diversity of religions and beliefs;
11. Encourages all States to consider providing updates on efforts made in this regard as part of ongoing
reporting to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and in this respect requests the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to include those updates in her reports to the Human Rights
Council;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report that
includes information provided by the High Commissioner on steps taken by States to combat intolerance, negative
stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons, based on religion
or belief, as set forth in the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/170
A/RES/68/170

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)454

68/170. Freedom of religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it proclaimed the Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling also article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 455 article 18 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights456 and other relevant human rights provisions,
Recalling further its previous resolutions on freedom of religion or belief and on the elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief, including resolution 67/179 of 20 December 2012
and Human Rights Council resolution 22/20 of 22 March 2013,457
Recognizing the important work carried out by the Human Rights Committee in providing guidance with
respect to the scope of freedom of religion or belief,
Considering that religion or belief, for those who profess either, is one of the fundamental elements in their
conception of life and that freedom of religion or belief, as a universal human right, should be fully respected and
guaranteed,
Deeply concerned at continuing acts of intolerance and violence based on religion or belief against individuals
and members of religious communities and religious minorities around the world and at the limited progress that has
been made in the elimination of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief, and
believing that further intensified efforts are therefore required to promote and protect the right to freedom of
thought, conscience and religion or belief and to eliminate all forms of hatred, intolerance and discrimination based
_______________
454

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
455
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
456
Resolution 217 A (III).
457
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.

624

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

on religion or belief, as also noted at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, as well as at the Durban
Review Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009,
Recalling that States have the primary responsibility to promote and protect human rights, including the
human rights of persons belonging to religious minorities, including their right to exercise their religion or
belief freely,
Concerned that official authorities sometimes tolerate or encourage acts of violence, or credible threats of
violence, against persons belonging to religious communities and religious minorities,
Concerned also at the increasing number of laws and regulations that limit the freedom of thought, conscience
and religion or belief and at the implementation of existing laws in a discriminatory manner,
Convinced of the need to address the rise in various parts of the world of religious extremism that affects the
rights of individuals, the situations of violence and discrimination that affect many women and other individuals on
the basis or in the name of religion or belief or in accordance with cultural and traditional practices and the misuse
of religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations and in other
relevant instruments of the United Nations,
Seriously concerned about all attacks on religious places, sites and shrines in violation of international law, in
particular human rights and humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of relics and monuments,
Emphasizing that States, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies, the media and
civil society as a whole have an important role to play in promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural
diversity and in the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or belief,
Underlining the importance of education, including human rights education, in the promotion of tolerance,
which involves the acceptance by the public of, and its respect for, diversity, including with regard to religious
expression, and underlining also the fact that education, in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful
way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or belief,
1. Stresses that everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, which
includes the freedom to have or not to have, or to adopt, a religion or belief of one’s own choice and the freedom,
either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in teaching,
practice, worship and observance, including the right to change one’s religion or belief;
2. Also stresses that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief applies equally to all
persons, regardless of their religion or belief and without any discrimination as to their equal protection by the law;
3. Strongly condemns violations of freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief as well as all
forms of intolerance, discrimination and violence based on religion or belief;
4. Recognizes with deep concern the overall rise in instances of discrimination, intolerance and violence,
regardless of the actors, directed against members of many religious and other communities in various parts of the
world, including cases motivated by Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and Christianophobia and prejudices against
persons of other religions or beliefs;
5. Reaffirms that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion or belief as this may have
adverse consequences on the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or belief of all members of the religious
communities concerned;
6. Condemns violence and acts of terrorism, which are increasing in number, targeting individuals,
including persons belonging to religious minorities across the world;
7. Recalls that States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish acts of
violence against persons belonging to religious minorities, regardless of the perpetrator, and that failure to do so may
constitute a human rights violation;
8. Emphasizes that freedom of religion or belief and freedom of expression are interdependent, interrelated
and mutually reinforcing, and stresses the role that these rights can play in the fight against all forms of intolerance
and of discrimination based on religion or belief;
625

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Strongly condemns any advocacy of hatred based on religion or belief that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any
other means;
10. Expresses concern at the persistence of institutionalized social intolerance and discrimination practised
against many on the grounds of religion or belief, and emphasizes that legal procedures pertaining to religious or
belief-based groups and places of worship are not a prerequisite for the exercise of the right to manifest one’s
religion or belief and that such procedures, when legally required at the national or local level, should be nondiscriminatory in order to contribute to the effective protection of the right of all persons to practise their religion or
belief, either individually or in community with others and in public or private;
11. Recognizes with concern the situation of persons in vulnerable situations, including persons deprived of
their liberty, refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons, children, persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and migrants, as regards their ability to freely exercise their right to
freedom of religion or belief;
12. Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee, restrictions on the freedom to manifest
one’s religion or belief are permitted only if limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety,
order, health or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, are non-discriminatory and are applied in a
manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief;
13. Expresses deep concern at emerging obstacles to the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or
belief as well as the continued existence of instances of intolerance, discrimination and violence based on religion or
belief, including:
(a) The increasing number of acts of violence and intolerance directed against individuals, including
persons belonging to religious minorities and other communities in various parts of the world;
(b) The rise of religious extremism in various parts of the world that affects the rights of individuals,
including persons belonging to religious minorities;
(c) Incidents of hatred, discrimination, intolerance and violence based on religion or belief, which may be
associated with or manifested by the derogatory stereotyping, negative profiling and stigmatization of persons based
on their religion or belief;
(d) Attacks on or destruction of religious places, sites and shrines in violation of international law, in
particular human rights and humanitarian law, as they have more than material significance for the dignity and lives
of members of communities holding spiritual or religious beliefs;
(e) Instances, both in law and practice, that constitute violations of the human right to freedom of religion or
belief, including of the individual right to publicly express one’s spiritual and religious beliefs, taking into account
the relevant articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,455 as well as other international
instruments;
(f) Constitutional and legislative systems that fail to provide adequate and effective guarantees of freedom
of thought, conscience and religion or belief to all without distinction;
14. Urges States to step up their efforts to protect and promote freedom of thought, conscience and religion
or belief, and to this end:
(a) To ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide adequate and effective guarantees of
freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief to all without distinction, inter alia, by providing access to
justice and effective remedies in cases where the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief or the
right to freely choose and practise one’s religion is violated;
(b) To implement all accepted universal periodic review recommendations related to the promotion and
protection of freedom of religion or belief;
(c) To ensure that no one within their jurisdiction is deprived of the right to life, liberty and security of
person because of religion or belief and that no one is subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment or arbitrary arrest or detention on that account and to bring to justice all perpetrators of
violations of these rights;
626

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(d) To end violations of the human rights of women and to devote particular attention to appropriate
measures modifying or abolishing existing laws, regulations, customs and practices that discriminate against
women, including in the exercise of their right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, and to foster
practical ways to ensure equality between men and women;
(e) To ensure that existing legislation is not implemented in a discriminatory manner or does not result in
discrimination based on religion or belief, that no one is discriminated against on the basis of his or her religion or
belief when accessing, inter alia, education, medical care, employment, humanitarian assistance or social benefits
and that everyone has the right and the opportunity to have access, on general terms of equality, to public services in
their country, without any discrimination based on religion or belief;
(f) To review, whenever relevant, existing registration practices in order to ensure that such practices do not
limit the right of all persons to manifest their religion or belief, either alone or in community with others and in
public or private;
(g) To ensure that no official documents are withheld from the individual on the grounds of religion or belief
and that everyone has the right to refrain from disclosing information concerning their religious affiliation in such
documents against their will;
(h) To ensure, in particular, the right of all persons to worship, assemble or teach in connection with a
religion or belief, their right to establish and maintain places for these purposes and the right of all persons to seek,
receive and impart information and ideas in these areas;
(i) To ensure that, in accordance with appropriate national legislation and in conformity with international
human rights law, the freedom of all persons and members of groups to establish and maintain religious, charitable
or humanitarian institutions is fully respected and protected;
(j) To ensure that all public officials and civil servants, including members of law enforcement bodies, and
personnel of detention facilities, the military and educators, in the course of fulfilling their official duties, respect
freedom of religion or belief and do not discriminate for reasons based on religion or belief, and that they receive all
necessary and appropriate awareness-raising, education or training on respect for freedom of religion or belief;
(k) To take all necessary and appropriate action, in conformity with international standards of human rights,
to combat hatred, discrimination, intolerance and acts of violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by
intolerance based on religion or belief, as well as incitement to hostility and violence, with particular regard to
members of religious minorities in all parts of the world;
(l) To promote, through education and other means, mutual understanding, tolerance, non-discrimination
and respect in all matters relating to freedom of religion or belief by encouraging, in society at large, a wider
knowledge of the diversity of religions and beliefs and of the history, traditions, languages and cultures of the
various religious minorities existing within their jurisdiction;
(m) To prevent any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on religion or belief that impairs the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis and to detect signs
of intolerance that may lead to discrimination based on religion or belief;
15. Welcomes and encourages initiatives by the media to promote tolerance and respect for religious and
cultural diversity and the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or
belief;
16. Stresses the importance of a continued and strengthened dialogue in all its forms, including among and
within religions or beliefs, and with broader participation, including of women, to promote greater tolerance, respect
and mutual understanding, and welcomes different initiatives in this regard, including the Alliance of Civilizations
initiative and the programmes led by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
17. Welcomes and encourages the continuing efforts of all actors in society, including non-governmental
organizations and bodies and groups based on religion or belief, to promote the implementation of the
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,458
_______________
458

Resolution 36/55.

627

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and further encourages their work in promoting freedom of religion or belief, in highlighting cases of religious
intolerance, discrimination and persecution and in promoting religious tolerance;
18. Recommends that States, the United Nations and other actors, including non-governmental organizations
and bodies and groups based on religion or belief, in their efforts to promote freedom of religion or belief, ensure the
widest possible dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in as many different languages as possible, and promote its
implementation;
19. Welcomes the work and the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
freedom of religion or belief;459
20. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, to respond favourably to his
requests to visit their countries and to provide all information and follow-up necessary for the effective fulfilment of
his mandate;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special Rapporteur receives the resources necessary to
fully discharge his mandate;
22. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session;
23. Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance at its sixty-ninth
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/171
A/RES/68/171

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)460

68/171. National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, the
most recent of which was resolution 66/169 of 19 December 2011, and those of the Commission on Human Rights and
the Human Rights Council concerning national institutions and their role in the promotion and protection of human
rights, the most recent of which are Council resolutions 20/14 of 5 July 2012461 and 23/17 of 13 June 2013,462
Welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in the creation and strengthening of independent,
pluralistic national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights (the Paris Principles),463 and welcoming the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the principles,
Reaffirming the important role that such national institutions play and will continue to play in promoting and
protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, in strengthening participation and the rule of law and in
developing and enhancing public awareness of those rights and freedoms,
_______________
459

See A/68/290.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
461
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. IV, sect. A.
462
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
463
Resolution 48/134, annex.
460

628

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling its resolution 67/163 of 20 December 2012 on the role of the Ombudsman, mediator and other
national human rights institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations, in particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in assisting the development of independent and effective national human rights
institutions, guided by the Paris Principles, and recognizing also in this regard the potential for strengthened and
complementary cooperation among the United Nations, the International Coordinating Committee of National
Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and those national institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June l993,464 which reaffirmed the important and constructive role played by national human rights
institutions, in particular in their advisory capacity to the competent authorities and their role in preventing and
remedying human rights violations, in disseminating information on human rights and in education in human rights,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and mutually
reinforcing, and that all human rights must be treated in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the
same emphasis,
Bearing in mind the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and
religious backgrounds, and that all States, regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, have the duty
to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling the programme of action adopted by national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights at their meeting held in Vienna in June 1993 during the World Conference on Human Rights, in which it was
recommended that United Nations activities and programmes should be reinforced to meet the requests for
assistance from States wishing to establish or strengthen their national institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights465 and on the process currently utilized by the International Coordinating Committee
of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to accredit national institutions in
compliance with the Paris Principles,466
Welcoming the strengthening in all regions of regional cooperation among national human rights institutions,
and noting with appreciation the continuing work of the Network of African National Human Rights Institutions,
the Network of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in the Americas, the AsiaPacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions and the European Group of National Human Rights
Institutions,
1.
therein;

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General467 and the conclusions contained

2. Reaffirms the importance of the development of effective, independent and pluralistic national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, in accordance with the Paris Principles;463
3. Recognizes the role of independent national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights in working together with Governments to ensure full respect for human rights at the national level, including
by contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to the recommendations resulting from the international human
rights mechanisms;
4. Welcomes the increasingly important role of national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights in supporting cooperation between their Governments and the United Nations in the promotion and
protection of human rights;
_______________
464

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
A/HRC/23/27.
466
A/HRC/16/77.
467
A/68/208.
465

629

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Underlines the value of national human rights institutions, established and operating in accordance with
the Paris Principles, in the continued monitoring of existing legislation and consistently informing the State about
the impact of such legislation on the activities of human rights defenders, including by making relevant and concrete
recommendations;
6. Recognizes the role that national human rights institutions can play in preventing and addressing cases of
reprisals as part of supporting the cooperation between their Governments and the United Nations in the promotion
of human rights, including by contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to recommendations made by
international human rights mechanisms;
7. Also recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,464 it is the
right of each State to choose the framework for national institutions that is best suited to its particular needs at the
national level in order to promote human rights in accordance with international human rights standards;
8. Encourages Member States to establish effective, independent and pluralistic national institutions or,
where they already exist, to strengthen them for the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, as outlined in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
9. Welcomes the growing number of States establishing or considering the establishment of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, and welcomes in particular the growing number of
States that have accepted recommendations to establish national institutions compliant with the Paris Principles
made through the universal periodic review and, where relevant, by treaty bodies and special procedures;
10. Encourages national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights established by
Member States to continue to play an active role in preventing and combating all violations of human rights as
enumerated in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and relevant international instruments;
11. Recognizes that national human rights institutions and their respective members and staff should not face
any form of reprisal or intimidation, including political pressure, physical intimidation, harassment or unjustifiable
budgetary limitations, as a result of activities undertaken in accordance with their respective mandates, including
when taking up individual cases or when reporting on serious or systematic violations in their countries;
12. Also recognizes the role played by national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights
in the Human Rights Council, including its universal periodic review mechanism, in both preparation and followup, and the special procedures, as well as in the human rights treaty bodies, in accordance with Council resolutions
5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June 2007468 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005;469
13. Welcomes the strengthening of opportunities for national human rights institutions compliant with the
Paris Principles to contribute to the work of the Human Rights Council, as stipulated in the Council review outcome
document annexed to Council resolution 16/21 of 25 March 2011470 adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 65/281 of 17 June 2011, and encourages national human rights institutions to make use of these
participatory opportunities;
14. Also welcomes the contribution of national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles
to the work of the United Nations, including of the Commission on the Status of Women, the Conference of States
Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing and
the ongoing intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system;
15. Encourages national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles to continue to
participate in and to contribute to deliberations in all relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes in
accordance with their respective mandates, including the discussions on the post-2015 development agenda;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to focus in his next report to the General Assembly on the current
participation of national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles in the work of the Assembly
_______________
468

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2),
chap. II, sect. A.
470
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
469

630

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and related processes, with a view to exploring the feasibility of enabling national human rights institutions
compliant with the Paris Principles to participate independently in relevant United Nations mechanisms and
processes in accordance with their respective mandates and based on practices and arrangements agreed upon in
Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June 2007 and
16/21 of 25 March 2011 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005, while ensuring
their most effective contribution;
17. Stresses the importance of the financial and administrative independence and stability of national human
rights institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, and notes with satisfaction the efforts of those
States that have provided their national institutions with more autonomy and independence, including by giving
them an investigative role or enhancing such a role, and encourages other Governments to consider taking
similar steps;
18. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to give high priority to requests from Member States for
assistance in the establishment and strengthening of national human rights institutions;
19. Underlines the importance of the autonomy and independence of ombudsman institutions, encourages
increased cooperation between national human rights institutions and regional and international associations of
ombudsmen, and also encourages ombudsman institutions to actively draw on the standards enumerated in
international instruments and the Paris Principles to strengthen their independence and increase their capacity to act
as national human rights protection mechanisms;
20. Commends the high priority given by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to work on national human rights institutions, encourages the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, in view of the expanded activities relating to national institutions, to ensure that appropriate
arrangements are made and budgetary resources provided to continue and further extend activities in support of
national institutions, and invites Governments to contribute additional voluntary funds to that end;
21. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms and agencies, funds and programmes to work
within their respective mandates with Member States and national institutions in the promotion and protection of
human rights with respect to, inter alia, projects in the area of good governance and the rule of law, and in this
regard welcomes the efforts made by the High Commissioner to develop partnerships in support of national
institutions, including the tripartite partnership among the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of
the High Commissioner and the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights;
22. Welcomes the important role played by the International Coordinating Committee, in close cooperation
with the Office of the High Commissioner, in assisting Governments, when requested, in the establishment and
strengthening of national human rights institutions in accordance with the Paris Principles, in assessing the
conformity of national human rights institutions with the Paris Principles and in providing technical assistance to
strengthen national human rights institutions, upon request, with a view to enhancing their compliance with the
Paris Principles, and calls upon Member States and other stakeholders, including United Nations agencies, to follow
up on the recommendations of the Subcommittee on Accreditation of the International Coordinating Committee,
with a view to enabling national human rights institutions to fully comply with the Paris Principles in both law and
practice;
23. Encourages national institutions, including ombudsman and mediator institutions, to seek accreditation
status through the International Coordinating Committee;
24. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate steps to promote the exchange of information and
experience concerning the establishment and effective operation of national human rights institutions and to support
the work of the International Coordinating Committee and its regional coordinating networks in this regard,
including through support for the relevant technical assistance programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the assistance necessary for holding international
and regional meetings of national institutions, including meetings of the International Coordinating Committee, in
cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
631

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/172
A/RES/68/172

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)471

68/172. Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities annexed to that resolution, and
bearing in mind article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights472 as well as other relevant
existing international standards and national legislation,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the effective promotion of the Declaration, as well as Human
Rights Council resolutions 6/15 of 28 September 2007473 and 19/23 of 23 March 2012,474 by which the Council
established and renewed the mandate of the Forum on Minority Issues, 16/6 of 24 March 2011 on the mandate of
the Independent Expert on minority issues, 475 18/3 of 29 September 2011 on the panel to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration476 and 22/4 of 21 March 2013 on the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,477
Affirming that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities and dialogue between these minorities and the rest of society, as well as the constructive
and inclusive development of practices and institutional arrangements to accommodate diversity within societies,
contribute to political and social stability and the prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts involving the rights
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
Expressing concern at the frequency and severity of disputes and conflicts involving persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in many countries and their often tragic consequences, and that
such persons often suffer disproportionately from the effects of conflicts resulting in the violation of their human
rights and are particularly vulnerable to displacement through, inter alia, population transfers, refugee flows and
forced relocation,
Emphasizing the important role that national institutions can play in the promotion and protection of the rights
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities as well as in early warning and
awareness-raising measures to address problems regarding minority situations,
Emphasizing also the need for reinforced efforts to meet the goal of the full realization of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, including by addressing economic and social
conditions and marginalization, as well as to end any type of discrimination against them,
Emphasizing further the importance of recognizing and addressing multiple, aggravated and intersecting
forms of discrimination against persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and the
compounded negative impact upon the enjoyment of their rights,
_______________
471

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay.
472
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
473
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I, sect. A.
474
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
475
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
476
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
477
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.

632

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Emphasizing the fundamental importance of human rights education, training and learning as well as of
dialogue, including intercultural and interfaith dialogue, and interaction among all relevant stakeholders and
members of society on the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities as an integral part of the development of society as a whole, including the
sharing of best practices such as for the promotion of mutual understanding of minority issues, managing
diversity by recognizing plural identities and promoting inclusive and stable societies as well as social
cohesion therein,
Acknowledging that the United Nations has an important role to play regarding the protection of the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia, taking due account of, and
giving effect to, the Declaration, and recalling the paragraphs in its resolution 67/292 of 24 July 2013 on
multilingualism relating to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
and recognizing that multilingualism is a means of preserving the diversity of languages and cultures globally,
Affirming that the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration, in 2012, offered an important
opportunity to reflect on the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities, on achievements, best practices and challenges with regard to implementation of
the Declaration, on the diverse ways in which it has been used and implemented in practice at the national, regional
and international levels and on the impact that it has had on national legislation, institutional mechanisms and their
activities and programmes to advance the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities,
Acknowledging the various activities undertaken by States, regional intergovernmental bodies, civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, and the United Nations system to commemorate the anniversary, in
particular the regional expert workshops organized by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights,
Welcoming the guide for advocates on promoting and protecting minority rights published by the Office of the
High Commissioner, which provides information on main actors working on the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in the United Nations and in key regional organizations and
which constitutes a valuable tool for advocates working on this issue worldwide,
Recognizing, in this context, the important role played by the Independent Expert in promoting the
implementation of the Declaration,
1. Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities may exercise fully and effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any
discrimination and in full equality before the law, as proclaimed in the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, 478 and draws attention to the relevant
provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,479 including the provisions on forms of multiple
discrimination;
2. Urges States and the international community to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as set out in the Declaration, including through the
encouragement of conditions for the promotion of their identity, the provision of adequate education and the
facilitation of their participation in all aspects of the political, economic, social, religious and cultural life of society
and in the economic progress and development of their country, without discrimination, and to apply a gender
perspective while doing so;
3. Urges States to take all appropriate measures, inter alia, constitutional, legislative, administrative and
other measures, for the promotion and implementation of the Declaration, and appeals to States to cooperate
bilaterally and multilaterally, in particular on the exchange of best practices and lessons learned, in accordance with
the Declaration, in order to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities;
_______________
478
479

Resolution 47/135, annex.
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

633

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Also urges States to undertake initiatives to ensure that persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities are aware of and able to exercise their rights as set out in the Declaration and in other
international human rights obligations and commitments;
5. Recommends that States and other relevant actors ensure to the fullest extent possible that the
Declaration is translated into all minority languages and disseminated widely;
6. Calls upon States, while bearing in mind the theme of the fifth session of the Forum on Minority Issues,
and with a view to enhancing the implementation of the Declaration and to ensuring the realization of the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, to take appropriate measures by,
inter alia:
(a) Reviewing any legislation, policy or practice that has a discriminatory or disproportionately negative
effect on persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities with a view to considering its
amendment;
(b) Developing awareness-raising and training initiatives, including for public officials, judges, prosecutors
and law enforcement officials, on the rights contained in the Declaration;
(c) Dedicating departments, sections or focal points within existing institutions or considering the
establishment of specialized national institutions or agencies to address the rights of persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
7. Recommends that States ensure that all measures taken with a view to implementing the Declaration are,
to the fullest extent possible, developed, designed, implemented and reviewed with the full, effective and equal
participation of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
8. Calls upon States to give special attention to the situation and specific needs of women, children and
persons with disabilities belonging to minorities while promoting and protecting the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
9. Encourages States, in their follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to include aspects relating to persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities in their national plans of action and, in this context, to take forms of multiple discrimination
fully into account;
10. Calls upon States to integrate the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as well as effective non-discrimination and equality for all, into
strategies for the prevention and resolution of conflicts involving these minorities, while ensuring their full and
effective participation in the design, implementation and evaluation of such strategies;
11. Calls upon the Secretary-General to make available, at the request of Governments concerned, qualified
expertise on minority issues, including in the context of the prevention and resolution of disputes, to assist in
resolving existing or potential situations involving minorities;
12. Welcomes the reports of the Independent Expert on minority issues and their special focus on
institutional attention to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
within governmental organs, national human rights institutions and other relevant national bodies as a means of
promoting their rights480 and on rights-based approaches to the protection and promotion of the rights of persons
belonging to religious minorities;481
13. Commends the Independent Expert for the work that has been done and the important role played
in raising the level of awareness of and in giving added visibility to the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and for her guiding role in the preparations for and the work of
_______________
480
481

634

A/67/293.
A/68/268.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the Forum, which contributes to efforts to improve cooperation and coordination among all United Nations
mechanisms relating to the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
14. Invites the Independent Expert to report annually to the General Assembly;
15. Calls upon all States to cooperate with and assist the Independent Expert in the performance of the tasks
and duties mandated to her, to provide her with all the necessary information requested and to seriously consider
responding promptly and favourably to the requests of the Independent Expert to visit their countries in order to
enable her to fulfil her duties effectively;
16. Encourages the specialized agencies, regional organizations, national human rights institutions and nongovernmental organizations to develop regular dialogue and cooperation with the mandate holder as well as to
continue to contribute to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities;
17. Expresses its appreciation for the successful completion, in November 2012, of the fifth session of
the Forum, which addressed the implementation of the Declaration and which, through the widespread
participation of stakeholders, provided an important platform for promoting dialogue on these topics and, as
part of its outcome, identified in its recommendations achievements, best practices and challenges for the
further implementation of the Declaration,482 and encourages States to take into consideration the relevant
recommendations of the Forum;
18. Invites States, United Nations mechanisms, bodies, specialized agencies, funds and programmes,
regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and national human rights institutions as well as
academics and experts on minority issues to continue to participate actively in the sessions of the Forum;
19. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on activities undertaken by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Independent Expert and relevant United Nations entities, as
well as by Member States, to mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration;483
20. Welcomes the panel discussion held by the Human Rights Council at its nineteenth session to
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration, and takes note with appreciation of
other multilateral, regional and subregional initiatives aimed at celebrating that anniversary;
21. Welcomes the inter-agency cooperation among United Nations agencies, funds and programmes on
minority issues, led by the Office of the High Commissioner, and urges them to further increase their cooperation
by, inter alia, developing policies on the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities,
drawing also on relevant outcomes of the Forum;
22. Takes note in particular, in this regard, of the establishment of the United Nations network on racial
discrimination and the protection of minorities, coordinated by the Office of the High Commissioner and aimed at
enhancing dialogue and cooperation between relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, and invites
the network to cooperate with the Independent Expert and the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and to consult and engage with persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and civil society actors;
23. Takes note with appreciation of the note by the Secretary-General on racial discrimination and protection
of minorities providing guidance for the United Nations system on how to address racial discrimination and the
protection of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and aimed at, inter alia,
integrating their rights into the work of the United Nations system at the global, regional and country levels,
including through coordination mechanisms;
24. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue her efforts to improve
coordination and cooperation among United Nations agencies, funds and programmes on activities related to the
_______________
482
483

See A/HRC/22/60.
A/68/304.

635

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
and to take the work of relevant regional organizations active in the field of human rights into account in her
endeavours;
25. Calls upon the High Commissioner to continue to promote, within her mandate, the implementation of
the Declaration, and to engage in a dialogue with Governments for that purpose and regularly update and
disseminate widely the United Nations Guide for Minorities;
26. Invites the High Commissioner to continue to seek voluntary contributions to facilitate the effective
participation of representatives of non-governmental organizations and persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities, in particular those from developing countries, in minority-related activities
organized by the United Nations, in particular the activities of its human rights bodies and of the Forum, and in
doing so to give particular attention to ensuring the participation of young people and women;
27. Welcomes, in this regard, the decision of the Human Rights Council to establish a special fund for the
participation of civil society and other relevant stakeholders in, inter alia, the Forum on Minority Issues,484 aiming to
facilitate the broadest possible participation of civil society representatives and other relevant stakeholders, with
particular attention being paid to participants from least developed countries, and calls upon States to support the
participation of civil society and other relevant stakeholders in the Forum on Minority Issues and, to that end, to
make voluntary contributions to the special fund;
28. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, as well as special procedures of the Human Rights Council, to
continue to give attention, within their respective mandates, to situations and rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and, in this regard, to take into consideration relevant recommendations
of the Forum;
29. Reaffirms that the universal periodic review, as well as the United Nations human rights treaty
bodies, constitute important mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in that regard calls upon States to effectively follow up on accepted universal periodic review
recommendations related to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, and further encourages States parties to give serious consideration to the follow-up to treaty body
recommendations on the matter;
30. Encourages regional intergovernmental bodies, within their respective regions, to promote greater
attention to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia,
actively raising awareness of and promoting the Declaration in their work, encouraging its implementation at the
national level and considering the creation of thematic and/or special mechanisms on this issue;
31. Encourages national human rights institutions to pay due attention to the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia, considering the establishment of, for instance, a
department, section or focal point within their secretariats to address those rights;
32. Encourages civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to promote awareness of the
Declaration and to review the extent to which it integrates the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities and the Declaration into its work, as well as to inform persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities about their rights;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, including information on activities undertaken by Member States, the
Office of the High Commissioner, the Independent Expert, relevant United Nations entities and other relevant
stakeholders to enhance the implementation of the Declaration and to ensure the realization of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
34. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its seventieth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
_______________
484

636

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1) chap. IV.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/173
A/RES/68/173

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)485

68/173. Follow-up to the International Year of Human Rights Learning
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations include promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible and interdependent and that human rights learning
can contribute to the understanding of their connectedness to people’s daily lives,
Recalling its resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, in which it decided that the Human Rights Council should,
inter alia, promote human rights education and learning as well as advisory services, technical assistance and
capacity-building,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, in which Heads of State and Government expressed their
support for the promotion of human rights education and learning at all levels, including through the
implementation of the World Programme for Human Rights Education, as appropriate, and encouraged all States to
develop initiatives in this regard,486
Recalling further its resolutions 62/171 of 18 December 2007 and 63/173 of 18 December 2008 on the
International Year of Human Rights Learning and resolutions 64/82 of 10 December 2009 and 66/173 of
19 December 2011 on the follow-up thereto,
Welcoming Human Rights Council resolution 24/15 of 24 September 2013,487 in which the Council decided
on the plan of action for the third phase (2015–2019) of the World Programme for Human Rights Education, and
stressing the complementarity of human rights learning and human rights education,
Acknowledging that civil society, academia, the private sector, the media and, where appropriate,
parliamentarians can play an important role at the national, regional and international levels in the development and
facilitation of ways and means to promote and implement learning about human rights as a way of life at the
community level,
Convinced that integrating human rights learning into all relevant development policies and programmes
contributes to enabling people to participate as equals in the decisions that determine their lives,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,488
1. Reaffirms its conviction that every woman, man, youth and child can realize his or her full human
potential by, inter alia, learning about the comprehensive framework of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the ability to act on that knowledge in order to ensure the effective realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all;
2. Encourages Member States to expand on efforts made beyond the International Year of Human Rights
Learning and to consider devoting the financial and human resources necessary to further design and implement
international, regional, national and local long-term human rights learning programmes of action aimed at broad_______________
485
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon (on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine.
486
Resolution 60/1, para. 131.
487
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
488
A/68/207.

637

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

based and sustained human rights learning at all levels, in coordination with civil society, the media, the private
sector, academia, parliamentarians and regional organizations, including the appropriate specialized agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations system, and, where possible, to designate human rights cities;
3. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Human Rights Council to
support, cooperate and collaborate closely with civil society, the private sector, academia, regional organizations, the
media and other relevant stakeholders, as well as with organizations, programmes and funds of the United Nations
system, and relevant networks and bodies such as the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, the United Nations
Global Compact and the United Nations Office for Partnerships in efforts to develop, in particular, the design of
strategies and international, regional, national and local programmes of action aimed at broad-based and sustained
human rights learning at all levels;
4. Welcomes the adoption by the General Assembly of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Education and Training,489 and stresses the complementarity of human rights learning and the Declaration;
5. Encourages civil society organizations worldwide, in particular those working at the community level,
to integrate human rights learning into dialogue and consciousness-raising programmes with groups working on
education, development, poverty eradication, participation, children, indigenous peoples, gender equality, persons
with disabilities, elder persons and migrants, as well as on other relevant political, civil, economic, social and
cultural issues of concern;
6. Encourages relevant actors in civil society, including sociologists, anthropologists, members of
academia and of the media and community leaders, to join in further developing the concept of human rights
learning as a way to promote the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all;
7.
parties;

Invites relevant treaty bodies to take human rights learning into account in their interaction with States

8. Invites the United Nations system, as well as Member States, to give due consideration to human rights
education and learning in the emerging post-2015 United Nations development agenda;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/174
A/RES/68/174

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)490

68/174. Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/105 of 4 December 2000 concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/34 B of 20 November 2000 and 55/233 of 23 December 2000, section III of
its resolution 55/234 of 23 December 2000, its resolution 56/253 of 24 December 2001 and its resolutions 58/176 of
22 December 2003, 59/183 of 20 December 2004, 60/151 of 16 December 2005, 61/158 of 19 December 2006,
62/221 of 22 December 2007, 63/177 of 18 December 2008, 64/165 of 18 December 2009 and 66/162 of
19 December 2011 on the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa,
_______________
489

Resolution 66/137.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Angola, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania,
Montenegro, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain,
Sudan, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
490

638

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling further that the World Conference on Human Rights recommended that more resources be made
available for the strengthening of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights under the
programme of technical cooperation in the field of human rights of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights,491
Recalling the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,492
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,493
Taking note also of the holding of the thirty-third, thirty-fourth, thirty-fifth and thirty-sixth ministerial meetings
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, in Bangui from 5 to
9 December 2011, in Bujumbura from 14 to 18 May 2012, in Brazzaville from 3 to 5 December 2012 and in Kigali
from 20 to 23 August 2013,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,494 in particular the decision confirmed therein to double the
regular budget of the Office of the High Commissioner over the subsequent five years,
1. Welcomes the activities of the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa at
Yaoundé;
2.

Notes with satisfaction the support provided for the establishment of the Centre by the host country;

3. Also notes with satisfaction the increasing activities of the Centre and the improved cooperation between
the Centre and the States members of the Economic Community of Central African States and Rwanda;
4. Takes note of the efforts of the Centre to implement its strategic thematic priorities for the period
2012–2013;
5.

Welcomes the appointment of the new Director of the Centre in June 2013;

6. Encourages the Centre to take into account the requested activities, needs and demands of the
countries of the subregion in the elaboration and implementation of its strategic thematic priorities for the
period 2014–2017;
7. Also encourages the Centre to strengthen its cooperation and invest in relations with subregional
organizations and bodies, including the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the United Nations country teams of the subregion;
8. Encourages the Regional Representative and Director of the Centre to continue to hold regular briefings
for the ambassadors of Central African States based in Geneva and Yaoundé, as well as in countries of the subregion
during visits of the Regional Representative, with the aim of exchanging information on the activities of the Centre
and charting its direction;
9. Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to ensure the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly495 in order to provide
sufficient funds and human resources for the missions of the Centre;
10. Requests the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner to continue to provide additional funds and
human resources within the existing resources of the Office of the High Commissioner to enable the Centre to
respond positively and effectively to the growing needs in the promotion and protection of human rights and in
developing a culture of democracy and the rule of law in the Central African subregion;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
_______________
491

See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 36, addendum (A/56/36/Add.1).
493
A/68/390.
494
Resolution 60/1.
495
Resolutions 61/158, 62/221, 63/177 and 64/165.
492

639

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/175
A/RES/68/175

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.2,
para. 146),496 by a recorded vote of 132 to 52, with 6 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, Palau, Peru, Samoa

68/175. Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order,
including resolution 67/175 of 20 December 2012, and Human Rights Council resolutions 18/6 of 29 September
2011497 and 21/9 of 27 September 2012,498
Reaffirming the commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote universal respect for, and
observance and protection of, all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, other instruments relating to human rights and international law,
Affirming that the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion and protection of all human
rights should continue to be carried out in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and
international law as set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter and, inter alia, with full respect for sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence, the non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations and
non-intervention in matters that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State,
Recalling the Preamble to the Charter, in particular the determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small,
Reaffirming that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights and freedoms set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights499 can be fully realized,
_______________
496

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, Burundi, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Senegal, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
497
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1),
chap. II.
498
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
499
Resolution 217 A (III).

640

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also the determination expressed in the Preamble to the Charter to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from
treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained, to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom, to practise tolerance and good-neighbourliness and to employ international machinery for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Stressing that the responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social issues, as well as threats to
international peace and security, must be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised
multilaterally, and that in this regard the central role must be played by the United Nations, as the most universal and
representative organization in the world,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of all peoples for an
international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter, including promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and respect for the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law, pluralism, development, better
standards of living and solidarity,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights is essential for the
full achievement of the purposes of the United Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims that all human beings are born free
and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to
determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of
their lives,
Recognizing that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based on the principle of
cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their
human rights obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Emphasizing that democracy is not only a political concept, but that it also has economic and social
dimensions,
Recognizing that democracy, respect for all human rights, including the right to development, transparent and
accountable governance and administration in all sectors of society and effective participation by civil society are an
essential part of the necessary foundations for the realization of social and people-centred sustainable development,
Noting with concern that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance may be aggravated
by, inter alia, inequitable distribution of wealth, marginalization and social exclusion,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations could contribute greatly to the
enhancement of international cooperation at all levels,
Underlining the fact that it is imperative for the international community to ensure that globalization becomes
a positive force for all the world’s people and that only through broad and sustained efforts, based on our common
humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable,
Deeply concerned that the current global economic, financial, energy and food crises, resulting from a
combination of several major factors, including macroeconomic and other factors, such as environmental
degradation, desertification and global climate change, natural disasters and the lack of financial resources and the
technology necessary to confront their negative impact in developing countries, particularly in the least developed
countries and small island developing States, represent a global scenario that is threatening the adequate enjoyment
of all human rights and widening the gap between developed and developing countries,
Stressing that efforts to make globalization fully inclusive and equitable must include policies and measures at
the global level that correspond to the needs of developing countries and countries with economies in transition and
are formulated and implemented with their effective participation,
641

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Stressing also the need for adequate financing of and technology transfer to developing countries, in particular
the landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, including to support their efforts to adapt to
climate change,
Having listened to the peoples of the world, and recognizing their aspirations to justice, to equality of
opportunity for all, to the enjoyment of their human rights, including the right to development, to live in peace
and freedom and to equal participation without discrimination in economic, social, cultural, civil and
political life,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 on institution-building of the Council and 5/2 on the Code of
Conduct for Special Procedures Mandate Holders of the Council of 18 June 2007,500 and stressing that all mandate
holders shall discharge their duties in accordance with those resolutions and the annexes thereto,
Resolved to take all measures within its power to secure a democratic and equitable international order,
1.

Affirms that everyone is entitled to a democratic and equitable international order;

2. Also affirms that a democratic and equitable international order fosters the full realization of all human
rights for all;
3. Calls upon all Member States to fulfil their commitment expressed in Durban, South Africa, during the
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance to maximize the
benefits of globalization through, inter alia, the strengthening and enhancement of international cooperation to
increase equality of opportunities for trade, economic growth and sustainable development, global communications
through the use of new technologies and increased intercultural exchange through the preservation and promotion of
cultural diversity,501 and reiterates that only through broad and sustained efforts to create a shared future based upon
our common humanity and all its diversity can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable;
4. Declares that democracy includes respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms and is a
universal value based on the freely expressed will of people to determine their own political, economic, social and
cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives, and reaffirms the need for universal
adherence to and implementation of the rule of law at both the national and international levels;
5. Affirms that a democratic and equitable international order requires, inter alia, the realization of the
following:
(a) The right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they can freely determine their political
status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development;
(b)

The right of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources;

(c)

The right of every human person and all peoples to development;

(d)

The right of all peoples to peace;

(e) The right to an international economic order based on equal participation in the decision-making
process, interdependence, mutual interest, solidarity and cooperation among all States;
(f)

International solidarity, as a right of peoples and individuals;

(g) The promotion and consolidation of transparent, democratic, just and accountable international
institutions in all areas of cooperation, in particular through the implementation of the principle of full and equal
participation in their respective decision-making mechanisms;
(h)
making;

The right to equitable participation of all, without any discrimination, in domestic and global decision-

(i) The principle of equitable regional and gender-balanced representation in the composition of the staff of
the United Nations system;
_______________
500
501

642

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(j) The promotion of a free, just, effective and balanced international information and communications
order based on international cooperation for the establishment of a new equilibrium and greater reciprocity in the
international flow of information, in particular correcting the inequalities in the flow of information to and from
developing countries;
(k) Respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all, since this enhances cultural pluralism,
contributes to a wider exchange of knowledge and understanding of cultural backgrounds, advances the application
and enjoyment of universally accepted human rights across the world and fosters stable, friendly relations among
peoples and nations worldwide;
(l) The right of every person and all peoples to a healthy environment and to enhanced international
cooperation that responds effectively to the needs for assistance of national efforts to adapt to climate change,
particularly in developing countries, and that promotes the fulfilment of international agreements in the field of
mitigation;
(m) The promotion of equitable access to benefits from the international distribution of wealth through
enhanced international cooperation, in particular in international economic, commercial and financial relations;
(n) The enjoyment by everyone of ownership of the common heritage of mankind in connection to the
public right of access to culture;
(o) The shared responsibility of the nations of the world for managing worldwide economic and social
development, as well as threats to international peace and security, which should be exercised multilaterally;
6. Stresses the importance of preserving the rich and diverse nature of the international community of
nations and peoples, as well as respect for national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and
religious backgrounds, in the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights;
7. Also stresses that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with
the same emphasis, and reaffirms that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various
historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their
political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all;
8. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, social
justice, equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity
and universal human rights and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
9. Reaffirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance and strengthening of
international peace and security and, to that end, should do their utmost to achieve general and complete
disarmament under effective international control, as well as to ensure that the resources released by effective
disarmament measures are used for comprehensive development, in particular that of the developing countries;
10. Also reaffirms the need to continue working urgently for the establishment of an international economic
order based on equity, sovereign equality, interdependence, common interest and cooperation among all States,
irrespective of their economic and social systems, which shall correct inequalities and redress existing injustices,
make it possible to eliminate the widening gap between the developed and the developing countries and ensure
steadily accelerating economic and social development and peace and justice for present and future generations;
11. Further reaffirms that the international community should devise ways and means to remove the current
obstacles and meet the challenges to the full realization of all human rights and to prevent the continuation of human
rights violations resulting therefrom throughout the world;
12. Urges States to continue their efforts, through enhanced international cooperation, towards the
promotion of a democratic and equitable international order;
13. Takes note of the report of the Independent Expert on the promotion of a democratic and equitable
international order;502
_______________
502

A/68/284.

643

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to provide all the human and financial resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the
Independent Expert;
15. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Independent Expert in his task, to supply all
necessary information requested by him and to consider responding favourably to the requests of the Independent
Expert to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more effectively;
16. Requests the Human Rights Council, the human rights treaty bodies, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the special mechanisms extended by the Council and the Human Rights
Council Advisory Committee to pay due attention, within their respective mandates, to the present resolution and to
make contributions towards its implementation;
17. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to build upon the issue of the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, United
Nations organs, bodies and components, intergovernmental organizations, in particular the Bretton Woods
institutions, and non-governmental organizations and to disseminate it on the widest possible basis;
19. Requests the Independent Expert to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session an interim
report on the implementation of the present resolution and to continue his work;
20. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/176
A/RES/68/176

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)503

68/176. Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of
international cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that among the purposes of the United Nations are those of developing friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and taking other
appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace, as well as achieving international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Desirous of achieving further progress in international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that such international cooperation should be based on the principles embodied in international
law, especially the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,504 the
International Covenants on Human Rights505 and other relevant instruments,
Deeply convinced that United Nations action in the field of human rights should be based not only on a
profound understanding of the broad range of problems existing in all societies but also on full respect for the
_______________
503

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
504
Resolution 217 A (III).
505
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

644

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

political, economic and social realities of each of them, in strict compliance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and for the basic purpose of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms through international cooperation,
Recalling its previous resolutions in this regard,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring the universality, objectivity and non-selectivity of the consideration of
human rights issues, as affirmed in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,506 and the elimination of double standards,
Reaffirming also the importance of the objectivity, independence, impartiality and discretion of the special
rapporteurs and representatives on thematic issues and on countries, as well as of the members of the working
groups, in carrying out their mandates,
Underlining the obligation that governments have to promote and protect human rights and to carry out the
responsibilities that they have undertaken under international law, especially the Charter, as well as various
international instruments in the field of human rights,
1. Reiterates that, by virtue of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, all peoples have the right freely to determine, without external interference, their
political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development, and that every State has the duty to
respect that right within the provisions of the Charter, including respect for territorial integrity;
2. Reaffirms that it is a purpose of the United Nations and the task of all Member States, in cooperation
with the Organization, to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and to remain
vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur;
3. Calls upon all Member States to base their activities for the promotion and protection of human rights,
including the development of further international cooperation in this field, on the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,504 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,505
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights505 and other relevant international instruments, and to
refrain from activities that are inconsistent with that international framework;
4. Considers that international cooperation in this field should make an effective and practical contribution
to the urgent task of preventing mass and flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and
to the strengthening of international peace and security;
5. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, as a legitimate concern of the world community, should be guided by the principles of nonselectivity, impartiality and objectivity and should not be used for political ends;
6. Requests all human rights bodies within the United Nations system, as well as the special rapporteurs
and representatives, independent experts and working groups, to take duly into account the contents of the present
resolution in carrying out their mandates;
7. Expresses its conviction that an unbiased and fair approach to human rights issues contributes to the
promotion of international cooperation as well as to the effective promotion, protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
8. Stresses the continuing need for impartial and objective information on the political, economic and social
situations and events of all countries, and in this context highlights the role of the media in raising public awareness
on issues of public interest;
9. Invites Member States to consider adopting, as appropriate, within the framework of their
respective legal systems and in accordance with their obligations under international law, especially the
Charter, and international human rights instruments, the measures that they may deem appropriate to achieve
further progress in international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms;
_______________
506

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

645

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Requests the Human Rights Council to continue taking duly into account the present resolution and to
consider further proposals for the strengthening of United Nations action in the field of human rights through the
promotion of international cooperation and the importance of the principles of non-selectivity, impartiality and
objectivity, including in the context of the universal periodic review;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to present further practical proposals and ideas that would contribute to the strengthening of United
Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of international cooperation based on the
principles of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity, and to submit a comprehensive report on the question to
the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
12. Decides to consider the matter at its seventieth session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection
of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/177
A/RES/68/177

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)507

68/177. The right to food
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations and its importance for the promotion and protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming also all previous resolutions and decisions on the right to food adopted within the framework of
the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,508 which provides that everyone has the right to a
standard of living adequate for her or his health and well-being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the
Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition 509 and the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 510 in particular
Millennium Development Goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by 2015,
Recalling also the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,511 in
which the fundamental right of every person to be free from hunger is recognized,
Bearing in mind the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action
and the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002,512
_______________
507

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
508
Resolution 217 A (III).
509
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
510
Resolution 55/2.
511
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
512
A/57/499, annex.

646

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the concrete recommendations contained in the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004,513
Reaffirming also the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food Security contained in the Declaration
of the World Summit on Food Security, adopted in Rome on 16 November 2009,514
Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that
they must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and economic environment, at both the
national and the international levels, is the essential foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to
food and nutrition security and poverty eradication,
Reiterating, as set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the Declaration of the World Food
Summit, that food should not be used as an instrument of political or economic pressure, and reaffirming in this
regard the importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well as the necessity of refraining from
unilateral measures that are not in accordance with international law and the Charter and that endanger food and
nutrition security,
Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its resources and capacities to achieve its
individual goals in implementing the recommendations contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security
and the World Food Summit Plan of Action and, at the same time, cooperate regionally and internationally in order
to organize collective solutions to global issues of food and nutrition security in a world of increasingly interlinked
institutions, societies and economies where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities are essential,
Recognizing that the complex character of the global food crisis, in which the right to adequate food is
threatened to be violated on a substantial scale, is a combination of several major factors, such as the global financial
and economic crisis, environmental degradation, desertification and the impacts of global climate change, as well as
natural disasters and the lack in many countries of the appropriate technology, investment and capacity-building
necessary to confront its impact, particularly in developing countries, least developed countries and small island
developing States,
Resolved to act to ensure that the human rights perspective is taken into account at the national, regional and
international levels in measures to address the global food crisis,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters, diseases and pest infestations, as well
as the negative impact of climate change, and their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted in
substantial loss of life and livelihood and threatened agricultural production and food and nutrition security, in
particular in developing countries,
Emphasizing that a multisectoral approach that integrates nutrition across all sectors, including agriculture,
health, water and sanitation, social protection and education, as well as a gender perspective, is critical to achieving
global food and nutrition security and the realization of the right to food,
Recalling the endorsement of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security515 by the Committee on World Food Security at its
38th session, held on 11 May 2012, and by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations at its 144th session,
Stressing the importance of reversing the continuing decline of official development assistance devoted to
agriculture, both in real terms and as a share of total official development assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the protection and preservation of agrobiodiversity in guaranteeing food
security and the right to food for all,
_______________
513

E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.
See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
515
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.
514

647

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as the key United
Nations agency for rural and agricultural development and its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to
achieve the full realization of the right to food, including through its provision of technical assistance to developing
countries in support of the implementation of national priority frameworks,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”, endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012,
Acknowledging the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis established by the SecretaryGeneral, and supporting the Secretary-General in his continuing efforts in this regard, including continued
engagement with Member States and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right to food,
1. Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human dignity and therefore requires the
adoption of urgent measures at the national, regional and international levels for its elimination;
2. Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food, consistent with
the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully
develop and maintain his or her physical and mental capacities;
3. Considers it intolerable that, as estimated by the United Nations Children’s Fund, more than one third of
the children who die every year before the age of 5 die from hunger-related illness, that, as estimated by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, about 842 million people worldwide suffer from chronic
hunger and that an additional 1 billion people are suffering from serious malnutrition, including as a result of the
global food crisis, while, according to the latter organization, the planet could produce enough food to feed everyone
around the world;
4. Expresses its concern at the fact that the effects of the world food crisis continue to have serious
consequences for the poorest and most vulnerable people, particularly in developing countries, which have been
further aggravated by the world financial and economic crisis, and at the particular effects of this crisis on many net
food-importing countries, especially least developed countries;
5. Expresses its deep concern that, according to the report of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations entitled The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2013, the number of hungry people in the world
remains unacceptably high and the vast majority of hungry people live in developing countries;
6. Expresses its concern that women and girls are disproportionately affected by hunger, food and nutrition
insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender inequality and discrimination, that in many countries, girls are
twice as likely as boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases and that it is estimated that
almost twice as many women as men suffer from malnutrition;
7. Encourages all States to take action to address gender inequality and discrimination against women, in
particular where they contribute to the malnutrition of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and
equal realization of the right to food and ensuring that women have equal access to resources, including income,
land and water and their ownership and agricultural inputs, as well as full and equal access to health care, education,
science and technology, to enable them to feed themselves and their families, and in this regard stresses the need to
empower women and strengthen their role in decision-making;
8. Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right to food to continue
mainstreaming a gender perspective in the fulfilment of his mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and all other United Nations bodies and mechanisms addressing the right to
food and food insecurity to integrate a gender perspective into their relevant policies, programmes and activities;
9. Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and nutritious food are inclusive of and
accessible to persons with disabilities;
10. Calls upon all States and, if appropriate, relevant international organizations to take measures and
support programmes which are aimed at combating undernutrition in mothers, in particular during pregnancy, and
children and the irreversible effects of chronic undernutrition in early childhood, in particular from birth to the age
of 2 years;
11. Encourages all States to take steps with a view to progressively achieving the full realization of the right
to food, including steps to promote the conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to
enjoy fully the right to food and to create and adopt national plans to combat hunger;
648

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Recognizes the advances reached through South-South cooperation in developing countries and regions
in connection with food security and the development of agricultural production for the full realization of the right
to food;
13. Stresses that improving access to productive resources and public investment in rural development are
essential for eradicating hunger and poverty, in particular in developing countries, including through the promotion
of investments, including private investments, in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management
technologies in order to reduce vulnerability to droughts;
14. Recognizes the critical contribution made by the fisheries sector to the realization of the right to food and
to food security and the contribution of small-scale fishers to the local food security of coastal communities;
15. Also recognizes that 80 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas and 50 per cent are small-scale farmholders and that these people are especially vulnerable to food insecurity given the increasing cost of inputs and the
fall in farm incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is an increasing challenge for poor
producers; that sustainable and gender-sensitive agricultural policies are important tools for promoting land and
agrarian reform, rural credit and insurance, technical assistance and other associated measures to achieve food
security and rural development; and that support by States for small farmers, fishing communities and local
enterprises, including through the facilitation of access of their products to national and international markets and
empowerment of small producers, particularly women, in value chains, is a key element for food security and the
provision of the right to food;
16. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including through national efforts supported by
international partnerships to stop desertification and land degradation and through investments and public policies
that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this regard calls for the full implementation of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa;516
17. Urges States that have not yet done so to favourably consider becoming parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity517 and to consider becoming parties to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for
Food and Agriculture518 as a matter of priority;
18. Recalls the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,519 acknowledges that many
indigenous organizations and representatives of indigenous peoples have expressed in different forums their deep
concerns over the obstacles and challenges they face in achieving the full enjoyment of the right to food, and calls
upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the disproportionately high level of hunger and
malnutrition among indigenous peoples and the continuous discrimination against them;
19. Notes the need to further examine various concepts such as, inter alia, “food sovereignty” and their
relation with food security and the right to food, bearing in mind the need to avoid any negative impact on the
enjoyment of the right to food for all people at all times;
20. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international organizations, within their respective
mandates, to take fully into account the need to promote the effective realization of the right to food for all,
including in the ongoing negotiations in different fields;
21. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment as well as international assistance, upon the
request of and in cooperation with the affected countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to
food, and in particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their homes and land
because of hunger or humanitarian emergencies affecting the enjoyment of the right to food;
22. Takes note with appreciation of the growing movement, in different regions of the world, towards the
adoption of framework laws, national strategies and measures in support of the full realization of the right to food for all;
_______________
516

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
518
Ibid., vol. 2400, No. 43345.
519
Resolution 61/295, annex.
517

649

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

23. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the allocation and utilization of technical and
financial resources from all sources, including external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce national
actions to implement sustainable food security policies;
24. Calls for the early conclusion and a successful, development-oriented outcome of the Doha Round of
trade negotiations of the World Trade Organization as a contribution to creating international conditions that permit
the full realization of the right to food;
25. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their international policies of a political and
economic nature, including international trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to food in
other countries;
26. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action against Hunger and Poverty, and
recommends the continuation of efforts aimed at identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against
hunger and poverty, as well as non-communicable diseases;
27. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in 1996 to halve the number of persons
who are undernourished are not being fulfilled, while recognizing the efforts of Member States in this regard, and
once again invites all international financial and development institutions, as well as the relevant United Nations
agencies and funds, to give priority to and provide the necessary funding to realize the aim of halving by 2015 the
proportion of people who suffer from hunger, as well as the right to food as set out in the Rome Declaration on
World Food Security and the United Nations Millennium Declaration;510
28. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the goal that all people at all times will have
access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and
healthy life, is part of a comprehensive effort to improve public health, including the response to the spread of
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other communicable diseases;
29. Urges States to give adequate priority in their development strategies and expenditures to the realization
of the right to food;
30. Stresses the importance of international cooperation and development assistance as an effective
contribution both to the expansion and improvement of agriculture and its environmental sustainability, food
production, breeding projects on diversity of crops and livestock and institutional innovations such as community
seed banks, farmer field schools and seed fairs and to the provision of humanitarian food assistance in activities
related to emergency situations for the realization of the right to food and the achievement of sustainable food
security, while recognizing that each country has the primary responsibility for ensuring the implementation of
national programmes and strategies in this regard;
31. Also stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights should consider implementing that agreement in a manner that is supportive of food
security, while being mindful of the obligation of Member States to promote and protect the right to food;
32. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders to support
national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to the food crises currently occurring across different regions, and
expresses its deep concern that funding shortfalls are forcing the World Food Programme to cut operations across
different regions, including Southern Africa;
33. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, to continue to promote policies and projects that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that
partners respect the right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support strategies of Member States
aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to avoid any actions that could have a negative impact on the
realization of the right to food;
34. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur;520
35. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, as extended by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution 13/4 of 24 March 2010;521
_______________
520

See A/68/288.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and Corr.1), chap. II,
sect. A.
521

650

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

36. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to provide all the human and financial resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur;
37. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in
promoting the right to adequate food, in particular its general comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food
(article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights),522 in which the Committee
affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate food is indivisibly linked to the inherent dignity of the human person
and is indispensable for the fulfilment of other human rights enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights and
is also inseparable from social justice, requiring the adoption of appropriate economic, environmental and social
policies, at both the national and the international levels, oriented to the eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of
all human rights for all;
38. Recalls general comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on
the right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the Covenant),523 in which the Committee noted, inter alia, the importance of
ensuring sustainable access to water resources for human consumption and agriculture in realization of the right to
adequate food;
39. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate
Food in the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations in November 2004,513 represent a practical tool to promote the realization of the right to food for
all, contribute to the achievement of food security and thus provide an additional instrument in the attainment of
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and looks
forward to the holding of a meeting for a 10-year retrospective on progress made in implementing the Voluntary
Guidelines to mark the tenth anniversary of their adoption, at the forty-first session of the Committee on World Food
Security, to be held in October 2014;
40. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in his task, to supply all
necessary information requested by him and to give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests
of the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more effectively;
41. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session an interim
report on the implementation of the present resolution and to continue his work, including by examining the
emerging issues with regard to the realization of the right to food within his existing mandate;
42. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, treaty bodies, civil
society actors and non-governmental organizations, as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the fulfilment of his mandate, inter alia, through the submission of comments and suggestions on
ways and means of realizing the right to food;
43. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/178
A/RES/68/178

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)524

68/178. Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
_______________
522

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and corrigendum (E/2000/22 and Corr.1), annex V.
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.
524
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
523

651

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,525
Reaffirming further the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,526
Reaffirming the fundamental importance, including in response to terrorism and the fear of terrorism, of
respecting all human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law,
Reaffirming also that States are under the obligation to protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms of
all persons,
Reaffirming further that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group,
Reiterating the important contribution of measures taken at all levels against terrorism, consistent with
international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, to the functioning of
democratic institutions and the maintenance of peace and security and thereby to the full enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, as well as the need to continue this fight, including through strengthening international
cooperation and the role of the United Nations in this respect,
Reaffirming its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal and
unjustifiable, and renewing its commitment to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism,
Deeply deploring the occurrence of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of the
fight against terrorism, as well as violations of international refugee and humanitarian law,
Noting with concern measures that can undermine human rights and the rule of law, such as the detention of
persons suspected of acts of terrorism in the absence of a legal basis for detention and due process guarantees, the
deprivation of liberty that amounts to placing a detained person outside the protection of the law, the trial of suspects
without fundamental judicial guarantees, the illegal deprivation of liberty and transfer of individuals suspected of
terrorist activities, and the return of suspects to countries without individual assessment of the risk of there being
substantial grounds for believing that they would be in danger of subjection to torture, and limitations to effective
scrutiny of counter-terrorism measures,
Stressing that all measures used in the fight against terrorism, including the profiling of individuals and the use
of diplomatic assurances, memorandums of understanding and other transfer agreements or arrangements, must be
in compliance with the obligations of States under international law, including international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law,
Stressing also that a criminal justice system based on respect for human rights and the rule of law, including
due process and fair trial guarantees, is one of the best means for effectively countering terrorism and ensuring
accountability,
Recalling article 30 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and reaffirming that acts, methods and
practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights,
fundamental freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and security of States and destabilizing
legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international community should take the necessary steps to
enhance cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism,527
Recognizing that respect for all human rights, respect for democracy and respect for the rule of law are
interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
Emphasizing the importance of properly interpreting and implementing the obligations of States with
respect to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and of abiding strictly by the
_______________
525

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
527
See sect. I, para. 17, of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on
25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III).
526

652

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

definition of torture contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment528 in the fight against terrorism,
Recalling its resolution 67/99 of 14 December 2012, Human Rights Council resolution 19/19 of 23 March
2012529 and other relevant resolutions and decisions as stated in the preamble to General Assembly resolution
65/221 of 21 December 2012, and welcoming the efforts of all relevant stakeholders to implement those resolutions,
Recalling also its resolution 60/288 of 8 September 2006, by which it adopted the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and its resolution 66/282 of 29 June 2012 on the review of the Strategy, reaffirming that
the promotion and protection of human rights for all and the rule of law are essential to the fight against terrorism,
recognizing that effective counter-terrorism measures and the protection of human rights are not conflicting goals
but complementary and mutually reinforcing, and stressing the need to promote and protect the rights of victims of
terrorism,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolution 22/8 of 21 March 2013,530 by which the Council decided
to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism,
Recalling its resolution 64/115 of 16 December 2009 and the annex thereto entitled “Introduction and
implementation of sanctions imposed by the United Nations”, in particular the provisions of the annex regarding
listing and delisting procedures,
1. Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
2. Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims and their families, expresses its
profound solidarity with them, and stresses the importance of providing them with assistance and other appropriate
measures to protect, respect and promote their human rights;
3. Expresses serious concern at the occurrence of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as
well as of international refugee and humanitarian law, committed in the context of countering terrorism;
4. Reaffirms that all counter-terrorism measures should be implemented in accordance with their
obligations under international law, including international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, thereby
taking into full consideration the human rights of all, including persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, and in this regard must not be discriminatory on grounds such as race, colour, sex, language,
religion or social origin;
5. Also reaffirms the obligation of States, in accordance with article 4 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights,531 to respect certain rights as non-derogable in any circumstances, recalls, in regard to all
other Covenant rights, that any measures derogating from the provisions of the Covenant must be in accordance
with that article in all cases, underlines the exceptional and temporary nature of any such derogations,532 and in this
regard calls upon States to raise awareness about the importance of these obligations among national authorities
involved in combating terrorism;
6.

Urges States, while countering terrorism:

(a) To fully comply with their obligations under international law, in particular international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law, with regard to the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
(b) To take all steps necessary to ensure that persons deprived of liberty, regardless of the place of arrest or
detention, benefit from the guarantees to which they are entitled under international law, including the review of the
detention and other fundamental judicial guarantees;
_______________
528

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. III, sect. A.
530
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
531
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
532
See, for example, general comment No. 29 on states of emergency adopted by the Human Rights Committee on 24 July 2001.
529

653

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(c) To ensure that no form of deprivation of liberty places a detained person outside the protection of the
law, and to respect the safeguards concerning the liberty, security and dignity of the person, in accordance with
international law, including international human rights and humanitarian law;
(d) To take all steps necessary to ensure the right of anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge to be
brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorized by law to exercise judicial power and the entitlement to
trial within a reasonable time or release;
(e) To treat all prisoners in all places of detention in accordance with international law, including
international human rights and humanitarian law;
(f) To respect the right of persons to equality before the law, courts and tribunals and to a fair trial as
provided for in international law, including international human rights law, such as the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, and international humanitarian and refugee law;
(g) To safeguard the right to privacy in accordance with international law, in particular international human
rights law, and to take measures to ensure that interferences with or restrictions on that right are not arbitrary, are
adequately regulated by law533 and are subject to effective oversight and appropriate redress, including through
judicial review or other means;
(h) To protect all human rights, including economic, social and cultural rights, bearing in mind that certain
counter-terrorism measures may have an impact on the enjoyment of these rights;
(i) To ensure that guidelines and practices in all border control operations and other pre-entry mechanisms
are clear and fully respect their obligations under international law, particularly international refugee and human
rights law, towards persons seeking international protection;
(j) To fully respect non-refoulement obligations under international refugee and human rights law and, at
the same time, to review, with full respect for these obligations and other legal safeguards, the validity of a refugee
status decision in an individual case if credible and relevant evidence comes to light that indicates that the person in
question has committed any criminal acts, including terrorist acts, falling under the exclusion clauses under
international refugee law;
(k) To refrain from returning persons, including in cases related to terrorism, to their countries of origin or to
a third State whenever such transfer would be contrary to their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law, including in cases where there are substantial grounds for
believing that they would be in danger of subjection to torture, or where their life or freedom would be threatened, in
violation of international refugee law, on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular
social group or political opinion, bearing in mind obligations that States may have to prosecute individuals not
returned, and in that case to adhere to the principle of extradite or prosecute;
(l) Insofar as such an act runs contrary to their obligations under international law, not to expose individuals
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment by way of return to another country;
(m) To ensure that their laws criminalizing acts of terrorism are accessible, formulated with precision, nondiscriminatory, non-retroactive and in accordance with international law, including human rights law;
(n) Not to resort to profiling based on stereotypes founded on grounds of discrimination prohibited by
international law, including on racial, ethnic and/or religious grounds;
(o) To ensure that the interrogation methods used against terrorism suspects are consistent with their
international obligations and are reviewed on a regular basis to prevent the risk of violations of their obligations
under international law, including international human rights and refugee and humanitarian law;
(p) To ensure that any person who alleges that his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms have
been violated has access to a fair procedure for seeking full, effective and enforceable remedy within a
reasonable time and that where such violations have been established, victims receive adequate, effective and
prompt reparation, which should include, as appropriate, restitution, compensation, rehabilitation and
_______________
533

654

See A/HRC/13/37 and Add.1 and 2.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

guarantees of non-recurrence, including where the violation constitutes a crime under international or national
law, to ensure accountability for those responsible for such violations;
(q) To ensure due process guarantees, consistent with all relevant provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,525 and their obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949534 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977,535 and the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees536 and the 1967 Protocol thereto537 in their respective fields of applicability;
(r) To shape, review and implement all counter-terrorism measures in accordance with the principles of
gender equality and non-discrimination;
(s) To ensure that any measures taken or means employed to counter terrorism, including the use of
remotely piloted aircraft, comply with their obligations under international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, human rights law and international humanitarian law, in particular the principles of distinction and
proportionality;
7. Also urges States, while countering terrorism, to take into account relevant United Nations resolutions
and decisions on human rights, and encourages them to give due consideration to the recommendations of the
special procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and to the relevant comments and views of
United Nations human rights treaty bodies;
8. Recognizes the importance of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance,538 the implementation of which will make a significant contribution in support of the rule
of law in countering terrorism, including by prohibiting places of secret detention, and encourages all States that
have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention;
9. Urges all States that have not yet done so to sign, ratify or accede to the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,528 and encourages States to consider ratifying as a
matter of priority the Optional Protocol thereto,539 the implementation of which will make a significant contribution
in support of the rule of law in countering terrorism;
10. Calls upon the United Nations entities involved in supporting counter-terrorism efforts to continue to
facilitate the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as due process and the
rule of law, while countering terrorism;
11. Recognizes the need to continue ensuring that fair and clear procedures under the United Nations
terrorism-related sanctions regime are strengthened in order to enhance their efficiency and transparency, and
welcomes and encourages the ongoing efforts of the Security Council in support of these objectives, including by
supporting the enhanced role of the office of the ombudsperson and continuing to review all the names of
individuals and entities in the regime, while emphasizing the importance of these sanctions in countering terrorism;
12. Urges States, while ensuring full compliance with their international obligations, to ensure the rule of
law and to include adequate human rights guarantees in their national procedures for the listing of individuals and
entities with a view to combating terrorism;
13. Requests the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism to continue to make recommendations, in the context of his mandate, with
regard to preventing, combating and redressing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the context
of countering terrorism, and to continue to report and engage in interactive dialogues on an annual basis with the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council in accordance with their programmes of work;
14. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the performance of the tasks
and duties mandated, including by reacting promptly to the urgent appeals of the Special Rapporteur and providing
_______________
534

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
536
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
537
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
538
Resolution 61/177, annex.
539
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2375, No. 24841.
535

655

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the information requested, and to give serious consideration to responding favourably to his requests to visit their
countries, as well as to cooperate with other relevant procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council
regarding the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;
15. Welcomes the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to implement the
mandate given to her by the General Assembly in its resolution 60/158 of 16 December 2005, and requests her to
continue her efforts in this regard;
16. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;540
17. Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,541 which refers, inter alia, to the
use of remotely piloted aircraft, and notes the recommendations, including on the urgent and imperative need to
seek agreement among Member States on legal questions pertaining to remotely piloted aircraft operations;
18. Encourages States, while countering terrorism, to undertake prompt, independent and impartial factfinding inquiries whenever there are plausible indications of possible breaches to their obligations under
international human rights law, with a view to ensuring accountability;
19. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur referring to the compatibility of the
mandate of the office of the ombudsperson, established by Security Council resolution 1904 (2009), with
international human rights norms;542
20. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Rapporteur to continue to contribute to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, including by
raising awareness, inter alia, through regular dialogue, about the need to respect human rights and the rule of law
while countering terrorism and support the exchange of best practices to promote and protect human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law in all aspects of counter-terrorism, including, as appropriate, those
identified by the Special Rapporteur in his report submitted to the Human Rights Council pursuant to Council
resolution 15/15;543
21. Welcomes the ongoing dialogue established in the context of the fight against terrorism between the
Security Council and its respective bodies, namely, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, with the relevant bodies for the promotion and protection of human rights, and
encourages the Security Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee to strengthen the links, cooperation and
dialogue with relevant human rights bodies, in particular with the Office of the High Commissioner, the Special
Rapporteur, other relevant special procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and relevant treaty
bodies, giving due regard to the promotion and protection of human rights and the rule of law in their ongoing work
relating to counter-terrorism;
22. Calls upon States and other relevant actors, as appropriate, to continue to implement the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which, inter alia, reaffirms respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as
the fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism;
23. Requests the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to continue its efforts to ensure that the
United Nations can better coordinate and enhance its support to Member States in their efforts to comply with their
obligations under international law, including international human rights and refugee and humanitarian law, while
countering terrorism, and to encourage the Working Groups of the Task Force to incorporate a human rights
perspective into their work;
24. Encourages relevant United Nations bodies and entities and international, regional and subregional
organizations, in particular those participating in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which provide
_______________
540

A/68/298.
A/68/389.
542
A/67/396.
543
A/HRC/16/51.
541

656

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

technical assistance, upon request, consistent with their mandates, related to the prevention and suppression of
terrorism, to step up their efforts to ensure respect for international human rights and refugee and humanitarian law,
as well as the rule of law, as an element of technical assistance, including in the adoption and implementation of
legislative and other measures by States;
25. Urges relevant United Nations bodies and entities and international, regional and subregional
organizations, including the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate related to the prevention
and suppression of terrorism, to step up their efforts to provide, upon request, technical assistance for building the
capacity of Member States in the development and implementation of programmes of assistance and support for
victims of terrorism in accordance with relevant national legislation;
26. Calls upon international, regional and subregional organizations to strengthen information-sharing,
coordination and cooperation in promoting the protection of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law while countering terrorism;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the
Human Rights Council and to the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
28. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its seventieth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/179
A/RES/68/179

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)544

68/179. Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the protection of migrants, the most recent of which is resolution
67/172 of 20 December 2012, as well as its resolutions 66/128 of 19 December 2011 on violence against
women migrant workers and 67/185 of 20 December 2012 on promoting efforts to eliminate violence against
migrants, migrant workers and their families, and recalling also Human Rights Council resolution 23/20 of
14 June 2013,545
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,546 which proclaims that all human beings are born
free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein,
without distinction of any kind, in particular as to race,
Reaffirming also that everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each
State and the right to leave any country, including his or her own, and to return to his or her country,
Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 547 and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,547 the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment,548 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,549
the Convention on the Rights of the Child,550 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
_______________
544

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Kyrgyzstan, Malawi, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Senegal, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Uganda and Uruguay.
545
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
546
Resolution 217 A (III).
547
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
548
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
549
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
550
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.

657

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Racial Discrimination,551 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,552 the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations553 and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families,554
Acknowledging the relevant contribution of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to the international system for the protection of migrants,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,555 in which States are called upon to promote and protect effectively the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants regardless of migration status, especially those of women and children, and to
address international migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and a
comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and
destination in promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding approaches that might
aggravate their vulnerability,
Recalling also the provisions concerning migrants contained in the outcome documents of major United
Nations conferences and summits, including the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development,556 which recognizes that migrant workers are among the most affected and
vulnerable in the context of financial and economic crises,
Recalling further Commission on Population and Development resolutions 2006/2 of 10 May 2006557 and
2009/1 of 3 April 2009,558 and its resolution 2013/1 of 26 April 2013 on new trends in migration: demographic
aspects,559
Taking note of advisory opinion OC-16/99 of 1 October 1999 on the Right to Information on Consular
Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due Process of Law and advisory opinion OC-18/03 of
17 September 2003 on the Juridical Condition and Rights of Undocumented Migrants, issued by the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights,
Taking note also of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 31 March 2004 in the case concerning
Avena and Other Mexican Nationals560 and the Judgment of the Court of 19 January 2009 regarding the request for
interpretation of the Avena Judgment,561 and recalling the obligations of States reaffirmed in both decisions,
Underlining the importance of the Human Rights Council in promoting respect for the protection of the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all, including migrants,
Recognizing that women represent almost half of all international migrants, and in this regard recognizing also
that women migrant workers are important contributors to social and economic development in countries of origin
and destination, and underlining the value and dignity of their labour, including the labour of domestic workers,
Recognizing also the importance of the second High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, held on 3 and 4 October 2013,562 which recognized the important contribution of migration in
realizing the Millennium Development Goals and recognized that human mobility is a key factor for sustainable
development, which should receive due consideration in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda,

_______________
551

Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
553
Ibid., vol. 596, No. 8638.
554
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
555
Resolution 66/288, annex.
556
Resolution 63/303, annex.
557
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2006, Supplement No. 5 (E/2006/25), chap. I, sect. B.
558
Ibid., 2009, Supplement No. 5 (E/2009/25), chap. I, sect. B.
559
Ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 5 (E/2013/25), chap. I, sect. B.
560
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/59/4), chap. V, sect. A.
561
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/64/4), chap. V, sect. B.
562
Resolution 68/4.
552

658

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind the seventh meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development, to be held in
Sweden in May 2014, whose main theme will be “Unlocking the potential of migration for inclusive development”
and which will take into consideration the results of the second High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development,
Recognizing the cultural and economic contributions made by migrants to receiving societies and their
communities of origin, as well as the need to identify appropriate means of maximizing development benefits and
responding to the challenges that migration poses to countries of origin, transit and destination, especially in the light
of the impact of the financial and economic crisis, and committing to ensuring dignified, humane treatment with
applicable protections and to strengthening mechanisms for international cooperation,
Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the importance of international, regional and
bilateral cooperation and dialogue in this regard, as appropriate, and the need to protect the human rights of all
migrants, particularly at a time in which migration flows have increased in the globalized economy and take place in
a context of continued security concerns,
Bearing in mind the obligations of States under international law, as applicable, to exercise due diligence to
prevent crimes against migrants and to investigate and punish perpetrators, and that not doing so violates and
impairs or nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of victims,
Affirming that crimes against migrants, including trafficking in persons, continue to pose a serious challenge
and require a concerted international assessment and response and genuine multilateral cooperation among
countries of origin, transit and destination for their eradication,
Bearing in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration, including those that refer to the orderly
management of migration, should promote holistic approaches that take into account the causes and consequences
of the phenomenon, as well as full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants,
Stressing the importance of regulations and laws regarding irregular migration, at all levels of government,
being in accordance with the obligations of States under international law, including international human rights law,
Stressing also the obligation of States to protect the human rights of migrants regardless of their migration
status, including when implementing their specific migration and border security policies, and expressing its
concern at measures which, including in the context of policies aimed at reducing irregular migration, treat irregular
migration as a criminal rather than an administrative offence, where the effect of doing so is to deny migrants the
full enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, and in this regard recalling that sanctions and the
treatment given to irregular migrants should be commensurate with their offences,
Aware that, as criminals take advantage of migratory flows and attempt to circumvent restrictive immigration
policies, migrants become more vulnerable to, inter alia, kidnapping, extortion, forced labour, sexual exploitation,
physical assault, debt servitude and abandonment,
Recognizing the contributions of young migrants to countries of origin and destination, and in that regard
encouraging States to consider the specific circumstances and needs of young migrants,
Concerned about the large and growing number of migrants, especially women and children, including those
unaccompanied or separated from their parents, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by attempting to
cross international borders without the required travel documents, and recognizing the obligation of States to respect
the human rights of those migrants,
Recognizing the importance of having a comprehensive and balanced approach to international migration, and
bearing in mind that migration enriches the economic, political, social and cultural fabric of States and the historical
and cultural ties that exist among some regions,
Recognizing also the obligations of countries of origin, transit and destination under international human
rights law,
Underlining the importance for States, in cooperation with civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, workers’ organizations and the private sector, among other relevant stakeholders, to undertake
information campaigns aimed at clarifying opportunities, limitations, risks and rights in the event of migration in
order to enable everyone to make informed decisions and to prevent anyone from utilizing dangerous means to
cross international borders,
659

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Calls upon States to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of women and children, and to address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and a comprehensive and balanced
approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and
protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their vulnerability;
2. Expresses its concern about the impact of financial and economic crises and natural disasters on
international migration and migrants, and in that regard urges Governments to combat unfair and discriminatory
treatment of migrants, in particular migrant workers and their families;
3. Reaffirms the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights546 and the obligations of
States under the International Covenants on Human Rights,547 and in this regard:
(a) Strongly condemns the acts, manifestations and expressions of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance against migrants and the stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion
or belief, and urges States to apply and, where needed, reinforce the existing laws when hate crimes, xenophobic or
intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants occur in order to eradicate impunity for those who
commit those acts;
(b) Expresses concern about legislation adopted by some States that results in measures and practices that
may restrict the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants, and reaffirms that, when exercising their
sovereign right to enact and implement migratory and border security measures, States have the duty to comply with
their obligations under international law, including international human rights law, in order to ensure full respect for
the human rights of migrants;
(c) Calls upon States to ensure that their laws and policies, including in the areas of counter-terrorism and
combating transnational organized crime, such as trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, fully respect the
human rights of migrants;
(d) Calls upon States that have not done so to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families554 as a matter of
priority, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to promote and raise awareness of the
Convention;
(e) Takes note of the report of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families on its seventeenth and eighteenth sessions;563
4. Also reaffirms the duty of States to effectively promote and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants, especially those of women and children, regardless of their migration status, in conformity
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international instruments to which they are party, and
therefore:
(a) Calls upon all States to respect the human rights and inherent dignity of migrants, to put an end to
arbitrary arrest and detention and, in order to avoid excessive detention of irregular migrants, to review, where
necessary, detention periods and to use alternatives to detention, where appropriate, including measures that have
been successfully implemented by some States;
(b) Urges all States to adopt effective measures to prevent and punish any form of illegal deprivation of
liberty of migrants by individuals or groups;
(c) Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation of the human rights of migrants
while in transit, including in ports and airports and at borders and migration checkpoints, and train public officials
who work in those facilities and in border areas to treat migrants respectfully and in accordance with the law;
(d) Calls upon States to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law, acts of violation of the human rights
of migrants and their families, such as arbitrary detention, torture and violations of the right to life, including
extrajudicial executions, during their transit from the country of origin to the country of destination and vice versa,
including transit across national borders;
_______________
563

660

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 48 (A/68/48).

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(e) Recognizing the particular vulnerability of migrants in transit situations, including through national
borders, and the need to ensure full respect for their human rights also in these circumstances;
(f) Recognizes the importance of coordinated efforts of the international community to assist and support
migrants stranded in vulnerable situations;
(g) Underlines the right of migrants to return to their country of citizenship, and recalls that States must
ensure that their returning nationals are duly received;
(h) Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full respect for and observance of the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations,553 in particular with regard to the right of all foreign nationals, regardless of their
migration status, to communicate with a consular official of the sending State in case of arrest, imprisonment,
custody or detention, and the obligation of the receiving State to inform the foreign national without delay of his or
her rights under the Convention;
(i) Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and applicable international legal instruments
to which they are party, to enforce labour law effectively, including by addressing violations of such law, with regard
to migrant workers’ labour relations and working conditions, inter alia, those related to their remuneration and
conditions of health, safety at work and the right to freedom of association;
(j) Invites Member States to consider ratifying relevant conventions of the International Labour
Organization, including Convention No. 189 on decent work for domestic workers;
(k) Encourages all States to remove unlawful obstacles, where they exist, that may prevent the safe,
transparent, unrestricted and expeditious transfer of remittances, earnings, assets and pensions of migrants to their
country of origin or to any other countries, in conformity with applicable legislation and agreements, and to
consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems that may impede such transfers;
(l) Recalls that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes that everyone has the right to an
effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted to him or her;
5.

Emphasizes the importance of protecting persons in vulnerable situations, and in this regard:

(a) Expresses its concern about the increase in the activities of transnational and national organized crime
entities and others who profit from crimes against migrants, especially women and children, without regard for
dangerous and inhumane conditions and in flagrant violation of national laws and international law and contrary to
international standards;
(b) Also expresses its concern about the high level of impunity enjoyed by traffickers and their accomplices
as well as other members of organized crime entities and, in this context, the denial of rights and justice to migrants
who have suffered from abuse;
(c) Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that allow migrants to integrate fully
into the host countries, facilitate family reunification and promote a harmonious, tolerant and respectful
environment, and encourages States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
(d) Calls upon States that have not already done so to provide for the protection of the human rights of
women migrant workers, to promote fair labour conditions and to ensure that all women, including care workers,
are legally protected against violence and exploitation;
(e) Encourages States to implement gender-sensitive policies and programmes for women migrant workers,
to provide safe and legal channels that recognize the skills and education of women migrant workers and, as
appropriate, to facilitate their productive employment, decent work and integration into the labour force, including
in the fields of education and science and technology;
(f) Encourages all States to develop international migration policies and programmes that include a gender
perspective, in order to adopt the necessary measures to better protect women and girls against dangers and abuse
during migration;
(g) Calls upon States to protect the human rights of migrant children, given their vulnerability, particularly
unaccompanied migrant children, ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in their
policies of integration, return and family reunification;
661

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(h) Encourages all States to prevent and eliminate discriminatory policies and legislation at all levels of
government that deny migrant children access to education and, while taking into account the best interests of the
child as a primary consideration, to foster the successful integration of migrant children into the education system
and the removal of barriers to their education in host countries and countries of origin;
(i) Urges States to ensure that repatriation mechanisms allow for the identification and special protection of
persons in vulnerable situations, including persons with disabilities, and take into account, in conformity with their
international obligations and commitments, the principle of the best interests of the child and family reunification;
(j) Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
supplementing protocols thereto564 to implement them fully, and calls upon States that have not done so to consider
ratifying or acceding to them as a matter of priority;
6. Encourages States to take into account the conclusions and recommendations of the study of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on challenges and best practices in the
implementation of the international framework for the protection of the rights of the child in the context of
migration565 when designing and implementing their migration policies;
7. Also encourages States to protect migrant victims of national and transnational organized crime, including
kidnapping and trafficking and, in some instances, smuggling, including through the implementation of programmes
and policies that guarantee protection and access to medical, psychosocial and legal assistance, where appropriate;
8. Encourages Member States that have not already done so to enact national legislation and to take further
effective measures to combat trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, recognizing that these crimes may
endanger the lives of migrants or subject them to harm, servitude, exploitation, debt bondage, slavery, sexual
exploitation or forced labour, and also encourages Member States to strengthen international cooperation to prevent,
investigate and combat such trafficking and smuggling;
9. Stresses the importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation in the protection of the human
rights of migrants, and therefore:
(a) Requests all States, international organizations and relevant stakeholders to take into account in their
policies and initiatives on migration issues the global character of the migratory phenomenon and to give due
consideration to international, regional and bilateral cooperation in this field, including by undertaking dialogues on
migration that include countries of origin, transit and destination, as well as civil society, including migrants, with a
view to addressing, in a comprehensive manner, inter alia, its causes and consequences and the challenge of
undocumented or irregular migration, granting priority to the protection of the human rights of migrants;
(b) Encourages States to take the measures necessary to achieve policy coherence on migration at the
national, regional and international levels, including by ensuring coordinated child protection policies and systems
across borders that are in full compliance with international human rights law;
(c)

Also encourages States to cooperate effectively in protecting witnesses in cases of smuggling of migrants;

(d) Further encourages States to cooperate effectively in protecting witnesses and victims in cases of
trafficking in persons, regardless of their migration status;
(e) Calls upon the United Nations system and other relevant international organizations and multilateral
institutions to enhance their cooperation in the development of methodologies for the collection and processing of
statistical data on international migration and the situation of migrants in countries of origin, transit and destination
and to assist Member States in their capacity-building efforts in this regard;
10. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the issue of migration and development in the
preparation of the post-2015 development agenda through, inter alia, integrating a human rights perspective and
mainstreaming a gender perspective, and therefore:
(a) Requests Member States, the United Nations system, international organizations, civil society and all
relevant stakeholders, especially the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Rapporteur
_______________
564
565

662

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
A/HRC/15/29.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of the Human Rights Council on the human rights of migrants, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on International Migration and Development and the International Organization for Migration and other members
of the Global Migration Group, to give due consideration to international migration in the elaboration of the
post-2015 development agenda;
(b) Recognizes the importance of the contribution of the High Commissioner, the Chair of the Committee
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Special Rapporteur,
as well as other key actors, to the discussion on international migration;
11. Encourages States, relevant international organizations, civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, and the private sector to continue and to enhance their dialogue in relevant international meetings
with a view to strengthening and making more inclusive public policies aimed at promoting and respecting human
rights, including those of migrants;
12. Requests Governments and international organizations to take appropriate measures to give due
consideration to the declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development, held on
3 and 4 October 2013,562 which reaffirmed the need to promote and protect effectively the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of women and children,
and to address international migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and
through a comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin,
transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding approaches that
might aggravate their vulnerability;
13. Invites the Chair of the Committee to present an oral report on the work of the Committee and to engage
in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights”, as a way to enhance communication between the Assembly and the Committee;
14. Invites the Special Rapporteur to submit his report to the General Assembly and to engage in an
interactive dialogue at its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”;
15. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session in accordance with resolution 67/172;566
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and to include in that report an analysis on ways and means to promote
and protect the rights of migrant children that ensure that the best interest of the child is a primary consideration,
particularly in the case of unaccompanied migrant children and children separated from their families.
RESOLUTION 68/180
A/RES/68/180

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)567

68/180. Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons
The General Assembly,
Recalling that internally displaced persons are persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged
to flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a result of or in order to avoid the
_______________
566

A/68/283.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay and Vanuatu.

567

663

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

effects of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural or human-made
disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally recognized State border,568
Recognizing that internally displaced persons are to enjoy, in full equality, the same rights and freedoms under
international and domestic law as do other persons in their country,
Deeply disturbed by the alarmingly high numbers of internally displaced persons throughout the world, for
reasons including armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights and natural or
human-made disasters, who receive inadequate protection and assistance, and conscious of the serious challenges
that this is creating for the international community,
Recognizing that natural disasters are a cause of internal displacement, and concerned about factors, such as
climate change, that are expected to exacerbate the impact of natural hazards and climate-related events,
Recognizing also that the consequences of hazards can be prevented or substantially mitigated by integrating
disaster risk reduction strategies into national development policies and programmes,
Conscious of the human rights, humanitarian and development dimensions, as well as the possible
peacebuilding dimension, of internal displacement, including in long-term displacement situations, the often
heightened vulnerability of women and children as well as persons with disabilities and the responsibilities of States
and the international community to strengthen further their protection and assistance,
Emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility to provide protection and assistance to internally
displaced persons within their jurisdiction, as well as to address the root causes of the displacement problem in
appropriate cooperation with the international community,
Reaffirming that all persons, including those internally displaced, have the right to freedom of movement and
residence and should be protected against arbitrary displacement,569
Noting the international community’s growing awareness of the issue of internally displaced persons
worldwide, including the millions living in protracted situations of displacement, many of them outside camp
settings in urban areas, and the urgency of providing adequate humanitarian assistance to and protection of
internally displaced persons and support to local host communities, addressing the root causes of displacement and
finding durable solutions for internally displaced persons in their countries, including voluntary return in safety and
with dignity, as well as voluntary local integration in the areas to which persons have been displaced or voluntary
settlement in another part of the country, without prejudice to the right of internally displaced persons to leave their
country or to seek asylum,
Recalling the relevant norms of international law, including international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law, and recognizing that the protection of internally displaced persons
has been strengthened by identifying, reaffirming and consolidating specific standards for their protection, in
particular through the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement,570
Recalling also the relevance of international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions of 1949571
and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977,572 as a vital legal framework for the protection of and assistance to
civilians in armed conflict and under foreign occupation, including internally displaced persons,
Welcoming the increasing dissemination, promotion, application and integration into domestic laws and
policies of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement when dealing with situations of internal
displacement,
Deploring practices of forced displacement and their negative consequences for the enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms by large groups of populations, and recalling the relevant provisions of the Rome
_______________
568

See Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex), introduction, para. 2.
See Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, principle 6.
570
E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
571
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
572
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
569

664

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Statute of the International Criminal Court that define the deportation or forcible transfer of population as a crime
against humanity and the unlawful deportation, transfer or ordering of the displacement of the civilian population as
war crimes,573
Expressing its appreciation to those Governments and intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental
organizations that have supported and facilitated the work of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
internally displaced persons, and of his predecessor, the former Representative of the Secretary-General on the
human rights of internally displaced persons and, according to their roles and responsibilities, have helped to
provide protection and assistance to internally displaced persons,
Welcoming the continuing cooperation between the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons and national Governments and the relevant offices and agencies of the United Nations as well as
with other international and regional organizations, and encouraging further strengthening of this collaboration in
order to promote better strategies for, protection of, assistance to and durable solutions for internally displaced
persons,
Acknowledging with appreciation the important and independent contribution of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement and other humanitarian agencies in protecting and assisting internally displaced
persons, in cooperation with national Governments and relevant international bodies,
Welcoming the priorities set by the Special Rapporteur as contained in his report to the Human Rights Council
at its sixteenth session and the two strategic objectives of supporting Governments in developing national
instruments on internal displacement and facilitating viable durable solutions for internally displaced persons,
including through the engagement of development actors,574
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993,575 regarding the need to develop global strategies to address the problem of internal
displacement, and recalling also all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
Recalling also its resolution 66/165 of 19 December 2011 and Human Rights Council resolutions 20/9 of
5 July 2012576 and 23/8 of 13 June 2013,577
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons578 and the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Commends the Special Rapporteur for the activities undertaken so far, for the catalytic role that he plays
in raising the level of awareness about the plight of internally displaced persons and for his ongoing efforts to
address their development and other specific needs, including through the mainstreaming of the human rights of
internally displaced persons into all relevant parts of the United Nations system;
3. Encourages the Special Rapporteur, through continuous dialogue with Governments and all
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, to continue his analysis of the root causes of
internal displacement and of the needs and human rights of those displaced, measures of prevention, including early
warning, and ways to strengthen protection and assistance, as well as durable solutions for internally displaced
persons, and, in the latter regard, to use in his activities the Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally
Displaced Persons of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee,579 and also encourages the Special Rapporteur to
continue to promote comprehensive strategies, taking into account the primary responsibility of States for the
protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction;
_______________
573

Art. 7, paras. 1 (d) and 2 (d), and art. 8, paras. 2 (a) (vii) and 2 (e) (viii) (see United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544).
See A/HRC/16/43.
575
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
576
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. IV, sect. A.
577
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
578
A/68/225.
579
A/HRC/13/21/Add.4.
574

665

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Recognizes the adverse effects of climate change as contributors to environmental degradation and
extreme weather events, which may, among other factors, contribute to human displacement, and encourages the
Special Rapporteur, in close collaboration with States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
to continue to explore the human rights implications and dimensions of disaster-induced internal displacement, with
a view to supporting Member States in their efforts to build local resilience and capacity to prevent displacement or
to provide assistance and protection to those who are forced to flee;
5. Calls upon States to provide durable solutions, including within their national development plans, and
encourages strengthened international cooperation, in particular between humanitarian and development actors,
including through the provision of resources and expertise to assist affected countries, in particular developing
countries, in their national efforts and policies related to assistance, protection and rehabilitation for internally
displaced persons and the integration of the human rights and needs of internally displaced persons into both rural
and urban development strategies, as well as the participation of both internally displaced persons and host
communities in the design and implementation of those strategies;
6. Expresses particular concern that many internally displaced children, particularly girls, lack access to
education in all phases of displacement owing to attacks against schools, damaged or destroyed school buildings,
insecurity, loss of documentation, language barriers and discrimination, and calls upon States, in cooperation with all
other relevant actors, including humanitarian and development agencies and donors, to ensure the right to a quality
education, including primary and secondary education, for internally displaced children, without discrimination of
any kind, as well as to support existing schools to enable them to include internally displaced persons, and calls
upon parties to armed conflict to respect the civilian character of schools and other educational institutions and to
refrain from undertaking actions that could adversely affect the protection of these buildings against direct attacks;
7. Expresses deep concern about the full range of threats and human rights violations and abuses
experienced by internally displaced women and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict situations, recognizing that
those women and girls who are particularly vulnerable or disadvantaged may be specifically targeted or at increased
risk of violence, and recognizes the need to provide better support to victims and to support both national and
international efforts to build the capacity to prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict;
8. Welcomes the initiatives undertaken by regional organizations, such as the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Organization of American States and the Council of
Europe, to address the protection, assistance and development needs of internally displaced persons and to find
durable solutions for them, and encourages regional organizations to strengthen their activities and their cooperation
with the Special Rapporteur;
9. Also welcomes the adoption and entry into force of the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention), which builds on the Protocol on the
Protection of and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and the Protocol on the Property Rights of Returning
Persons adopted by the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and which marks a significant step
towards strengthening the national and regional normative framework for the protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons in Africa, encourages African States to consider signing and/or ratifying the
Convention, and encourages other regional mechanisms to consider the development of their own regional
normative frameworks for the protection of internally displaced persons;
10. Recognizes that Member States have the primary responsibility to promote durable solutions for their
internally displaced persons, thus contributing to their national, economic and social development processes, and
encourages the international community, the United Nations system, the Special Rapporteur, relevant international
and regional organizations and donor countries to continue to support international, regional and national efforts to
meet the needs of internally displaced persons on the basis of solidarity, the principles of international cooperation
and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement570 and to ensure that humanitarian assistance, early recovery
and development assistance efforts are appropriately funded;
11. Expresses particular concern about the grave problems faced by many internally displaced women
and children, especially violence, exploitation and abuse, including sexual and gender-based violence and
sexual exploitation and abuse, trafficking in persons, forced recruitment and abduction, and encourages the
continued commitment of the Special Rapporteur to promote action to address their particular assistance,
protection and development needs, as well as those of other groups with special needs, such as severely
666

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

traumatized individuals, older persons and persons with disabilities, taking into account all relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
12. Emphasizes the importance of consultation with internally displaced persons and host communities by
Governments and other relevant actors, in accordance with their specific mandates, during all phases of
displacement, as well as the participation of internally displaced persons, where appropriate, in policies,
programmes and activities pertaining to them, taking into account the primary responsibility of States for the
protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction;
13. Calls upon States, in cooperation with international agencies and other stakeholders, to particularly
provide for and support the full and meaningful participation of internally displaced women, at all levels of decisionmaking processes and in all activities that have a direct impact on their lives, in all aspects of internal displacement,
including the promotion and protection of human rights, the prevention of human rights violations and the design
and implementation of durable solutions, peace processes, peacebuilding, transitional justice, post-conflict
reconstruction and development;
14. Notes the importance of taking the human rights and the specific protection and assistance needs of
internally displaced persons into consideration, when appropriate, in peace processes, and emphasizes that durable
solutions for internally displaced persons, including through voluntary return, sustainable reintegration and
rehabilitation processes and their active participation, as appropriate, in the peace process are necessary elements of
effective peacebuilding;
15. Welcomes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in this regard, and continues to urge the
Commission to intensify its efforts, within its mandate, in cooperation with national and transitional Governments
and in consultation with the relevant United Nations entities, to incorporate the rights and the specific needs of
internally displaced persons, including their voluntary return in safety and with dignity, reintegration and
rehabilitation, as well as related land and property issues, when advising on or proposing country-specific
peacebuilding strategies for post-conflict situations in cases under consideration;
16. Recognizes the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as an important international framework for
the protection of internally displaced persons, welcomes the fact that an increasing number of States, United Nations
organizations and regional and non-governmental organizations are applying them as a standard, and encourages all
relevant actors to make use of the Guiding Principles when dealing with situations of internal displacement;
17. Welcomes the use of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement by the Special Rapporteur in his
dialogue with Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other relevant actors, and
requests him to continue his efforts to further the dissemination, promotion, application and integration into
domestic laws and policies of the Guiding Principles and to provide support for efforts to promote capacity-building
and the use of the Guiding Principles, as well as the development of domestic legislation and policies;
18. Expresses its appreciation that an increasing number of States have adopted domestic legislation and
policies dealing with all stages of displacement, encourages States to continue to do so in an inclusive and nondiscriminatory way consistent with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, including through the
identification of a national focal point within the Government for issues of internal displacement and the allocation
of budget resources, and encourages the international community and national actors to provide financial support
and cooperation to Governments, upon request, in this regard;
19. Urges all Governments to continue to facilitate the activities of the Special Rapporteur, in particular
Governments with situations of internal displacement, and to respond favourably to requests from the Special
Rapporteur for visits so as to enable him to continue and enhance dialogue with Governments in addressing
situations of internal displacement, and thanks those Governments that have already done so;
20. Invites Governments to give serious consideration, in dialogue with the Special Rapporteur, to the
recommendations and suggestions addressed to them, in accordance with his mandate, and to inform him of
measures taken thereon;
21. Calls upon Governments to provide protection and assistance, including reintegration and development
assistance, to internally displaced persons and to facilitate the efforts of the relevant United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations in these respects by further improving the access of humanitarian personnel and the
delivery of supplies and equipment to internally displaced persons and by maintaining the civilian and humanitarian
667

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

character of camps and settlements for internally displaced persons where they exist, as well as by taking the steps
necessary to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel so that they may efficiently perform their task
of assisting internally displaced persons;
22. Emphasizes the central role of the Emergency Relief Coordinator for the coordination of, protection of
and assistance to internally displaced persons, inter alia, through the inter-agency cluster system, welcomes
continued initiatives taken in order to ensure better protection, assistance and development strategies for internally
displaced persons, as well as better coordination of activities regarding them, and emphasizes the need to strengthen
the capacities of the United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to meet the immense humanitarian
challenges of internal displacement;
23. Encourages all relevant United Nations organizations and humanitarian assistance, human rights and
development organizations to enhance their collaboration and coordination through the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee and United Nations country teams in countries with situations of internal displacement and to provide all
possible assistance and support to the Special Rapporteur, and requests the continued participation of the Special
Rapporteur in the work of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
24. Encourages Member States, humanitarian agencies, donors, development actors and other providers of
development assistance to continue to work together, in close cooperation with the Special Rapporteur, to provide a
more predictable response to the needs of internally displaced persons, including long-term development assistance
for the implementation of durable solutions, takes note of the decision by the Policy Committee of the SecretaryGeneral of 4 October 2011 endorsing the preliminary framework on ending displacement in the aftermath of
conflict, notes the rolling-out of the decision in select countries, and calls for United Nations agencies implementing
the decision to cooperate closely with the Special Rapporteur in that regard and to use the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons in a manner that complements the
decision of the Policy Committee;
25. Notes with appreciation the increased attention paid to the issue of internally displaced persons in the
consolidated appeals process, and encourages further efforts in this regard;
26. Also notes with appreciation the increasing role of national human rights institutions in assisting
internally displaced persons and in promoting and protecting their human rights;
27. Recognizes the need to collect reliable disaggregated data, including data disaggregated by age and sex,
on internally displaced persons in order to improve policy, programming and response to internal displacement and,
in this respect, the relevance of the inter-agency Joint Internally Displaced Person Profiling Service and the global
database on internally displaced persons maintained by the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre;
28. Encourages Governments, members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, United Nations
humanitarian coordinators and country teams to ensure the provision of reliable data on internal displacement
situations, collaborating with the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre, requesting the support of the Joint
Internally Displaced Person Profiling Service and providing financial resources, as appropriate in these respects;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Special Rapporteur, from within existing
resources, with all assistance necessary to carry out his mandate effectively, and encourages the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in close cooperation with the Emergency Relief Coordinator, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and all other relevant United Nations offices and agencies, to continue to support the
Special Rapporteur;
30. Encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue to seek the contributions of States, relevant organizations
and institutions in order to create a more stable basis for his work;
31. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth and seventieth
sessions a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
32. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of protection of and assistance to internally
displaced persons at its seventieth session.
668

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/181
A/RES/68/181

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.2, para. 146)580

68/181. Promotion of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of
Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms: protecting women human rights defenders
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,581 the International Covenants on Human Rights582 and other relevant instruments, including the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,583
Recalling its resolution 53/144 of 9 December 1998, by which it adopted by consensus the Declaration on the
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms annexed to that resolution, and reiterating the fundamental
importance of the Declaration and its promotion and implementation,
Recalling also all previous resolutions on this subject, including its resolution 66/164 of 19 December 2011
and Human Rights Council resolutions 16/5 of 24 March 2011584 and 22/6 of 21 March 2013,585
Recalling further the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,586 the Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence against Women, 587 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development588 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action589 and their review outcomes, as well as the
agreed conclusions and resolutions of the Commission on the Status of Women,
Acknowledging the attention given by the Human Rights Council to the importance of women human rights
defenders and of ensuring their protection and enabling their work in recent resolutions, and noting the panel
discussion on women human rights defenders convened on 26 June 2012,
Acknowledging also that women of all ages who engage in the promotion and protection of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms and all people who engage in the defence of the rights of women and gender equality,
individually and in association with others, play an important role, at the local, national, regional and international
levels, in the promotion and protection of human rights, in accordance with the Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,590
Noting with deep concern that in many countries persons and organizations engaged in promoting and
defending human rights and fundamental freedoms, including women human rights defenders, frequently face
_______________
580

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Iceland, Israel, Japan,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Maldives, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Republic of Korea, Serbia, Switzerland, Turkey, United States of America, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
581
Resolution 217 A (III).
582
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
583
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
584
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
585
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
586
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
587
Resolution 48/104.
588
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
589
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
590
Resolution 53/144, annex.

669

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

threats and harassment and suffer insecurity as a result of those activities, including through the curtailment of
freedom of association or expression or the right to peaceful assembly or the abuse of civil or criminal
proceedings,
Gravely concerned that women human rights defenders are at risk of and suffer from violations and abuses,
including systematic violations and abuses of their fundamental rights to life, liberty and security of person, to
psychological and physical integrity, to privacy and respect for private and family life and to freedom of opinion and
expression, association and peaceful assembly, and in addition can experience gender-based violence, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, harassment and verbal abuse and attacks on reputation, online and offline, by State actors,
including law enforcement personnel and security forces, and non-State actors, such as those related to family and
community, in both public and private spheres,
Deeply concerned that historical and structural inequalities in power relations and discrimination against
women, as well as various forms of extremism, have direct implications for the status and treatment of women and
that the rights of some women human rights defenders are violated or abused and their work stigmatized owing to
discriminatory practices and those social norms or patterns that serve to condone violence against women or
perpetuate practices involving such violence,
Gravely concerned that impunity for violations and abuses against women human rights defenders persists
owing to factors including a lack of reporting, documentation, investigation and access to justice, social barriers and
constraints with regard to addressing gender-based violence, including sexual violence and the stigmatization that
may result from such violations and abuses, and a lack of recognition of the legitimate role of women human rights
defenders, all of which entrench or institutionalize gender discrimination,
Concerned that all forms of discrimination, including racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, can lead to the targeting or vulnerability to violence of women human rights defenders, who are prone
to multiple, aggravated or intersecting forms of discrimination,
Aware that information-technology-related violations, abuses, discrimination and violence against women,
including women human rights defenders, such as online harassment, cyberstalking, violation of privacy, censorship
and the hacking of e-mail accounts, mobile phones and other electronic devices, with a view to discrediting them
and/or inciting other violations and abuses against them, are a growing concern and can be a manifestation of
systemic gender-based discrimination, requiring effective responses compliant with human rights,
Mindful that domestic law and administrative provisions and their application should enable the work of
women human rights defenders, including by avoiding any criminalization or stigmatization of the important
activities and legitimate role of women human rights defenders and the communities of which they are a part or on
whose behalf they work, as well as by avoiding impediments, obstructions, restrictions or selective enforcement
thereof contrary to relevant provisions of international human rights law,
Recalling that the primary responsibility for promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms rests with the State, and reaffirming that national legislation consistent with the Charter and other
international obligations of the State in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms is the juridical
framework within which human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, conduct their activities,
Gravely concerned that, in some instances, national security and counter-terrorism legislation and other
measures have been misused to target human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, or have
hindered their work and endangered their safety in a manner contrary to international law,
Recognizing the urgent need to address, and to take concrete steps to prevent and stop, the use of legislation to
hinder or limit unduly the ability of human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, to exercise
their work, including by reviewing and, where necessary, amending relevant legislation and its implementation in
order to ensure compliance with States’ obligations and commitments under international human rights law,
Underlining the need for all appropriate measures to be taken to modify the social and cultural patterns of
conduct of men and women with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and customary and other
practices based on the idea of the inferiority or superiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men and
women, in accordance with States’ obligations and commitments under international human rights law, thereby
addressing harmful attitudes, customs, practices and gender stereotypes that underlie and perpetuate violence against
women, including women human rights defenders,
670

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming that the empowerment, autonomy and advancement of women and the improvement of their
political, social, legal and economic status are essential to respect for all human rights, the growth and prosperity of
society and the achievement of representative, transparent and accountable government, democratic institutions and
sustainable development in all areas of life,
Recognizing the valuable work of human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, in
promoting civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights and the right to development,
Welcoming the opportunity afforded by the post-2015 development agenda for the global community to
advance the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons, including gender equality and nondiscrimination, as well as real and effective participation, including equal political participation, in decision-making
processes,
Welcoming also the steps taken by some States towards the adoption of national policies or legislation for the
protection of individuals, groups and organs of society engaged in promoting and defending human rights, including
as follow-up to the universal periodic review mechanism of the Human Rights Council,
1. Calls upon all States to promote, translate and give full effect to the Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,590 including by taking appropriate, robust and practical steps to protect
women human rights defenders;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the work of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
defenders, noting the particular attention given to women human rights defenders;591
3. Stresses that respect and support for the activities of human rights defenders, including women human
rights defenders, is essential to the overall enjoyment of human rights, and condemns all human rights violations
and abuses committed against persons engaged in promoting and defending human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
4. Recognizes that all human rights are universal, indivisible and interdependent and that the international
community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same
emphasis, and stresses that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical,
cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their political,
economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Expresses particular concern about systemic and structural discrimination and violence faced by women
human rights defenders of all ages, and calls upon States to take all measures necessary to ensure their protection
and to integrate a gender perspective into their efforts to create a safe and enabling environment for the defence of
human rights;
6. Reiterates strongly the right of anyone, individually and in association with others, to defend the human
rights of women in all their aspects, and stresses the important role of women human rights defenders in promoting
and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, to which everyone is entitled without distinction of any
kind, including in addressing all forms of human rights violations, combating impunity, fighting poverty and
discrimination and promoting access to justice, democracy, the full participation of women in society, tolerance,
human dignity and the right to development, while recalling that the exercise of these rights carries duties and
responsibilities set out in the Declaration;
7. Urges States to acknowledge publicly the important and legitimate role of women human rights
defenders in the promotion and protection of human rights, democracy, the rule of law and development as an
essential component of ensuring their protection, including by publicly condemning violence and discrimination
against women human rights defenders;
8. Calls upon States to ensure that human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, can
perform their important role in the context of peaceful protests, in accordance with national legislation consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations and international human rights law, and in this regard to ensure that no one is
_______________
591

See A/68/262, A/67/292 and A/HRC/16/44 and Corr.1.

671

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

subject to excessive or indiscriminate use of force, arbitrary arrest or detention, torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, enforced disappearance, abuse of criminal and civil proceedings or threats of
such acts;
9. Also calls upon States to exercise due diligence in preventing violations and abuses against human rights
defenders, including through practical steps to prevent threats, harassment and violence against women human
rights defenders, who face particular risks, and in combating impunity by ensuring that those responsible for
violations and abuses, including gender-based violence and threats against women human rights defenders,
committed by State and non-State actors, including online, are promptly brought to justice through impartial
investigations;
10. Further calls upon States to ensure that the promotion and protection of human rights are not
criminalized or met with limitations in contravention of their obligations and commitments under international
human rights law and that women human rights defenders are not prevented from enjoying universal human rights
owing to their work, including by ensuring that all legal provisions, administrative measures and policies affecting
women human rights defenders, including those aimed at preserving public morals, are clearly defined,
determinable, non-retroactive and compatible with relevant provisions of international human rights law;
11. Underlines the fundamental principle of the independence of the judiciary and that procedural
safeguards must be in place in accordance with States’ obligations and commitments under international human
rights law in order to protect women human rights defenders from unwarranted criminal actions and sanctions as a
consequence of their work in line with the Declaration;
12. Also underlines that women human rights defenders have the right to the lawful exercise of their
occupation or profession and that everyone who, as a result of his or her profession, can affect the human dignity,
human rights and fundamental freedoms of others should respect those rights and freedoms and comply with
relevant national and international standards of occupational and professional conduct or ethics;
13. Stresses that, in the exercise of the rights and freedoms referred to in the Declaration, women human
rights defenders, acting individually and in association with others, shall be subject only to such limitations as are in
accordance with applicable international obligations and are determined by law solely for the purpose of securing
due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of meeting the just requirements of morality,
public order and the general welfare in a democratic society;
14. Urges States to strengthen and implement legal, policy and other measures to promote gender equality,
empower women and promote their autonomy and to promote and protect their equal participation, full involvement
and leadership in society, including in the defence of human rights;
15. Invites leaders in all sectors of society and in their respective communities, including political, military,
social and religious leaders and leaders in business and the media, to express public support for the important role of
women human rights defenders and the legitimacy of their work;
16. Calls upon States to implement, effectively and expeditiously, Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
of 31 October 2000, 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008, 1888 (2009) of 30 September 2009, 1889 (2009) of 5 October
2009, 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010, 2106 (2013) of 24 June 2013 and 2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013 on
women and peace and security, including through the provision of gender-sensitivity training for police officers and
law enforcement personnel, inter alia, on the barriers that women human rights defenders face in gaining access to
justice in armed conflict and post-conflict situations, ensuring the inclusion of sexual violence in the definition of
acts prohibited by ceasefires and in provisions for ceasefire monitoring and the exclusion of sexual violence crimes
from amnesty provisions in the context of conflict resolution processes, as a step towards the effective protection of
women, including women human rights defenders;
17. Strongly calls upon States to refrain from, and ensure adequate protection from, any act of intimidation
or reprisal against women human rights defenders who cooperate, have cooperated or seek to cooperate with
international institutions, including their family members and associates;
18. Reaffirms the right of everyone, individually and in association with others, to unhindered access to and
communication with international bodies, in particular the United Nations, its special procedures, the universal
periodic review mechanism and the treaty bodies, as well as regional human rights mechanisms;
672

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. Urges States to develop and put in place comprehensive, sustainable and gender-sensitive public policies
and programmes that support and protect women human rights defenders, including by providing adequate
resources for immediate and long-term protection and making sure that these can be mobilized in a flexible and
timely manner to guarantee effective physical and psychological protection, while also extending protection
measures to their relatives, including children, and otherwise to take into account the role of many women human
rights defenders as the main or sole caregivers in their families;
20. Emphasizes the need for the participation of women human rights defenders in the development of
effective policies and programmes related to their protection, recognizing their independence and expertise with
regard to their own needs, and the need to create and strengthen mechanisms for consultation and dialogue with
women human rights defenders, such as focal points for human rights defenders within the public administration,
for example, through national mechanisms for the advancement of women and girls, where they exist, or other
mechanisms, depending on the national and local context;
21. Urges States to adopt and implement policies and programmes that provide women human rights
defenders with access to effective remedies, including by ensuring:
(a) The effective participation of women human rights defenders in all initiatives, including transitional
justice processes, to secure accountability for violations and abuses, and also ensuring that the guarantee of nonrecurrence incorporates overcoming the root causes of gender-based violations and abuses in everyday life and
institutions;
(b) Adequate access to comprehensive support services for those women human rights defenders who
experience violence, including shelters, psychosocial services, counselling, medical care and legal and social services;
(c) That women human rights defenders who are victims of sexual and other forms of violence are attended
to by adequately trained and equipped personnel with gender sensitivity and expertise and are consulted during each
step of the process;
(d) That women human rights defenders are able to avoid situations of violence, including by preventing the
occurrence or recurrence of such violence in the exercise of their important and legitimate role in accordance with
the present resolution;
22. Also urges States to promote and support projects to improve and further develop the documentation and
monitoring of cases of violations against women human rights defenders, and encourages the provision of adequate
support and resources for those working to protect women human rights defenders, such as government agencies,
national human rights institutions and civil society, including national and international non-governmental
organizations;
23. Encourages national human rights institutions to support the documentation of violations against women
human rights defenders and to integrate a gender dimension into the planning and implementation of all
programmes and other interventions related to human rights defenders, including through consultations with the
relevant stakeholders;
24. Encourages regional protection mechanisms, where they exist, to promote projects to improve and
further develop the documentation of cases of violations against women human rights defenders and to ensure that
programmes for the security and protection of human rights defenders integrate a gender perspective and address the
specific risks and security needs of women human rights defenders;
25. Encourages United Nations bodies, agencies and other entities, within their respective mandates and in
cooperation with the Special Rapporteur and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, to address the situation of human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, in their work
and to contribute to the effective implementation of the Declaration;
26. Requests all concerned United Nations agencies and organizations, within their mandates, to provide all
possible assistance and support to the Special Rapporteur for the effective fulfilment of her mandate, including in
the context of country visits and through suggestions on ways and means of ensuring the protection of women
human rights defenders;
27. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue to report annually on her activities to the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council, in accordance with her mandate;
28. Decides to continue its consideration of this matter.
673

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/182
A/RES/68/182

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.3,
para. 27),592 by a recorded vote of 127 to 13, with 47 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against: Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde,
Chad, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guyana, India, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Togo, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia

68/182. Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights593 and
relevant international human rights treaties, including the International Covenants on Human Rights,594
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic and to the principles of the Charter,
Recalling its resolutions 66/176 of 19 December 2011, 66/253 A of 16 February 2012, 66/253 B of 3 August
2012, 67/183 of 20 December 2012 and 67/262 of 15 May 2013, Human Rights Council resolutions S-16/1 of
29 April 2011,595 S-17/1 of 23 August 2011,595 S-18/1 of 2 December 2011,596 19/1 of 1 March 2012,597 19/22 of
23 March 2012,597 S-19/1 of 1 June 2012,598 20/22 of 6 July 2012,599 21/26 of 28 September 2012,600 22/24 of
22 March 2013,601 23/1 of 29 May 2013,602 23/26 of 14 June 2013602 and 24/22 of 27 September 2013,603 and
_______________
592

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Comoros, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritania, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu and Yemen.
593
Resolution 217 A (III).
594
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
595
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. I.
596
Ibid., Supplement No. 53B and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.2 and Corr.1), chap. II.
597
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
598
Ibid., chap. V.
599
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. A.
600
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
601
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
602
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
603
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.

674

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Security Council resolutions 2042 (2012) of 14 April 2012, 2043 (2012) of 21 April 2012 and 2118 (2013) of
27 September 2013 and the statement of the President of the Council of 2 October 2013,604
Noting the fact that the Syrian Arab Republic has acceded to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,605
Expressing outrage at the continuing escalation of violence in the Syrian Arab Republic, which has caused
more than 100,000 casualties, mostly by conventional weapons, and in particular at the continued widespread and
systematic gross violations, as well as abuses, of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law,
including those involving the continued use of heavy weapons and aerial bombardments, such as the indiscriminate
use of ballistic missiles and cluster munitions, by the Syrian authorities against the Syrian population,
Expressing alarm at the failure of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to protect its population and to
implement the relevant resolutions and decisions of United Nations bodies,
Expressing grave concern at the spread of extremism and extremist groups, and strongly condemning all
human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law in the Syrian Arab Republic,
Strongly condemning the large-scale use of chemical weapons on 21 August 2013 in the Ghouta area of
Damascus, as concluded in the report of the United Nations Mission to Investigate Allegations of the Use of
Chemical Weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, 606 condemning the killing of civilians that resulted from it,
affirming that the use of chemical weapons constitutes a serious violation of international law, and stressing that
those responsible for any use of chemical weapons must be held accountable,
Noting that the League of Arab States, in its resolution 7667 adopted by the Ministerial Council of the League
at its 140th ordinary session on 1 September 2013, and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation have held the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic fully responsible for the chemical attacks against the Syrian people, which
took place in the Ghouta area of Damascus,
Recalling the statements made by the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights that crimes against humanity are likely to have been committed in the Syrian Arab Republic,
stressing that the Syrian authorities have failed to prosecute such serious violations, and noting the repeated
encouragement by the High Commissioner that the Security Council refer the situation to the International
Criminal Court,
Expressing support for the work carried out by the independent international commission of inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic,
Strongly condemning the continued border violations from the Syrian Arab Republic into neighbouring
countries, which have led to casualties among and injuries to the civilians of those countries, including Syrian
refugees, and underlining that such incidents have violated international law and highlighted the grave impact of the
crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic on the security of its neighbours and on regional peace and stability,
Deploring the further deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the failure of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to ensure the immediate, safe and unimpeded provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas
affected by the fighting,
Expressing deep concern at the more than 2.2 million refugees, including more than 1 million children, and
the millions of internally displaced persons fleeing as a result of the extreme violence in the Syrian Arab Republic,
and at the escalating violence causing an influx of Syrian refugees into neighbouring countries and other countries in
the region,
Welcoming the hosting by the Government of Kuwait, on 30 January 2013, of the pledging conference for the
United Nations joint appeal, and also welcoming with appreciation the hosting by the Government of Kuwait of the
Second International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria in January 2014,
_______________
604

S/PRST/2013/15.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.
606
A/67/997-S/2013/553.
605

675

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing its deep appreciation for the significant efforts that have been made by neighbouring countries and
other countries in the region to accommodate Syrian refugees, while acknowledging the increasing political,
socioeconomic and financial impact of the presence of large-scale refugee populations in those countries, notably in
Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq, Egypt and Libya,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the Joint Special Representative of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria to achieve a solution to the Syrian crisis,
1. Strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, which is prohibited under
international law, amounts to a serious crime and has a devastating impact on civilians, and in particular the
massacre in the Ghouta area of Damascus, and notes in this regard the report of 16 September 2013606 prepared by
the United Nations Mission to Investigate Allegations of the Use of Chemical Weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic,
which provides clear evidence that surface-to-surface rockets were fired on 21 August from Government-held
territory into opposition areas, using professionally made munitions containing Sarin;
2. Also strongly condemns the continued widespread and systematic gross violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms and all violations of international humanitarian law by the Syrian authorities and the
Government-affiliated shabbiha militias, including those involving the use of heavy weapons, aerial bombardments,
cluster munitions, ballistic missiles and other force against civilians, attacks on schools, hospitals and places of
worship, massacres, arbitrary executions, extrajudicial killings, the killing and persecution of protestors, human
rights defenders and journalists, arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances, violations of women’s rights, unlawful
interference with access to medical treatment, failure to respect and protect medical personnel, torture, systemic
sexual and gender-based violence, including rape in detention, and ill-treatment, and further strongly condemns all
human rights abuses or violations of international humanitarian law by armed extremists, as well as any human
rights abuses or violations of international humanitarian law by armed anti-Government groups;
3. Condemns all grave violations and abuses committed against children in contravention of applicable
international law, such as their recruitment and use, killing and maiming, rape and all other forms of sexual violence,
attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as their arbitrary arrest, detention, torture, ill-treatment and their use as
human shields;
4. Also condemns all violence, irrespective of where it comes from, and calls upon all parties to
immediately put an end to all forms of violence, including terrorist acts and acts of violence or intimidation that may
foment sectarian tensions, and to comply strictly with their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law;
5. Demands that all parties immediately put an end to all violations and abuses of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, recalls, in particular, the obligation under international humanitarian
law to distinguish between civilian populations and combatants and the prohibition against indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks and all attacks against civilians and civilian objects, also demands that all parties to the
conflict take all appropriate steps to protect civilians, including by desisting from attacks directed against civilian
objects, such as medical centres, schools and water stations, immediately demilitarize such facilities, avoid
establishing military positions in populated areas and enable the evacuation of the wounded and all civilians who
wish to do so from besieged areas, and recalls in this regard that the Syrian authorities bear primary responsibility
for protecting the population;
6. Strongly condemns the intervention of all foreign combatants in the Syrian Arab Republic, including
those fighting on behalf of the Syrian authorities, and in particular Hizbullah, and expresses deep concern that their
involvement further exacerbates the deteriorating human rights and humanitarian situation, which has a serious
negative impact on the region;
7. Demands that the Syrian authorities immediately release all persons arbitrarily detained, including the
members of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of Expression, publish a list of all detention facilities, ensure
that conditions of detention comply with applicable international law and immediately allow access of independent
monitors to all detention facilities;
8. Also demands that the Syrian authorities fully cooperate with the independent international commission
of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and provide it and individuals working on its behalf with immediate, full and
unfettered entry and access to all areas of the country, and further demands that all parties cooperate fully with the
commission in the performance of its mandate;
676

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Welcomes the reports submitted by the independent international commission of inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
10. Stresses the importance of ensuring accountability and the need to end impunity and hold to account
those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights,
including those violations that may amount to crimes against humanity, notably in the Ghouta area of Damascus on
21 August 2013, encourages the Security Council to consider appropriate measures to ensure accountability in the
Syrian Arab Republic, and stresses the important role that international criminal justice could play in this regard;
11. Underlines the importance that the Syrian people, on the basis of broad, inclusive and credible
consultations, should determine, within the framework provided by international law and based upon the
complementarity principle, the domestic process and mechanisms to achieve reconciliation, truth and accountability
for gross violations, as well as reparations and effective remedies for the victims;
12. Reminds the Security Council of its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security and to take measures to put an end to all serious violations of international humanitarian law and all
serious violations and abuses of international human rights law committed in the Syrian Arab Republic;
13. Strongly condemns all attacks by the Syrian authorities or any other party against medical facilities,
personnel and vehicles, as well as the use of medical and civilian facilities, including hospitals, for armed purposes,
recalls that under international humanitarian law the wounded and sick must receive, to the fullest extent practicable
and with the least possible delay, the medical care and attention required by their condition, and urges that free
passage for medical personnel and supplies, including surgical items and medicine, be provided to all areas in the
Syrian Arab Republic;
14. Stresses that the magnitude of the humanitarian tragedy caused by the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic requires immediate action to facilitate the safe and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout the entire country, in particular in areas and districts where humanitarian needs are especially urgent,
condemns all cases of arbitrary denial of humanitarian access, and recalls that depriving civilians of objects
indispensable to their survival, including wilfully impeding relief supply and access, can constitute a violation of
international humanitarian law;
15. Demands that the Syrian authorities take immediate steps to facilitate the expansion of humanitarian
relief operations and lift bureaucratic impediments and other obstacles, including by immediately facilitating safe
and unimpeded access to people in need, through the most effective ways, including across conflict lines and across
borders, and urges all parties to take all appropriate steps to facilitate the efforts of the United Nations, its specialized
agencies and all humanitarian actors engaged in humanitarian relief activities to provide immediate humanitarian
assistance to the affected people in the Syrian Arab Republic and to nominate empowered interlocutors who can
work with humanitarian agencies to resolve difficulties in gaining such access in order to fully implement the
humanitarian response plan;
16. Expresses grave concern at the increasing numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons as a
result of the ongoing violence, reiterates its appreciation for the significant efforts that have been made by
neighbouring countries and countries of the region to assist those who have fled across the borders of the Syrian
Arab Republic as a consequence of the violence, urges all relevant United Nations agencies, in particular the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and other donors to provide urgent and coordinated
support to Syrian refugees and their host countries, and calls upon Member States, based on burden-sharing
principles, to host the Syrian refugees in coordination with the Office of the High Commissioner;
17. Demands that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic implement the relevant resolutions and
decisions of United Nations bodies and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons;
18. Stresses its support for the aspirations of the Syrian people for a peaceful, democratic and pluralistic
society, with the full and effective participation of women, in which there is no room for sectarianism or
discrimination on ethnic, religious, linguistic, gender or any other grounds, based on the promotion of universal
respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
19. Stresses that rapid progress on a political transition represents the best opportunity to resolve the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic peacefully, reaffirms its support for the engagement of the Secretary-General
and the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria and all
677

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

diplomatic efforts aimed at reaching a political solution to the crisis, also reaffirms the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of international peace and security as set out in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, and welcomes the relevant resolutions of the League of Arab States to address the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic;
20. Endorses the final communiqué issued by the Action Group for Syria of 30 June 2012 (Geneva
communiqué),607 and calls for the convening as soon as possible of the international conference on the Syrian Arab
Republic to implement the Geneva communiqué.
RESOLUTION 68/183
A/RES/68/183

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.3, para. 27)608

68/183. Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms
and to fulfil the obligations that they have undertaken under the various international instruments,
Mindful that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,609 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,609 the Convention on the
Rights of the Child610 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,611 and
recalling the concluding observations of the treaty-monitoring bodies under the four treaties,
Recalling all previous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and
the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including Assembly resolution 67/181 of 20 December 2012 and Council resolution 22/13 of 21 March 2013,612
and mindful of the need for the international community to strengthen its coordinated efforts aimed at achieving the
implementation of those resolutions,
Welcoming the establishment of the commission of inquiry by the Human Rights Council in its resolution
22/13, taking note of its initial oral report to the Council in September 2013 and to the General Assembly in October
2013, and commending its methodology of conducting public hearings with witnesses, while regretting that the
commission has received no cooperation from the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including with regard to access to the country,
Acknowledging the participation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the universal periodic
review process, expressing serious concern at the continued refusal of the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to articulate its position as to which recommendations included in the outcome report of its
universal periodic review,613 adopted in March 2010, enjoy its support, and regretting the continuing lack of action
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to implement the recommendations contained in the report,
_______________
607

A/66/865-S/2012/522, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America and Vanuatu.
609
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
610
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
611
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
612
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
613
A/HRC/13/13.
608

678

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting with appreciation the collaboration established between the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization in order to improve
the health situation in the country, and the collaboration established with the United Nations Children’s Fund in
order to improve the quality of education for children,
Noting the decision on the resumption, on a modest scale, of the activities of the United Nations Development
Programme in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and encouraging the engagement of the Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with the international community to ensure that the programmes benefit
the persons in need of assistance,
Noting also the cooperation established between the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for the purpose of conducting a crop and food security assessment, as well as the
letter of understanding signed with the World Food Programme, recognizing improvements in access by the World
Food Programme, emphasizing the importance of providing further access to all United Nations entities, while
supporting the establishment, implementation and monitoring of joint projects with other international agencies and
organizations aiming to increase the synergy of food and non-food assistance, and noting also with appreciation the
work of international aid operators in the areas of humanitarian and food assistance,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea,614 regretting that he still has not been allowed to visit the country and that he received
no cooperation from the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and taking note also of the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea submitted in accordance with resolution 67/181,615
Noting with appreciation the recent signature of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities616
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, encouraging the Government to take speedy steps to ratify the
Convention, and urging the Government to fully respect the rights of persons with disabilities,
Noting the importance of the inter-Korean dialogue, which could contribute to the improvement of the human
rights and humanitarian situation in the country,
Noting with regret that the reunion of separated families across the border, which is an urgent humanitarian
concern of the entire Korean people, has been halted, and hoping that it will be resumed as early as possible and that
necessary arrangements for further reunions on a larger scale and a regular basis will be made by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea and members of the Korean diaspora,
Deeply concerned at the significant persistent deterioration of the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea,
1.

Expresses its very serious concern at:

(a) The persistence of continuing reports of systematic, widespread and grave violations of civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including:
(i) Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including inhuman conditions
of detention, public executions, extrajudicial and arbitrary detention; the absence of due process and the rule of
law, including fair trial guarantees and an independent judiciary; extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions; the imposition of the death penalty for political and religious reasons; collective punishments
extending up to three generations; and the extensive use of forced labour;
(ii) The existence of an extensive system of political prison camps, where a vast number of persons are
deprived of their liberty and subjected to deplorable conditions and where alarming violations of human rights
are perpetrated, and in this regard strongly urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to immediately
end this practice and to release all political prisoners unconditionally and without any delay;
_______________
614

A/68/319.
A/68/392.
616
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
615

679

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(iii) Limitations imposed on every person who wishes to move freely within the country and travel abroad,
including the punishment of those who leave or try to leave the country without permission, or their families,
as well as punishment of persons who are returned;
(iv) The situation of refugees and asylum seekers expelled or returned to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and sanctions imposed on citizens of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who have
been repatriated from abroad, leading to punishments of internment, torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or the death penalty, and in this regard strongly urges all States to respect the fundamental principle
of non-refoulement, to treat those who seek refuge humanely and to ensure unhindered access to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his Office, with a view to protecting the human rights of those
who seek refuge, and once again urges States parties to comply with their obligations under the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees617 and the 1967 Protocol thereto618 in relation to refugees from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who are covered by those instruments;
(v) All-pervasive and severe restrictions on the freedoms of thought, conscience, religion or belief, opinion
and expression, peaceful assembly and association, the right to privacy and equal access to information, by
such means as the persecution, torture and imprisonment of individuals exercising their freedom of opinion
and expression, religion or belief, and their families, and the right of everyone to take part in the conduct of
public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives, of his or her country;
(vi) The violations of economic, social and cultural rights, which have led to severe malnutrition, widespread
health problems and other hardship for the population in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
particular for persons belonging to particularly exposed groups, inter alia, women, children and the elderly;
(vii) Continuing violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women, in particular the
creation of internal conditions that force women to leave the country and risk falling victim to trafficking for
the purpose of prostitution or forced marriage and the subjection of women to human smuggling, forced
abortions, gender-based discrimination, including in the economic sphere, and gender-based violence and
continuing impunity for such violence;
(viii) Continuing reports of violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of children, in particular
the continued lack of access to basic economic, social and cultural rights for many children, and in this regard
notes the particularly vulnerable situation faced by, inter alia, returned or repatriated children, street children,
children with disabilities, children whose parents are detained, children living in detention or in institutions
and children in conflict with the law;
(ix) Continuing reports of violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of persons with
disabilities, especially in the use of collective camps and of coercive measures that target the rights of persons
with disabilities to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children;
(x) Violations of workers’ rights, including the right to freedom of association and effective recognition of
the right to collective bargaining, the right to strike as defined by the obligations of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,609 and the
prohibition of the economic exploitation of children and of any harmful or hazardous work of children as
defined by the obligations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea under the Convention on the Rights
of the Child;610
(b) The continued refusal of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to recognize the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the mandate of the commission of inquiry or to extend cooperation to the Special Rapporteur and the
commission of inquiry;
(c) The continued refusal of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to articulate
which recommendations enjoyed its support following its universal periodic review by the Human Rights Council
_______________
617
618

680

Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

or to express its commitment to their implementation, and expresses its serious concern at the lack of action taken to
date to implement the recommendations contained in the final outcome;613
2. Underscores its very serious concern at unresolved questions of international concern relating to
abductions in the form of enforced disappearance, which violate the human rights of nationals of other sovereign
countries, and in this regard strongly calls upon the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
urgently to resolve those questions, including through existing channels, in a transparent manner, including by
ensuring the immediate return of abductees;
3. Expresses its very deep concern at the precarious humanitarian situation in the country, which could
rapidly deteriorate owing to limited resilience to natural disasters and to government policies causing limitations in
the availability of and access to food, compounded by structural weaknesses in agricultural production resulting in
significant shortages of diversified food and the State restrictions on the cultivation and trade in foodstuffs, as well
as the prevalence of chronic and acute malnutrition, particularly among the most vulnerable groups, pregnant
women, infants and children and the elderly, which, despite some progress, continues to affect the physical and
mental development of a significant proportion of children, and urges the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in this regard, to take preventive and remedial action, cooperating where necessary with
international donor agencies and in accordance with international standards for monitoring humanitarian assistance;
4. Commends the Special Rapporteur and the commission of inquiry for the activities undertaken so far
and for their continued efforts in the conduct of their mandates despite the denial of access;
5. Strongly urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect fully all human
rights and fundamental freedoms and, in this regard:
(a) To immediately put an end to the systematic, widespread and grave violations of human rights
emphasized above, inter alia, by implementing fully the measures set out in the above-mentioned resolutions of the
General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, and the recommendations
addressed to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the Council in the context of the universal periodic
review and by the United Nations special procedures and treaty bodies;
(b) To protect its inhabitants, address the issue of impunity and ensure that those responsible for violations
of human rights are brought to justice before an independent judiciary;
(c) To tackle the root causes leading to refugee outflows and prosecute those who exploit refugees by
human smuggling, trafficking and extortion, while not criminalizing the victims;
(d) To ensure that citizens of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who are expelled or returned to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are able to return in safety and dignity, are treated humanely and are not
subjected to any kind of punishment, and to provide information on their status and treatment;
(e) To extend its full cooperation to the Special Rapporteur and the commission of inquiry, including by
granting them full, free and unimpeded access to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and to other United
Nations human rights mechanisms so that a full needs assessment of the human rights situation may be made;
(f) To engage in technical cooperation activities in the field of human rights with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and her Office, as pursued by the High Commissioner in recent years, with a view
to improving the situation of human rights in the country, and to strive to implement the recommendations made in
the universal periodic review by the Human Rights Council;
(g)

To engage in cooperation with the International Labour Organization;

(h)

To continue and reinforce its cooperation with United Nations humanitarian agencies;

(i) To ensure full, safe and unhindered access to humanitarian aid and take measures to allow humanitarian
agencies to secure its impartial delivery to all parts of the country on the basis of need in accordance with
humanitarian principles, as it pledged to do, and to ensure access to adequate food and implement more effective
food security policies, including through sustainable agriculture, sound food production distribution measures and
by allocating more funds to the food sector, and to ensure adequate monitoring of humanitarian assistance;
(j) To further improve cooperation with the United Nations country team and development agencies
so that they can directly contribute to improving the living conditions of the civilian population, including
681

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

accelerating progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, in accordance with
international monitoring and evaluation procedures;
(k) To consider ratifying and acceding to remaining international human rights treaties, which would enable
a dialogue with the human rights treaty bodies;
6. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea at its sixty-ninth session, and to this end requests the Secretary-General to submit a
comprehensive report on the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and requests the Special
Rapporteur to continue to report his findings and recommendations, as well as to report on the outcome of and
follow-up to the work of the commission of inquiry, in line with any decisions of the Human Rights Council at its
twenty-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 68/184
A/RES/68/184

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.3,
para. 27),619 by a recorded vote of 86 to 36, with 61 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu
Against: Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Suriname,
Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia

68/184. Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,620 the
International Covenants on Human Rights621 and other international human rights instruments,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, the most
recent of which is resolution 67/182 of 20 December 2012,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted in September 2013 pursuant to resolution
67/182,622 in which he notes that he remains deeply troubled by ongoing human rights violations in the Islamic
Republic of Iran, and the report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
_______________
619

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Vanuatu.
620
Resolution 217 A (III).
621
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
622
A/68/377.

682

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Iran623 submitted in October 2013 pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 22/23 of 15 April 2013,624 in which
the Special Rapporteur continues to catalogue a wide range of systemic and systematic human rights violations;
2. Welcomes pledges made by the new President of the Islamic Republic of Iran with regard to some
important human rights issues, particularly on eliminating discrimination against women and members of ethnic
minorities and promoting freedom of expression and opinion, as well as the proposal of the President to implement
a civil rights charter, and encourages the Islamic Republic of Iran to take concrete action to ensure that these pledges
can result in demonstrable improvements as soon as possible and to uphold the Government’s obligations under its
national laws and under international human rights law;
3. Also welcomes the peaceful conduct during voting in the June 2013 presidential elections and the broad
participation of the Iranian people, while expressing concern over the restrictions placed on candidates, including
the exclusion of all women candidates, and the further erosion of democratic space for political activities prior to the
elections;
4. Further welcomes the recent release of a number of prisoners of conscience and political prisoners, and
continues to call upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to immediately and unconditionally release
all those who have been arbitrarily arrested and detained for exercising their rights to freedom of religion or belief,
freedom of expression and peaceful assembly or for participating in peaceful protests about political, economic,
environmental or other issues;
5. Expresses deep concern at serious ongoing and recurring human rights violations in the Islamic
Republic of Iran relating to, inter alia:
(a)

Torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including flogging and amputations;

(b) The continuing alarming high frequency of the carrying-out of the death penalty in the absence of
internationally recognized safeguards, including public executions, notwithstanding the issuance of a circular by the
former head of the judiciary prohibiting public executions, and secret group executions, as well as reports of
executions undertaken without the notification of the prisoner’s family members or legal counsel;
(c) The continuing imposition and carrying-out of the death penalty against minors and persons who at the
time of their offence were under the age of 18, in violation of the obligations of the Islamic Republic of Iran under
the Convention on the Rights of the Child625 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;621
(d) The imposition of the death penalty for crimes that lack a precise and explicit definition, including
moharebeh (enmity against God), and for crimes that do not qualify as the most serious crimes, in violation of
international law;
(e) Widespread and serious restrictions on the right to peaceful assembly, freedom of association and
freedom of opinion and expression, including through efforts to block, filter or hinder Internet access and content,
jam international satellite transmissions into the Islamic Republic of Iran and censor or close newspapers, magazines
and other publications, including in the lead-up to the June 2013 presidential election;
(f) The systematic targeting and harassment of human rights defenders, who face arrest, arbitrary detention,
long-term exile and harsh sentences, including the death sentence;
(g) Pervasive gender inequality and violence against women and increased discrimination against women
and girls in law and in practice, as well as restrictions on access to government decision-making positions and the
labour market;
(h) Continued discrimination and other human rights violations, at times amounting to persecution, against
persons belonging to ethnic, linguistic or other minorities, including Arabs, Azeris, Balochis and Kurds and their
defenders, noting in particular reports of the violent suppression and detention of ethnic Arabs and Azeris, including
serious concerns about violations of their due process rights and alleged torture while imprisoned;
_______________
623

A/68/503.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
625
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
624

683

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(i) Ongoing severe limitations and restrictions on the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or
belief and restrictions on the building of, as well as attacks against, places of worship and burial;
(j) Continued harassment, at times amounting to persecution, and human rights violations against persons
belonging to recognized religious minorities, including Christians, Jews, Sufi Muslims, Sunni Muslims and
Zoroastrians and their defenders, noting in particular the widespread arrest and detention of Sufi Muslims and
evangelical Christians, including the continued detention of Christian pastors;
(k) Continued persecution and human rights violations against persons belonging to unrecognized religious
minorities, particularly members of the Baha’i faith and their defenders, including targeted attacks and murders,
without proper investigation to hold those responsible accountable, arbitrary arrests and detention, the restriction of
access to higher education on the basis of religion, the continued imprisonment of the leadership of the Iranian
Baha’i community, the closure of Baha’i-owned businesses and the de facto criminalization of membership in the
Baha’i faith;
(l) Continued and sustained house arrest of leading opposition figures from the 2009 presidential elections
and growing concerns about their health, as well as ongoing restrictions on their supporters and family members,
including through harassment, intimidation and reprisals;
(m) Persistent failure to uphold due process of law, and violations of the rights of detainees, including the
widespread and systematic use of arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance, the lack of access of detainees to
legal representation of their choice, the refusal to consider granting bail to detainees, the poor conditions of prisons and
the denial of access to adequate medical treatment, as well as reports of detainees dying in custody, being subjected to
torture, rape and other forms of sexual violence, harsh interrogation techniques and the use of pressure exerted upon
their relatives and dependants, including through arrest, to obtain false confessions that are then used at trials;
(n) Continuing arbitrary or unlawful interference by State authorities with the privacy of individuals, in
particular in relation to private homes, and with their correspondence, including telephone and e-mail
communications, in violation of international law;
6. Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to address the substantive concerns
highlighted in the reports of the Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Islamic Republic of Iran, as well as the specific calls to action found in previous resolutions of the General
Assembly, and to respect fully its human rights obligations, in law and in practice, in particular:
(a) To eliminate, in law and in practice, amputations, flogging, blinding and other forms of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
(b) To abolish, in law and in practice, public executions and other executions carried out in the absence of
respect for internationally recognized safeguards, including by stoning and suspension strangulation;
(c) To further revisit the revised Islamic Penal Code to make it consistent with its obligation, under article 37
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, to abolish executions of minors and persons who at the time of their offence were under the age of 18;
(d) To eliminate, in law and in practice, all forms of discrimination and other human rights violations against
women and girls, to promote women’s participation in decision-making positions and, while recognizing the high
enrolment of women in all levels of education, to lift all restrictions on women’s equal access to all aspects of
university education;
(e) To eliminate, in law and in practice, all forms of discrimination and other human rights violations against
persons belonging to religious, ethnic, linguistic or other minorities, recognized or otherwise;
(f) To eliminate discrimination against, and exclusion of, members of certain groups, including members of
the Baloch community and members of the Baha’i faith, regarding access to higher education, to eliminate the
criminalization of efforts to provide higher education to Baha’i youth denied access to Iranian universities and to
release those imprisoned for this reason;
(g) To implement, inter alia, the 1996 report of the Special Rapporteur on religious intolerance,626 in which
he recommended ways in which the Islamic Republic of Iran could emancipate the Baha’i community, to release the
_______________
626

684

E/CN.4/1996/95/Add.2.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

seven Baha’i leaders held since 2008 and to accord all Baha’is, including those imprisoned because of their beliefs,
the due process of law and the rights that they are constitutionally guaranteed;
(h) To launch a comprehensive accountability process in response to cases of serious human rights
violations, including those involving the Iranian judiciary and security agencies, and to end impunity for such
violations;
(i) To fulfil pledges by the new President for greater space for freedom of expression and opinion by ending
the harassment, intimidation and persecution of political opponents, human rights defenders, women’s rights
activists, labour leaders, students, academics, film-makers, journalists and their families, other media
representatives, bloggers, netizens, clerics, artists and lawyers, including by releasing persons detained arbitrarily or
on the basis of their political views, and in this regard welcoming the reopening of the House of Cinema;
(j) To end restrictions on the press and media representatives, Internet users and Internet providers,
including the selective jamming of satellite broadcasts, that violate the rights to freedom of expression and
association;
(k)

To uphold, in law and in practice, procedural guarantees to ensure due process of law;

7. Also calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to strengthen its national human rights
institutions in accordance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights (the Paris Principles),627 as it committed itself to doing in the framework of its universal
periodic review by the Human Rights Council;628
8. Notes the recent engagement by the Islamic Republic of Iran with the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, recalls its previous engagement with the Human Rights Committee,629 and calls upon the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to consider acting upon the concluding observations adopted by those
committees;
9. Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to effectively implement its obligations
under those human rights treaties to which it is already a party, to withdraw any reservations that it may have made
upon signature or ratification of other international human rights instruments where such reservations are overly
general, imprecise or could be considered incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty, to consider acting
upon the concluding observations concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran adopted by the bodies of the international
human rights treaties to which it is a party and to consider ratifying or acceding to the international human rights
treaties to which it is not already a party;
10. Strongly encourages the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to implement all of the
recommendations that it accepted in the framework of its universal periodic review by the Human Rights Council,
with the full and genuine participation of civil society and other stakeholders in the implementation process;
11. Expresses deep concern that, despite the standing invitation issued by the Islamic Republic of Iran to all
thematic special procedures mandate holders, it has not fulfilled any requests from those special mechanisms to visit
the country in eight years and has left unanswered the vast majority of the numerous and repeated communications
from those special mechanisms, and strongly urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to fully
cooperate with the special mechanisms, including facilitating their visits to its territory, so that credible and
independent investigations of all allegations of human rights violations can be conducted;
12. Expresses serious concern about allegations of reprisals against individuals for their cooperation or
contact with United Nations human rights mechanisms or representatives;
13. Strongly encourages the thematic special procedures mandate holders to pay particular attention to, with
a view to investigating and reporting on, the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran, in particular the
Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, the Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
_______________
627

Resolution 48/134, annex.
See A/HRC/14/12 and Add.1 and Corr.1.
629
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/67/40), vol. I, para. 107.
628

685

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the right to freedom of opinion and expression, the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and of association, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, the Special
Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief, the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, the Special Rapporteur on the right to
education, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence,
the Independent Expert on minority issues, the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and the Working Group on the issue of discrimination against women in
law and in practice;
14. Welcomes the recent engagement, through country visits, of the heads of United Nations agencies, and
urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to deepen its engagement with United Nations human rights
mechanisms;
15. Encourages the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to continue exploring cooperation on
human rights and justice reform with the United Nations, including the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights;
16. Continues to call upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to cooperate fully with the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran and other international human
rights mechanisms, including by responding positively to the request made by the Special Rapporteur in July 2013
to visit the country to carry out his mandate;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution, including options and recommendations to improve
its implementation, and to submit an interim report to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fifth session;
18. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran at its
sixty-ninth session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 68/185
A/RES/68/185

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)630

68/185. Follow-up to the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
and preparations for the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/119 of 19 December 2001 on the role, function, periodicity and duration of the
United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, in which it stipulated the
guidelines in accordance with which, beginning in 2005, the congresses, pursuant to paragraphs 29 and 30 of the
statement of principles and programme of action of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme,631 should be held,
Emphasizing the responsibility assumed by the United Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal
justice in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 155 C (VII) of 13 August 1948 and General
Assembly resolution 415 (V) of 1 December 1950,
Acknowledging that the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice, as major
intergovernmental forums, have influenced national policies and practices and promoted international cooperation
in that field by facilitating the exchange of views and experience, mobilizing public opinion and recommending
policy options at the national, regional and international levels,
_______________
630
631

686

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
Resolution 46/152, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Emphasizing the important role played by the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal
justice in recognizing that crime prevention and criminal justice, with due regard to the observance of human rights,
make a direct contribution to the maintenance of peace and security,
Recognizing the significant contributions of the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal
justice in promoting the exchange of experience in research, law and policy development and the identification of
emerging trends and issues in crime prevention and criminal justice among States, intergovernmental organizations
and individual experts representing various professions and disciplines,
Recalling its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
in which it stressed that all countries should promote policies consistent and coherent with the commitments of the
major United Nations conferences and summits, emphasized that the United Nations system had an important
responsibility to assist Governments to stay fully engaged in the follow-up to and implementation of agreements
and commitments reached at the major United Nations conferences and summits, and invited its intergovernmental
bodies to further promote the implementation of the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits,
Recalling also its resolution 62/173 of 18 December 2007, in which it endorsed the recommendations made
by the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on Lessons Learned from United Nations Congresses on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice at its meeting held in Bangkok from 15 to 18 August 2006,632
Recalling further its resolution 65/230 of 21 December 2010, in which it endorsed the Salvador Declaration
on Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their
Development in a Changing World,633 adopted by the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, and welcomed with appreciation the offer of the Government of Qatar to act as host to the
Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, in 2015,
Recalling its resolution 67/184 of 20 December 2012, in which it approved the main theme, the agenda items
and the topics for the workshops of the Thirteenth Congress and decided that the duration of the Thirteenth
Congress should not exceed eight days, including pre-Congress consultations,
Taking note of the development goals and national commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,634
Recognizing the importance of the substantive contributions that the Thirteenth Congress can make to the
United Nations post-2015 development agenda,
Re-emphasizing the importance of integrating crime prevention and criminal justice into the wider United
Nations agenda to address, inter alia, social and economic challenges and to promote the rule of law at the national
and international levels and public participation,
Stressing the importance of undertaking all preparatory activities for the Thirteenth Congress in a timely and
concerted manner,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,635
1. Reiterates its invitation to Governments to take into consideration the Salvador Declaration on
Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their
Development in a Changing World633 and the recommendations adopted by the Twelfth United Nations Congress
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice when formulating legislation and policy directives and to make all efforts,
where appropriate, to implement the principles contained therein, taking into account the economic, social, legal and
cultural specificities of their respective States;
_______________
632

See E/CN.15/2007/6, chap. IV.
Resolution 65/230, annex.
634
Resolution 55/2.
635
E/CN.15/2013/10.
633

687

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Notes with appreciation the progress made thus far in the preparations for the Thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice;
3. Decides to hold the Thirteenth Congress in Doha, from 12 to 19 April 2015, with pre-Congress
consultations to be held on 11 April 2015;
4. Also decides that the high-level segment of the Thirteenth Congress shall be held during the first two
days of the Congress in order to allow Heads of State or Government and Government ministers to focus on the
main theme of the Congress and to enhance the possibility of generating useful feedback;
5. Further decides that, in accordance with its resolution 56/119, the Thirteenth Congress shall adopt a
single declaration, to be submitted to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice for its
consideration, and that the declaration shall contain the major recommendations reflecting and emerging from the
deliberations of the high-level segment, as well as the discussion of the agenda items and the workshops;
6. Takes note with appreciation of the draft discussion guide prepared by the Secretary-General, in
cooperation with the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network, for
the regional preparatory meetings and for the Thirteenth Congress;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to finalize the discussion guide in a timely manner, taking into account
the recommendations of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, as well as additional comments
and feedback from Member States, in order to enable the regional preparatory meetings for the Thirteenth Congress
to be held as early as possible in 2014;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to proceed with the organization of the four regional
preparatory meetings for the Thirteenth Congress and to make available the necessary resources for the participation
of the least developed countries in those meetings and in the Congress itself, in accordance with past practice, as
well as making a special effort to organize the regional preparatory meeting for European and other States so as to
benefit from their inputs;
9. Urges Governments to actively participate in the regional preparatory meetings, where appropriate, and
invite their representatives to examine the substantive items on the agenda and the topics of the workshops of the
Thirteenth Congress and to make action-oriented recommendations for consideration by the Congress;
10. Invites Governments to undertake preparations for the Thirteenth Congress at an early stage by all
appropriate means, including, where appropriate, the establishment of national preparatory committees;
11. Reiterates its invitation to Member States to be represented at the Thirteenth Congress at the highest
possible level, for example, by Heads of State or Government, Government ministers or attorneys general, to make
statements on the theme and topics of the Congress;
12. Also reiterates its invitation to Member States to play an active role in the Thirteenth Congress by
sending legal and policy experts, including practitioners with special training and practical experience in crime
prevention and criminal justice;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the participation of representatives from relevant entities of
the United Nations system in the Thirteenth Congress, bearing in mind the main theme, agenda items and workshop
topics of the Congress;
14. Invites donor countries to cooperate with developing countries to ensure their full participation in the
workshops, and encourages States, the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme network, other entities concerned and the Secretary-General to work together in order to ensure that the
workshops are well-focused and achieve practical results, leading to technical cooperation ideas, projects and
documents for enhancing bilateral and multilateral technical assistance activities in crime prevention and criminal
justice;
15. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to facilitate the organization of ancillary meetings of nongovernmental and professional organizations participating in the Thirteenth Congress, in accordance with past
practice, as well as meetings of professional and geographical interest groups, and to take appropriate measures to
encourage the participation of the academic and research community in the Congress, and encourages Member
States to actively participate in the above-mentioned meetings, as they provide an opportunity to develop and
maintain a strong partnership with the private sector and civil society organizations;
688

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

16. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a plan for the documentation for the Thirteenth Congress, in
consultation with the extended bureau of the Commission;
17. Again encourages the relevant specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, as well as other professional organizations, to cooperate
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the preparations for the Thirteenth Congress;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a Secretary-General and an Executive Secretary of the
Thirteenth Congress, in accordance with past practice, to perform their functions under the rules of procedure for
United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with the
necessary resources, from within the overall appropriations of the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015,
to support the preparations for and holding of the Thirteenth Congress;
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure, in collaboration with Member States, a wide and
effective programme of public information relating to the preparations for the Thirteenth Congress, to the Congress
itself and to the follow-up to and implementation of its recommendations;
21. Requests the Commission to accord sufficient time at its twenty-third session to reviewing the progress
made in the preparations for the Thirteenth Congress, to finalize in a timely manner all outstanding organizational
and substantive arrangements and to make its recommendations to the General Assembly through the Economic and
Social Council;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure proper follow-up to the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly through the Commission at its twenty-third session.
RESOLUTION 68/186
A/RES/68/186

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)636

68/186. Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice responses to protect cultural property,
especially with regard to its trafficking
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 66/180 of 19 December 2011, entitled “Strengthening crime prevention and criminal
justice responses to protect cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking”,
Recalling the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 55/25 of 15 November 2000,637 as well as the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, adopted by the Assembly in its resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003,638
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on 14 November 1970,639 the Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported
Cultural Objects, adopted by the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law on 24 June 1995,640 and
the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, adopted at The Hague on
14 May 1954,641 and the two Protocols thereto, adopted on 14 May 1954641 and 26 March 1999,642 and other
_______________
636

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
638
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
639
Ibid., vol. 823, No. 11806.
640
Ibid., vol. 2421, No. 43718.
641
Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511.
642
Ibid., vol. 2253, No. 3511.
637

689

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

relevant conventions, and reaffirming the necessity for those States that have not done so to consider ratifying or
acceding to and, as States parties, implementing those international instruments,
Alarmed at the growing involvement of organized criminal groups in all forms and aspects of trafficking in
cultural property and related offences, and observing that illicitly trafficked cultural property is increasingly being
sold through markets, including in auctions, in particular over the Internet, and that such property is being
unlawfully excavated and illicitly exported or imported, with the facilitation of modern and sophisticated
technologies,
Reiterating the need for credible and comparable data on different aspects of trafficking in cultural property,
including the links with transnational organized crime and the involvement of illicit proceeds, as well as good
practices and challenges in this regard,
Recognizing the indispensable role of crime prevention and criminal justice responses in combating all forms
and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences in a comprehensive and effective manner,
Welcoming the recommendations of the joint discussion on trafficking in cultural property of the Working
Group of Government Experts on Technical Assistance and the Working Group on International Cooperation, held
in Vienna on 18 October 2012, as endorsed by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime in its resolution 6/1 of 19 October 2012,643
Taking note of the report of the Secretariat on technical assistance provided to States in the application of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime to new forms and dimensions of transnational
organized crime,644 including trafficking in cultural property, and the report of the Secretariat on the application of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime by States parties with respect to criminal
offences against cultural property,645
Taking note also of the publication by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime of a digest of organized
crime cases, containing a compilation of cases with commentaries and lessons learned, aimed at providing
policymakers and criminal justice practitioners with an analysis of concrete cases for the implementation of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, including with regard to trafficking in cultural
property,
Taking note further of the report of the Secretary-General,646
Recalling that the theme of the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, to be held in Qatar in 2015, will be “Integrating crime prevention and criminal justice into the wider United
Nations agenda to address social and economic challenges and to promote the rule of law at the national and
international levels, and public participation”, and considering that one of the workshops at the Congress will focus
on comprehensive and balanced approaches to prevent and adequately respond to new and emerging forms of
transnational crime, such as trafficking in cultural property,
Taking note of the report of the Secretariat on the potential utility of and improvements to the model treaty for
the prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of peoples in the form of movable property,647
1. Requests Member States to continue their efforts to effectively strengthen crime prevention and criminal
justice responses to protect cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking, including within the
framework of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime637 and the Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice;
2. Recalls its invitation to Member States, in its resolution 66/180, to protect cultural property and prevent
trafficking in such property by introducing appropriate legislation, including, in particular, procedures for its seizure,
recovery and return, as well as by promoting education, launching awareness-raising campaigns, locating and
_______________
643

See CTOC/COP/2012/15, sect. I.A.
CTOC/COP/2012/7.
645
CTOC/COP/WG.2/2012/3-CTOC/COP/WG.3/2012/4.
646
E/CN.15/2013/14.
647
UNODC/CCPCJ/EG.1/2012/2 and Add.1.
644

690

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

inventorying such property, adopting adequate security measures, developing the capacities and human resources of
monitoring institutions, such as the police and customs services, and of the tourism sector, involving the media and
disseminating information on the theft and pillaging of cultural property;
3. Invites Member States to consider, as appropriate, reviewing their legal frameworks, with a view to
providing the most extensive international cooperation possible to fully address the issue of trafficking in cultural
property, and also invites Member States to make trafficking in cultural property, including stealing and looting at
archaeological and other cultural sites, a serious crime, as defined in article 2 of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, with a view to fully utilizing that Convention for the purpose of extensive
international cooperation in fighting all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences;
4. Welcomes the recommendations of the second meeting of the open-ended intergovernmental expert
group on protection against trafficking in cultural property, held in Vienna from 27 to 29 June 2012;
5. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to solicit from Member States and relevant
international organizations information and statistical data on trafficking in cultural property, in particular on
trafficking that involves organized criminal groups, to analyse that information and report on the findings to the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-third session, and to develop in coordination
with Member States an appropriate research methodology to study trafficking in cultural property, in particular the
participation of organized criminal groups;
6. Invites Member States that have not yet done so to consider designating contact points to facilitate
international cooperation within the application of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, for the purpose of preventing and combating trafficking in cultural property, and to report such information
to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for inclusion in the directory of competent national authorities;
7. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to
Member States in the area of protection against trafficking in cultural property and related offences, upon request
and in coordination with relevant international organizations, such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), including legislative
drafting assistance in order to strengthen crime prevention and criminal justice responses in this field, and to develop
practical assistance tools for that purpose;
8. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate and in close
cooperation with relevant international organizations, such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and INTERPOL, to raise awareness of the issue of trafficking in cultural property and related
offences at the regional and international levels, including in the context of its public service announcements on
organized crime and through workshops, seminars and similar events, thereby promoting synergies with the relevant
entities of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice network;
9. Further requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to create a portal on its website
containing all documents, tools and relevant information regarding trafficking in cultural property produced by the
Office, including a link to the Database of National Cultural Heritage Laws of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the INTERPOL database on stolen works of art;
10. Welcomes the progress made in exploring the development of guidelines on crime prevention and
criminal justice responses with respect to trafficking in cultural property, and stresses the need for their expeditious
finalization, bearing in mind the importance of the matter for all Member States;
11. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to reconvene the expert group on protection
against trafficking in cultural property for Member States to review and revise the draft guidelines, taking into
account an updated compendium from the Secretariat of comments made by Member States on the draft guidelines,
with a view to finalizing and submitting the draft guidelines to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice at its twenty-third session;
12. Requests the Secretariat, pursuant to resolution 6/1 of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, entitled “Ensuring effective implementation of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto”,643 to bring the guidelines on
crime prevention and criminal justice responses with respect to trafficking in cultural property, after their adoption,
to the attention of the Conference of the Parties;
691

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

13. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue its review of the model treaty for
the prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of peoples in the form of movable property,648 taking
into account the views and comments expressed by Member States,647 and requests Member States and relevant
international organizations that have not yet done so to submit to the Secretariat their comments on the model treaty;
14. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the purposes described
above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
at its twenty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/187
A/RES/68/187

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)649

68/187. Technical assistance for implementing the international conventions and protocols related
to counter-terrorism
The General Assembly,
Recalling all General Assembly and Security Council resolutions related to technical assistance in
countering terrorism, and especially General Assembly resolutions 66/171 of 19 December 2011 on protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, 66/178 of 19 December 2011 on
technical assistance for implementing the international conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism,
67/99 of 14 December 2012 on measures to eliminate international terrorism and 67/189 of 20 December
2012 on strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in particular its
technical cooperation capacity,
Stressing again the need to strengthen international, regional and subregional cooperation to effectively
prevent and combat terrorism, in particular by enhancing the national capacity of States through the provision of
technical assistance, based on the needs and priorities identified by requesting States,
Reiterating all aspects of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy650 and the need for States to
continue to implement the Strategy,
Reiterating also that it is the primary responsibility of Member States to implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and recognizing the need to enhance the important role that the United Nations plays, in
coordination with other international, regional and subregional organizations, in facilitating coherence in the
implementation of the Strategy at the national, regional and global levels and in providing assistance, especially in
the area of capacity-building,
Recalling its resolution 66/282 of 29 June 2012 on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
review, in which it reaffirmed the Strategy, noted with appreciation the activities undertaken in the area of capacitybuilding by United Nations entities to assist Member States, upon their request, in implementing the Strategy, and
underlined the importance of greater cooperation among United Nations entities and of the work of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to ensure overall coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts
of the United Nations system and the need to continue to promote transparency and to avoid duplication,
Recalling also that in its resolution 66/282, it recognized the role that victims of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations can play, including in countering the appeal of terrorism, and noting the ongoing efforts of the
relevant United Nations entities and Member States to ensure that victims of terrorism are treated with dignity and
that their rights are recognized and protected,
_______________
648

Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990:
report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B, resolution 1, annex.
649
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
650
Resolution 60/288.

692

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling further that in its resolution 67/189, it expressed deep concern about the connections, that may exist
in some cases, between some forms of transnational organized criminal and terrorist activities, and emphasized the
need to enhance cooperation at the national, subregional, regional and international levels in order to strengthen
responses to that evolving challenge,
Expressing concern at the increased use, in a globalized society, by terrorists of new information and
communications technologies, in particular the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, inter alia, recruitment and
incitement, as well as for the financing, training, planning and preparation of their activities,
Taking note of the new technical assistance tools developed by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
including the handbook entitled “The Criminal Justice Response to Support Victims of Acts of Terrorism” and the
publication entitled “The Use of the Internet for Terrorist Purposes”,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group,
1. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the existing international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within
its mandate, in close coordination with the relevant entities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, to
continue to provide technical assistance to Member States for the ratification and legislative incorporation of those
international legal instruments;
2. Urges Member States to continue to strengthen international coordination and cooperation in order to
prevent and combat terrorism in accordance with international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, and,
when appropriate, by entering into bilateral, regional and multilateral treaties on extradition and mutual legal
assistance, and to ensure adequate training of all relevant personnel in executing international cooperation activities,
and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to provide technical assistance to
Member States to that end, including by continuing and enhancing its assistance related to international legal
cooperation pertaining to terrorism;
3. Stresses the importance of the development and maintenance of fair and effective criminal justice
systems, in accordance with applicable international law, as a fundamental basis of any strategy to counter terrorism,
and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, whenever appropriate, to take into account in its
technical assistance to counter terrorism the elements necessary for building national capacity in order to strengthen
criminal justice systems and the rule of law;
4. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to give high priority to the
implementation of an integrated approach through the promotion of its regional and thematic programmes,
including by assisting States, as requested, with the further elaboration and development of national, subregional
and regional counter-terrorism strategies;
5. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to strengthen the provision of
technical assistance to Member States, upon request and within its mandate, on effective measures, based on the rule
of law, for criminal justice responses addressing the prevention of terrorism;
6. Also calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical
assistance, upon request, for building the capacity of Member States to become a party to and implement
international conventions and protocols related to terrorism, including through targeted programmes and the training
of relevant criminal justice officials, the development of and participation in relevant initiatives and the elaboration
of technical tools and publications, in consultation with Member States;
7. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to continue to develop
specialized legal knowledge in the area of counter-terrorism and pertinent thematic areas of relevance to the
mandate of the Office and to provide assistance to requesting Member States with regard to criminal justice
responses to acts of terrorism as set out in the international legal instruments against terrorism and as detailed in
relevant General Assembly resolutions;
8. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate and pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 65/221 of 21 December 2010 and 66/178, to continue to enhance specialized legal
knowledge through the preparation of best practices, in close coordination with Member States, on assistance to and
support for victims of terrorism, including the role of victims within the criminal justice framework;
693

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Further requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to continue to
develop its specialized legal knowledge in close consultation with Member States to continue to provide assistance
to requesting Member States so as to counter the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, to support those Member
States in effectively criminalizing, investigating and prosecuting such acts in accordance with applicable
international law on due process and fully respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to encourage the
use of the Internet as a tool for countering the spread of terrorism;
10. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to strengthen its cooperation with
international organizations and relevant entities of the United Nations system, as well as with international, regional
and subregional organizations and arrangements, in the delivery of technical assistance, whenever appropriate;
11. Takes note with appreciation of the recent joint initiatives developed by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate, as well as by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force;
12. Encourages Member States to cooperate and to address, as appropriate, including through the effective
exchange of information and sharing of experiences and best practices, the links that, in some cases, may exist
between transnational organized criminal and terrorist activities in order to enhance criminal justice responses to
terrorism, and calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its relevant mandates, to support the
efforts of Member States in this regard, upon request;
13. Expresses its appreciation to Member States that have supported the technical assistance activities of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, including through financial contributions, and invites Member States to
consider making additional sustainable voluntary financial contributions, as well as providing in-kind support,
especially in view of the need for enhanced and effective delivery of technical assistance to assist Member States
with the implementation of the relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;650
14. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with sufficient
resources to carry out activities, within its mandate, to assist Member States, upon request, in the implementation of
the relevant elements of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/188
A/RES/68/188

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)651

68/188. The rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice in the United Nations development agenda
beyond 2015
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law,
Reaffirming also its commitments contained in resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, entitled “United Nations
Millennium Declaration”, and resolution 65/1 of 22 September 2010, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals”,
Reaffirming further the declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the
national and international levels,652
Noting the report on the General Assembly thematic debate on drugs and crime as a threat to development,653
held in New York on 26 June 2012,
_______________
651

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
Resolution 67/1.
653
Available on the website of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session.
652

694

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Accelerating progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals: options for sustained and inclusive growth and issues for advancing the United Nations
development agenda beyond 2015”654 and the report of the United Nations system task team on the post-2015
United Nations development agenda entitled “Realizing the future we want for all”,
Reiterating that the advancement of the rule of law at the national and international levels is essential for
sustained and inclusive economic growth, sustainable development, the eradication of poverty and hunger and the
full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, all of which in
turn reinforce the rule of law,
Reiterating also that transnational crime must be addressed in full respect for the principle of the sovereignty
of States and in accordance with the rule of law as part of a comprehensive response to promote durable solutions
through the promotion of human rights and more equitable socioeconomic conditions and, in that regard, stressing
again the importance of encouraging Member States to develop, as appropriate, comprehensive crime prevention
policies based on an understanding of the multiple factors that contribute to crime and to address such factors in a
holistic manner, while emphasizing that crime prevention should be an integral element of strategies to foster social
and economic development in all States,
Recalling its resolution 67/189 of 20 December 2012, entitled “Strengthening the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme, in particular its technical cooperation capacity”, and its resolution
67/186 of 20 December 2012, entitled “Strengthening the rule of law and the reform of criminal justice institutions,
particularly in the areas related to the United Nations system-wide approach to fighting transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking”,
Recalling also the resolution of the Ninth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders on the recommendations of the Congress on its four substantive topics, including the topic
“International cooperation and practical technical assistance for strengthening the rule of law: promoting the United
Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme”, 655 as endorsed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 50/145 of 21 December 1995, as well as the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the
Challenges of the Twenty-first Century, adopted by the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders, in 2000, and endorsed by the Assembly in its resolution 55/59 of 4 December 2000,
and the Bangkok Declaration on Synergies and Responses: Strategic Alliances in Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, adopted by the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, in 2005, and
endorsed by the Assembly in its resolution 60/177 of 16 December 2005,
Recalling further the Salvador Declaration on Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their Development in a Changing World,656 in which Member States,
inter alia, recognized the centrality of crime prevention and the criminal justice system to the rule of law and that
long-term, sustainable economic and social development and the establishment of a functioning, efficient, effective
and humane criminal justice system have a positive influence on each other,
Mindful of Economic and Social Council resolutions 2004/25 of 21 July 2004, 2005/21 of 22 July 2005 and
2006/25 of 27 July 2006 on strengthening the rule of law and the reform of criminal justice institutions, as well as
the assistance activities of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme in that area,
including in post-conflict reconstruction,
Acknowledging that the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice are
important tools for establishing fair and effective criminal justice systems that are enshrined in the rule of law and
that their use and application in the provision of technical assistance should be enhanced, as appropriate,
Stressing the importance of a well-functioning, efficient, fair, effective and humane criminal justice system as
the basis for a successful strategy against transnational organized crime, corruption, terrorism, drug trafficking and
other forms of trafficking,
Bearing in mind that the rule of law includes fostering respect for a rule of law culture and the
legislative, executive and judicial institutions needed to make and administer effective laws, and fostering
_______________
654

A/67/257.
See A/CONF.169/16/Rev.1, chap. I, resolution 1, sect. I.
656
Resolution 65/230, annex.
655

695

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

trust and confidence that law-making will be responsive to the concerns and needs of the population and that
the administration of law will be just, efficient and transparent,
Recognizing the importance of ensuring that women, on the basis of equality of men and women, fully enjoy
the benefits of the rule of law, and committed to using law to uphold their equal rights and ensure their full and equal
participation,
Concerned by urban crime, acknowledging the need for stronger coordination between security and social
policies, with a view to addressing the root causes of urban crime, and recognizing the direct relevance of urban
safety as a prerequisite to sustainable urban development and the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals,
Acknowledging the call of mayors and other stakeholders at the sixth session of the World Urban Forum, held
in Naples, Italy, in September 2012, as part of the Global Network on Safer Cities, for intensified efforts to
strengthen the integrity of the safer cities approach by means of international cooperation and United Nations
system-wide guidelines on safer cities and financing mechanisms for safer cities,
Noting the work of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, and in
particular the importance given to the rule of law and access to justice, as well as the focus on data availability and
better accountability in measuring progress, as expressed by the Panel at its meeting in Nusa Dua, Bali, Indonesia,
from 25 to 27 March 2013,
Noting with appreciation the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations system task force
on transnational organized crime and drug trafficking as threats to security and stability for the purpose of
developing within the United Nations system an effective and comprehensive approach to transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking, and reaffirming the crucial role of Member States as reflected in the Charter,
Noting the strategic priorities for the period 2013–2016 of the United Nations Development Group,
Stressing the importance of the rule of law, both nationally and internationally, as an essential element in
addressing and preventing organized crime and corruption, and noting that the rule of law requires strong and
efficient justice sector coordination, as well as coordination with other United Nations offices and activities,
Convinced that the rule of law and development are strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing and that
crime prevention and criminal justice elements that support the rule of law should therefore be considered in
implementing the post-2015 international development agenda,
1. Recognizes the cross-cutting nature of the rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice and
development, and recommends that such linkages and interrelationships be properly addressed and further elaborated;
2. Notes with appreciation the decision to hold a special event at the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly to follow up on efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals and to deliberate on
the post-2015 development agenda;
3. Underscores that the post-2015 development agenda should be guided by respect for and promotion of
the rule of law, and that crime prevention and criminal justice have an important role in that regard;
4. Stresses the need for a comprehensive approach and further involvement of the States members of the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in the discussion leading to the formation of the post-2015
United Nations development agenda, in close coordination with the Economic and Social Council and other United
Nations bodies and entities, fully taking into account the focus areas of the Millennium Development Goals;
5. Emphasizes that special attention should be placed on channelling the work of the Commission, where
appropriate, into the discussions on the post-2015 United Nations development agenda, in close consultation with
other stakeholders;
6. Notes that the main theme of the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, to be held in Qatar in 2015, is “Integrating crime prevention and criminal justice into the wider United
Nations agenda to address social and economic challenges and to promote the rule of law at the national and
international levels, and public participation”, and looks forward to fruitful discussions at the regional preparatory
meetings on that subject;
7. Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to assist Member States in
improving systems for collecting and analysing data on crime prevention and criminal justice at all levels, where
necessary, including gender-specific data, in order to promote the rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice
in the post-2015 development agenda;
696

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

8. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General towards stronger coordination and integration of rule
of law assistance, through the specialized and relevant international organizations, in order to enhance predictability,
coherence, accountability and effectiveness in delivery of the rule of law at the national and international levels, and
encourages further participation by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in such arrangements, in
particular, with regard to police, justice and corrections;
9. Urges Member States providing development assistance, in particular to countries emerging from
conflict, to increase their assistance in the areas of crime prevention and criminal justice, and recommends that such
assistance could, upon request, include elements relating to strengthening the rule of law;
10. Stresses the importance of a comprehensive approach to transitional justice, incorporating the full range
of judicial and non-judicial measures to ensure accountability and promote reconciliation while protecting the rights
of victims of crime and of abuse of power, highlighting in particular the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in supporting criminal justice reforms and strengthening the rule of law at the national and international
levels in that context;
11. Also stresses that institutions of governance and the judicial system should be gender-sensitive and that
the full participation of women needs to be promoted;
12. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide substantive contributions to the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) with regard to efforts to complement the
development of United Nations guidelines on safer cities, taking into consideration the Guidelines for Cooperation
and Technical Assistance in the Field of Urban Crime Prevention657 and the Guidelines for the Prevention of
Crime,658 and to regularly inform Member States of the progress made in that regard, with a view to receiving
comments;
13. Invites the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network to
continue to include in their work programmes the issue of the rule of law, as well as to consider exploring the
challenges posed to the rule of law and development and to develop appropriate training material;
14. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the purposes described
above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/189
A/RES/68/189

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)659

68/189. Model strategies and practical measures on the elimination of violence against children in the field of
crime prevention and criminal justice
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,660 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,661 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,661 the Convention on the Rights of the
Child,662,663 and all other relevant international treaties in this regard,
_______________
657

Economic and Social Council resolution 1995/9, annex.
Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/13, annex.
659
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
660
Resolution 217 A (III).
661
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
662
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
663
A child means every human being below the age of 18 years unless, under the law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier, in
accordance with the definition contained in article 1 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
658

697

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also the numerous international standards and norms in the field of crime prevention and criminal
justice, in particular on juvenile justice, such as the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration
of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules),664 the United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency
(the Riyadh Guidelines),665 the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty,666 the
Guidelines for Action on Children in the Criminal Justice System,667 the Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving
Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime,668 the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),669 the updated Model Strategies and Practical
Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Women in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,670
the Guidelines for Cooperation and Technical Assistance in the Field of Urban Crime Prevention,671 the Guidelines
for the Prevention of Crime672 and the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal
Justice Systems,673
Recalling further relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Human Rights Council, as well as of the Commission on Human Rights,674
Recalling the invitation to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to consider developing
a set of model strategies and practical measures on the elimination of violence against children in the field of crime
prevention and criminal justice, in consultation with all Member States and in close collaboration with all relevant
United Nations entities, in particular with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against
Children and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as contained in General
Assembly resolution 67/166 of 20 December 2012,
Noting with appreciation the important work on child rights in the context of crime prevention and criminal
justice conducted by United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Office of the High Commissioner and the United Nations Children’s Fund, and by the Special
Representative on Violence against Children and relevant mandate holders,
Noting with satisfaction the work of the Interagency Panel on Juvenile Justice and of its members, in particular
their coordination in providing technical advice and assistance in juvenile justice, and the active participation of civil
society in their respective work,
Mindful of the manual for the measurement of juvenile justice indicators, prepared jointly by the United
Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and welcoming progress made on
providing training in the use of the indicators contained therein,
Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the specific situation of children in the criminal justice
system, in particular while they are deprived of their liberty, and their vulnerability to various forms of violence,
abuse, injustice and humiliation,
1. Notes with appreciation the joint report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Special Representative of the Secretary_______________
664

Resolution 40/33, annex.
Resolution 45/112, annex.
666
Resolution 45/113, annex.
667
Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/30, annex.
668
Economic and Social Council resolution 2005/20, annex.
669
Resolution 65/229, annex.
670
Resolution 65/228, annex.
671
Economic and Social Council resolution 1995/9, annex.
672
Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/13, annex.
673
Resolution 67/187, annex.
674
Including, among recent resolutions, General Assembly resolutions 62/141 and 62/158 of 18 December 2007, 63/241 of 24 December
2008, 64/146 of 18 December 2009, 65/197 and 65/213 of 21 December 2010, 66/138 to 66/141 of 19 December 2011 and 67/152 and
67/166 of 20 December 2012; Economic and Social Council resolutions 2007/23 of 26 July 2007 and 2009/26 of 30 July 2009; and
Human Rights Council resolutions 7/29 of 28 March 2008, 10/2 of 25 March 2009, 18/12 of 29 September 2011, 19/37 of 23 March 2012
and 22/32 of 22 March 2013.
665

698

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

General on Violence against Children on prevention of and responses to violence against children within the
juvenile justice system,675 submitted to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-first session;
2. Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all United Nations standards and
norms in crime prevention and criminal justice;
3. Urges Member States to pay particular attention to the issue of child rights and the best interests of the
child in the administration of justice, in accordance with applicable United Nations standards and norms for all
children who come into contact with the criminal justice system as victims, witnesses or alleged offenders, in
particular children deprived of liberty, taking into account the age, gender, social circumstances and development
needs of such children;
4. Also urges Member States to take all necessary and effective measures, including legal reform, where
appropriate, to prevent and respond to all forms of violence against children in contact with the criminal justice
system as victims or witnesses or as children alleged as, accused of or recognized as having infringed criminal law;
5. Encourages Member States to promote, inter alia, the use of alternative measures, such as diversion and
restorative justice, to comply with the principle that deprivation of liberty of children should be used only as a
measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time, and to avoid, wherever possible, the use of
pretrial detention for children;
6. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue providing advisory services and
technical assistance to Member States, upon request, to support the implementation of United Nations standards and
norms relating to crime prevention and to child rights in the administration of criminal justice, with a view to
promoting and protecting the rights of children alleged as, accused of or recognized as having infringed criminal
law, as well as of child victims and witnesses of crime;
7. Invites the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Human Rights Council, as
well as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the High Commissioner and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, to closely coordinate their activities relating to child rights in the administration of justice
and the prevention of and responses to violence against children in the criminal justice system, in cooperation with
the Committee on the Rights of the Child;
8. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to convene a meeting of an open-ended
intergovernmental expert group, in collaboration with all relevant United Nations entities, in particular the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the High Commissioner and the Special Representative on Violence against
Children, to develop a draft set of model strategies and practical measures on the elimination of violence against
children in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, to be considered by the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice at its session following the meeting of the open-ended intergovernmental expert
group, and welcomes the offer of the Government of Thailand to act as host to that meeting in 2013;
9. Invites the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network to
include in their work programmes the issue of violence against children, develop training materials and offer
training and other capacity-building opportunities, in particular for practitioners working in the areas of crime
prevention and criminal justice and providers of support services for the victims of violence against children and for
child witnesses within the criminal justice system, and to make available and disseminate information on successful
intervention models, preventive programmes and other practices;
10. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the purposes described
above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,
at its session following the meeting of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group, on the outcome of that
meeting, as well as to the General Assembly, as appropriate.

_______________
675

A/HRC/21/25.

699

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/190
A/RES/68/190

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)676

68/190. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and inspired by the determination
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, and in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small,
Bearing in mind the long-standing concern of the United Nations for the humanization of criminal justice and
the protection of human rights,
Reaffirming the importance of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal
justice, and especially of promoting their implementation,
Re-emphasizing that, in the Salvador Declaration on Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their Development in a Changing World, 677 Member States
recognized that an effective, fair and humane criminal justice system was based on the commitment to uphold the
protection of human rights in the administration of justice and the prevention and control of crime and
acknowledged the value and impact of the United Nations standards and norms in designing and implementing
national crime prevention and criminal justice policies, laws, procedures and programmes,
Recalling its resolution 65/230 of 21 December 2010, entitled “Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice”, in which it requested the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
to establish an open-ended intergovernmental expert group to exchange information on best practices, as well as
national legislation and existing international law, and on the revision of existing United Nations standard minimum
rules for the treatment of prisoners so that they reflect recent advances in correctional science and best practices,
with a view to making recommendations to the Commission on possible next steps, and requested the expert group
to report to the Commission on progress in its work,
Recalling also its resolution 67/188 of 20 December 2012, in which it authorized the open-ended
intergovernmental Expert Group on the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners to continue its
work, within its mandate, with a view to reporting on its progress to the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice at its twenty-second session,
Recognizing that the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners 678 remain the universally
acknowledged minimum standards for the detention of prisoners,
Taking into account the progressive development of international instruments relevant to the treatment of
prisoners since 1955, in particular the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment679 and the Optional Protocol thereto,680
Taking into account also the relevance of other United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and
criminal justice related to the treatment of prisoners, namely, the procedures for the effective implementation of the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,681 the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons
_______________
676

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
Resolution 65/230, annex.
678
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal Instruments (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
679
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
680
Ibid., vol. 2375, No. 24841.
681
Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/47, annex.
677

700

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment,682 the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials,683 the Basic
Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners,684 the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of
Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules),685 the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their
Liberty,686 the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules),687 the United
Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok
Rules)688 and the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems,689
Mindful of its resolution 67/166 of 20 December 2012 on human rights in the administration of justice, in
which it recognized the importance of the principle that, except for those lawful limitations that are demonstrably
necessitated by the fact of incarceration, persons deprived of their liberty shall retain their non-derogable human
rights and all other human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Aware that, in its resolution 67/166, it took note of general comment No. 21 on the humane treatment of
persons deprived of their liberty, adopted by the Human Rights Committee,690 and stated its awareness of the need
for special vigilance with regard to the specific situation of children, juveniles and women in the administration of
justice, in particular while they are deprived of their liberty, and their vulnerability to various forms of violence,
abuse and humiliation,
Recalling that, in its resolution 67/184 of 20 December 2012 on follow-up to the Twelfth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations for the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, it decided that one of the workshops to be held within the framework of the
Thirteenth Congress would be devoted to the topic “Role of the United Nations standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice in support of effective, fair, humane and accountable criminal justice systems:
experiences and lessons learned in meeting the unique needs of women and children, in particular the treatment and
social reintegration of offenders”,
Taking note with appreciation of the work done by the Expert Group at its meetings held in Vienna691 and in
Buenos Aires,692 and mindful of the progress achieved at those meetings,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Argentina for hosting the second meeting of the Expert
Group on the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, held in Buenos Aires from 11 to
13 December 2012, and expresses its appreciation for the work done and the progress made at that meeting;
2. Takes note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat examining the preliminary areas for possible
consideration, and recognizes that, to a large extent, the paper has captured issues and identified rules of the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners678 to be considered for a comprehensive revision under
each preliminary area;
3. Expresses appreciation for the submissions of Member States in response to the request to exchange
information on best practices and on the revision of the existing Standard Minimum Rules;
4. Recognizes the need for the Expert Group to take into account the social, legal and cultural specificities
of Member States;
5. Takes into consideration the recommendations of the Expert Group with regard to the issues and the
rules of the Standard Minimum Rules identified for revision,693 in the following areas:
(a)

Respect for prisoners’ inherent dignity and value as human beings (rules 6, para. 1; 57–59; and 60, para. 1);

_______________
682

Resolution 43/173, annex.
Resolution 34/169, annex.
684
Resolution 45/111, annex.
685
Resolution 40/33, annex.
686
Resolution 45/113, annex.
687
Resolution 45/110, annex.
688
Resolution 65/229, annex.
689
Resolution 67/187, annex.
690
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/47/40), annex VI.B.
691
E/CN.15/2012/18.
692
E/CN.15/2013/23.
693
E/CN.15/2013/23, paras. 15–24, and UNODC/CCPCJ/EG.6/2012/4, paras. 7–16.
683

701

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(b)

Medical and health services (rules 22–26; 52; 62; and 71, para. 2);

(c) Disciplinary action and punishment, including the role of medical staff, solitary confinement and
reduction of diet (rules 27, 29, 31 and 32);
(d) Investigations of all deaths in custody, as well as of any signs or allegations of torture or inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment of prisoners (rules 7, proposed 44 bis and proposed 54 bis);
(e) Protection and special needs of vulnerable groups deprived of their liberty, taking into consideration
countries in difficult circumstances (rules 6 and 7);
(f)

The right of access to legal representation (rules 30; 35, para. 1; 37; and 93);

(g)

Complaints and independent inspection (rules 36 and 55);

(h)

The replacement of outdated terminology (rules 22–26, 62, 82 and 83 and various others);

(i)

Training of relevant staff to implement the Standard Minimum Rules (rule 47);

6. Decides to extend the mandate of the Expert Group, authorizing it to continue its work within its
mandate with a view to reporting to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-third
session, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the required services and support are provided for this
purpose;
7. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Brazil for its readiness to host a further meeting of the
Expert Group to continue the revision process;
8. Invites Member States to continue to be engaged in the revision process by submitting to the Secretariat,
by 30 September 2013, proposals for revision in the nine areas identified above and to participate actively in the
next meeting of the Expert Group, and invites civil society and relevant United Nations bodies to contribute to the
process;
9. Requests the Secretariat to prepare a working paper integrating all inputs received from Member States,
pursuant to paragraph 8 above,694 for consideration at the next meeting of the Expert Group;
10. Reiterates that any changes to the Standard Minimum Rules should not lower any of the existing
standards but should improve them so that they reflect the recent advances in correctional science and good
practices, so as to promote safety, security and humane conditions for prisoners;
11. Takes note of the contribution received from the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment of the Committee against Torture and other submissions
received for consideration,695 and underlines in this regard the valuable contribution of civil society in this process;
12. Encourages Member States to improve conditions in detention, consistent with the principles of the
Standard Minimum Rules and all other relevant and applicable international standards and norms, to continue
exchanging good practices, such as those regarding conflict resolution in detention facilities, including in the area of
technical assistance, to identify challenges faced in implementing the Rules and share their experiences in dealing
with those challenges, and to provide relevant information in that regard to their experts participating in the
Expert Group;
13. Recommends that Member States endeavour to reduce overcrowding and pretrial detention, where
appropriate; promote increased access to justice and legal defence mechanisms; reinforce alternatives to
imprisonment such as fines, community service, restorative justice and electronic monitoring; and support
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, in accordance with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules);687
_______________
694

Those inputs include the proposal by the Governments of Argentina, Brazil, South Africa, the United States of America, Uruguay and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), circulated in a conference room paper at the twenty-second session of the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice.
695
Including the summary of an expert meeting held at the University of Essex, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, on
3 and 4 October 2012 on the review of the Standard Minimum Rules.

702

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue to promote the use and application of the
United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice by, inter alia, providing advisory
services and technical assistance to Member States on request, including assistance in criminal justice and law
reform and in the organization of training for law enforcement and criminal justice personnel and support in the
administration and management of penal and penitentiary systems, thus contributing to the upgrading of their
efficiency and capabilities;
15. Reaffirms the important role of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme
network, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council in contributing to the dissemination, promotion and practical application of the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, in accordance with the procedures for the effective
implementation of the Rules;681
16. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the purposes described
above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations.
RESOLUTION 68/191
A/RES/68/191

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)696

68/191. Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that the global prevalence of different manifestations of the gender-related killing of women
and girls697 is reaching alarming proportions,
Concerned about violent gender-related killing of women and girls, while recognizing efforts made to address
that form of violence in different regions, including in countries where the concept of femicide or feminicide has
been incorporated into national legislation,
Aware that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights698 affirms the principle of the inadmissibility of
discrimination and proclaims that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in the Declaration, especially to the right to life, liberty and security of
person, without distinction of any kind, including distinction based on sex,
Emphasizing the importance of the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women,699 which
defines violence against women as any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical,
sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation
of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private spheres,
Conscious of the commitments undertaken by States parties through the adoption of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,700 which requires State parties to take all appropriate
political, social, economic and cultural measures, including legislation, to ensure the full development and
advancement of women, for the purpose of guaranteeing them the exercise and enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms on a basis of equality with men, taking into account the Optional Protocol to the
Convention,701
_______________
696

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
Gender-related killing of women and girls is criminalized in some countries as “femicide” or “feminicide” and has been incorporated as
such into national legislation in those countries.
698
Resolution 217 A (III).
699
Resolution 48/104.
700
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
701
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
697

703

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking into consideration the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted at the Fourth World
Conference on Women,702 which identifies violence against women as an obstacle to the achievement of the
objectives of equality, development and peace, while emphasizing that such violence both violates and impairs or
nullifies the enjoyment by women of their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and reaffirming that discrimination on the basis of sex is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other international human rights
instruments and that the elimination of such discrimination is an integral part of efforts towards the elimination of all
forms of violence against women,
Stressing that States have the obligation to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all, including women and girls, and must exercise due diligence to prevent and investigate acts of violence against
women and girls and punish the perpetrators, eliminate impunity and provide protection to the victims, and that
failure to do so violates and impairs or nullifies the enjoyment by victims of their human rights and fundamental
freedoms,
Bearing in mind the actions and measures that Member States should take to meet their international
obligations with respect to putting an end to violence against women and girls,
Recalling the relevant General Assembly resolutions addressing various aspects of violence against women
and girls of all ages,
Stressing the significance of the updated Model Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of
Violence against Women in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice703 as a way to assist countries in
strengthening their national crime prevention and criminal justice capacities to respond to all forms of violence
against women,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences704 and Human Rights Council resolution 20/12 of 5 July 2012 on accelerating efforts to eliminate all
forms of violence against women: remedies for women who have been subjected to violence,705
Taking note with appreciation of the agreed conclusions of the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on the
Status of Women of 15 March 2013,706 in which, inter alia, the Commission urged all Governments to strengthen
national legislation, where appropriate, to punish violent gender-related killing of women and girls and integrate
specific mechanisms or policies to prevent, investigate and eradicate such deplorable forms of gender-based
violence,
Taking note with appreciation also of the various initiatives taken at the regional level to prevent and address
violence against women, including, for example, the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and
Eradication of Violence against Women, the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the
Rights of Women in Africa, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention on Preventing and
Combating Trafficking in Women and Children for Prostitution, the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence
against Women in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Region, the Council of Europe Convention on
Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence and the Council of Europe Convention
on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings,
Expressing its appreciation for the work undertaken by the United Nations system in preventing and
responding to all forms of violence against women and girls,
_______________
702
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
703
Resolution 65/228, annex.
704
A/HRC/20/16.
705
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. IV, sect. A.
706
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27).

704

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Viewing with appreciation the considerable input of many civil society organizations, as well as academia, in
addressing the different forms of violence against women and girls, through research and direct action in their
respective communities,
Alarmed by the fact that violence against women and girls is among the least punished crimes in the world,
Deeply concerned about the high level of impunity with regard to gender-related killing of women and girls,
and recognizing the key role of the criminal justice system in preventing and responding to gender-related killing of
women and girls, including in ending impunity for such crimes,
Reaffirming the commitment to working together to put an end to such crimes, in full compliance with
international and national legal instruments,
1. Urges Member States to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish acts of
violence against women and girls, in accordance with national laws;
2. Also urges Member States to consider undertaking institutional initiatives, as appropriate, to improve the
prevention of gender-related killing of women and girls and the provision of legal protection, including appropriate
remedies, reparation and compensation, to the victims of such crimes, in accordance with applicable national and
international law and taking into account, as appropriate, the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims
of Crime and Abuse of Power;707
3. Invites Member States to adopt a variety of measures, including preventive measures and the enactment
and implementation of legislation, that address gender-related killing of women and girls and to periodically review
those measures with a view to improving them;
4. Urges Member States, acting at all levels, to end impunity by ensuring accountability and punishing
perpetrators of those heinous crimes against women and girls;
5. Also urges Member States, as appropriate, to consider designing, implementing and evaluating
comprehensive programmes aimed at preventing all forms of violence against women and girls and reducing related
vulnerabilities of victims, as well as those risks unique to perpetrators of gender-related killing of women and girls,
including by conducting research focused on public education and interventions that target those vulnerabilities
and risks;
6. Invites Member States to strengthen the criminal justice response to gender-related killing of women and
girls, in particular measures to support the capacity of Member States to investigate, prosecute and punish all forms
of such crime and provide reparation and/or compensation to victims and their families or dependents, as
appropriate, in accordance with national laws;
7. Also invites Member States to address the existing problems of underreporting by enhancing data
collection and analysis, as well as sharing relevant data, in accordance with national laws, and related information
on gender-related killing of women and girls, in order to inform the formulation, monitoring and evaluation of laws,
policies and programmes;
8. Calls upon Member States to give due consideration to the updated Model Strategies and Practical
Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Women in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice703 in
order to strengthen national responses to gender-related killing of women and girls;
9. Encourages relevant United Nations entities and agencies, in particular the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), to support Member States in developing and implementing strategies and policies, upon request, at
the national, regional and international levels to address and prevent gender-related killing of women and girls;
10. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the institutes of the United Nations
crime prevention and criminal justice programme network to facilitate the gathering and dissemination of relevant
and reliable data and other related information to be provided by Member States on their efforts to implement the
present resolution;
_______________
707

Resolution 40/34, annex.

705

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

11. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the institutes of the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme network to continue conducting and coordinating relevant research on
gender-related killing of women and girls, particularly in connection with the standardization of the collection and
analysis of data;
12. Encourages relevant United Nations entities and agencies, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
UN-Women and other specialized funds and programmes of the United Nations, to raise awareness among Member
States regarding gender-related killing of women and girls;
13. Invites Member States to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with information
related to best practices and other relevant information related to the investigation and prosecution of these crimes,
in accordance with national legislation, and in that regard encourages civil society organizations and academia to
share relevant information with the Office;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to convene an open-ended intergovernmental expert group meeting to
discuss ways and means to more effectively prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish gender-related killing of
women and girls, with a view to making practical recommendations, drawing also on current best practices, in
consultation with relevant United Nations entities and human rights mechanisms, and welcomes the offer of the
Government of Thailand to act as host to that meeting;
15. Invites Member States to give due consideration to ending violence against women and girls, as well as
to the realization of gender equality and empowerment of women in the elaboration of the post-2015 development
agenda;
16. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary contributions for the purposes
described above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/192
A/RES/68/192

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)708

68/192. Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, which
constitutes an offence and a serious threat to human dignity and physical integrity, human rights and development,
Reiterating its concern that, despite sustained measures taken at the international, regional and national levels,
trafficking in persons remains one of the grave challenges facing the international community, which also impairs
the enjoyment of human rights and needs a more concerted collective and comprehensive international response,
Bearing in mind that all States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish
perpetrators of trafficking in persons and to rescue victims, as well as to provide for their protection, and that not
doing so violates and impairs or nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the
victims,
_______________
708
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Iceland, India, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Mexico, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).

706

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the commitment made by world leaders at the Millennium Summit,709 the 2005 World Summit710
and the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held in
2010,711 to devise, enforce and strengthen effective measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in
persons, to counter the demand for trafficked victims and to protect the victims,
Recalling the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,712 the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,713 which provided the definition of the crime of trafficking in
persons, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography714 and the Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and
Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery,715
Recognizing the significance of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010, and underlining the importance of its full
implementation,
Reaffirming that the Global Plan of Action was developed:
(a) To promote universal ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, as
well as other relevant international instruments that address trafficking in persons, and to reinforce the
implementation of existing instruments against trafficking in persons,
(b) To help Member States reinforce their political commitments and legal obligations to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons,
(c) To promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent responses at the national, regional and
international levels to counter trafficking in persons,
(d) To promote a human rights-based, gender- and age-sensitive approach in addressing all factors that
make people vulnerable to trafficking in persons and in strengthening the criminal justice response, which are
necessary to prevent trafficking in persons, protect victims and prosecute perpetrators,
(e) To raise awareness within the United Nations system and also among States and other stakeholders, such
as the private sector, civil society and the international and national mass media, and the public at large,
(f) To foster cooperation and coordination among all relevant stakeholders, including Member States,
international organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector, and within various entities of the
United Nations system, taking into account existing best practices and lessons learned,
Recalling its resolutions 61/180 of 20 December 2006, 64/178 of 18 December 2009 and 67/190 of
20 December 2012 on improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons and other relevant
General Assembly resolutions on trafficking in persons,716
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/41 of 25 July 2013 on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and previous Council resolutions on
trafficking in persons,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolution 23/5 of 13 June 2013, entitled “Trafficking in persons,
especially women and children: efforts to combat human trafficking in supply chains of businesses”,717 and other
relevant resolutions of the Council on trafficking in persons,
_______________
709

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
711
Resolution 65/1.
712
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
713
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
714
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
715
Ibid., vol. 266, No. 3822.
716
Resolutions 55/67, 58/137, 59/166, 61/144, 63/156 and 63/194.
717
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
710

707

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the adoption of the Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development,718 held on 3 and 4 October 2013, and the commitment by Member States, inter alia, to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons, to protect victims of trafficking, stressing the need to establish or upgrade, as
appropriate, national and regional anti-human trafficking policies, and to reinforce cooperation on prevention, the
prosecution of traffickers and the protection of victims of trafficking,
Recognizing the important role of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons in
fostering coordination and cooperation in the global fight against trafficking in persons, in particular the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the International Labour
Organization, the International Organization for Migration, the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other
intergovernmental organizations, within their existing mandates,
Recognizing also that the Inter-Agency Coordination Group, within its mandate, contributes to the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action, and taking note with appreciation of the activities of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as coordinator of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group,
Emphasizing the central role of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the global fight
against trafficking in persons, particularly in providing technical assistance to implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
by making use of existing capacity-building tools, lessons learned and expertise available in international
organizations, including the International Framework for Action to Implement the Trafficking in Persons Protocol,
Recognizing the need to continue to foster a global partnership against trafficking in persons and the need to
continue to work towards an enhanced comprehensive and coordinated approach to prevent and combat trafficking
and to protect and assist victims of trafficking in persons through the appropriate national, regional and international
mechanisms,
Recognizing also the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and international cooperation mechanisms
and initiatives, including information exchanges on good practices, of Governments and of intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to address the problem of trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
Stressing the need to protect victims of trafficking from being incarcerated and prosecuted even when States
have inadequate or no formal procedures for their identification,
Recognizing that broad international cooperation between Member States and relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations is essential for effectively countering the threat of trafficking in persons and other
contemporary forms of slavery,
Recognizing also that victims of trafficking are often subject to multiple forms of discrimination and violence,
including on the grounds of gender, age, disability, ethnicity, culture and religion, as well as national or social origin,
and that these forms of discrimination may themselves fuel trafficking in persons, and that women and children
without nationality or without birth registration are particularly vulnerable to trafficking in persons,
Stressing the need to promote and protect the rights of victims of trafficking in persons and to reintegrate
victims into the community, including by taking into account, where appropriate, the Recommended Principles and
Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking719 and the commentary thereon developed by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the Guidelines on the Protection of Child Victims
of Trafficking developed by the United Nations Children’s Fund,
Welcoming the efforts of Member States, United Nations agencies, international organizations, civil society
organizations and the private sector to address the problem of trafficking in persons, including women and girls as
the most vulnerable group, and encouraging them to further enhance their efforts and cooperation, including by
sharing their knowledge and best practices as widely as possible,
_______________
718
719

708

Resolution 68/4.
E/2002/68/Add.1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Affirming that capacity-building is a very important component in combating trafficking in persons, and in this
regard stressing the need to intensify international cooperation to combat trafficking in persons, as well as technical
assistance for countries aimed at strengthening their ability to prevent all forms of trafficking, including supporting
their development programmes,
Recognizing that the Global Plan of Action and the establishment of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, established in compliance with the Global
Plan of Action, aim at raising awareness of the situation of victims of human trafficking and at providing them with
humanitarian, legal and financial aid through established channels of assistance, such as governmental,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Reaffirming the importance of humanitarian, legal and financial aid to victims of trafficking in persons,
including through governmental, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, including the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children and the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children,720
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the mandates of the United
Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, with particular reference to the technical cooperation
activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,721 which provides, inter alia, information on progress
made in improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons and in the implementation by the United
Nations system of the Global Plan of Action,
Taking note further of the outcomes of the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, held in Vienna from 15 to 19 October 2012,722 and of the fifth
session of the Working Group on Trafficking in Persons, held in Vienna from 6 to 8 November 2013,723
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, the Conference
of the Parties to the Convention is established to improve the capacity of States parties to combat transnational
organized crime and to promote and review the implementation of the Convention, including the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
Recalling its resolution 59/156 of 20 December 2004, and expressing its serious concern about the number of
reported incidents of trafficking in persons for the purpose of removal of organs and the ongoing lack of reliable
data in that regard,
Recalling also its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries,
1. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to, as a matter of
priority, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime712 and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,713 taking into consideration the central role of those instruments
in the fight against trafficking in persons, and also urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully
and effectively;
2. Urges Member States and other stakeholders mentioned in the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, and invites the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, within their
_______________
720

A/HRC/23/48.
A/68/127.
722
See CTOC/COP/2012/15, sect. I.A.
723
See CTOC/COP/WG.4/2013/5.
721

709

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

respective mandates, to continue to contribute to the full and effective implementation of the Global Plan of Action,
including by means of strengthening cooperation and improving coordination among themselves in achieving
that goal;
3. Welcomes the holding of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly during its sixty-seventh
session, from 13 to 15 May 2013, to appraise the progress achieved in the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action, which, inter alia, evinced strong political will to step up efforts against trafficking in persons;
4. Decides to appraise, from within existing resources, on a four-year basis, starting at its seventy-second
session, the progress achieved in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action in order to assess achievements,
gaps and challenges, including in the implementation of the relevant legal instruments, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take all necessary measures in that regard;
5. Also decides, in the context of the need for raising awareness of the situation of victims of human
trafficking and for the promotion and protection of their rights, to designate 30 July as the World Day against
Trafficking in Persons, to be observed every year beginning in 2014, invites all Member States, relevant agencies of
the United Nations system and other international organizations, as well as civil society, to observe the World Day,
and notes that the costs of all activities that may arise should be met from voluntary contributions;
6. Expresses support for the activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, reaffirms its
request to the Secretary-General to provide adequate support to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, and invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to the Office for the purpose of providing
assistance to Member States upon request;
7. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to cooperate with relevant international
organizations outside the United Nations system and to invite such organizations and interested Member States to
participate, when appropriate, in the meetings of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in
Persons and to keep Member States informed of the schedule of and the progress made by the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group;
8. Invites the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in its capacity as coordinator of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group, and other relevant agencies of the United Nations system, to continue to increase their
activities related to the implementation of relevant international instruments and the Global Plan of Action;
9. Invites Member States to address the social, economic, cultural, political and other factors that make
people vulnerable to trafficking in persons, such as poverty, unemployment, inequality, humanitarian emergencies,
including armed conflicts and natural disasters, sexual violence, gender discrimination and social exclusion and
marginalization, as well as a culture of tolerance towards violence against women, youth and children;
10. Calls upon Member States, international organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector
to increase and support prevention efforts in countries of origin, transit and destination by focusing on the demand
that fosters all forms of trafficking and the goods and services produced as a result of trafficking in persons;
11. Calls upon Member States to continue their efforts to criminalize trafficking in persons in all its forms,
including for labour exploitation and commercial sexual exploitation of children, including by tourists, to condemn
these practices and to investigate, prosecute and penalize traffickers and intermediaries while providing protection
and assistance to the victims of trafficking with full respect for their human rights, and invites Member States to
continue to support those United Nations agencies and international organizations that are actively involved in
victim protection;
12. Invites the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Working Group on
Trafficking in Persons, pursuant to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, to
consider the need for meetings of representatives of national coordinating mechanisms on combating trafficking in
persons, with a view to facilitating, inter alia, better international coordination and information exchange on good
practices to address the problem of trafficking in persons;
13. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in its capacity as fund manager of the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, to continue to
encourage contributions by States and all other relevant stakeholders to the Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children;
710

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Welcomes the publication of the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2012 prepared by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, looks forward to the next such report to be produced by the Office in 2014,
pursuant to the Global Plan of Action, and encourages Member States to provide to the Office evidence-based data
on patterns, forms and flows of trafficking in persons, including for the purpose of the removal of organs;
15. Invites Member States to give due consideration to the commitment on combating trafficking in persons
made by world leaders at the Millennium Summit,709 the 2005 World Summit710 and the high-level plenary meeting
of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held in 2010,711 in elaborating the post-2015
development agenda;
16. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other members of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group to continue to contribute in line with their existing mandates to the implementation of the
Global Plan of Action, and in this regard invites the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other members
of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group to elaborate, in cooperation with Member States, a list of concrete
measures planned until 2017 aimed at implementing the Global Plan of Action and to present it in an appropriate
manner to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
17. Invites Member States and other international and bilateral donors to provide voluntary contributions for
these purposes, in accordance with the policies, rules and procedures of the United Nations;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to resume the preparation of a separate report on the implementation of
the present resolution and to submit the next report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/193
A/RES/68/193

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)724

68/193. Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in
particular its technical cooperation capacity
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 46/152 of 18 December 1991, 60/1 of 16 September 2005, 67/1 of 24 September
2012 and 67/186, 67/189, 67/190 and 67/192 of 20 December 2012,
Reaffirming also its resolutions relating to the urgent need to strengthen international cooperation and technical
assistance in promoting and facilitating the ratification and implementation of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,725 the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as
amended by the 1972 Protocol, 726 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 727 the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,728 the United Nations
Convention against Corruption729 and all the international conventions and protocols against terrorism,
_______________
724

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Zimbabwe.
725
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
726
Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.
727
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
728
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
729
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

711

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming further the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem730 adopted by the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session,
Reaffirming the commitments undertaken by Member States in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy adopted on 8 September 2006 731 and its successive biennial reviews, 732 and looking forward to the
forthcoming review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June 2014,
Reaffirming also its resolutions addressing various aspects of violence against women and girls of all ages,
Recalling the resolutions of the Human Rights Commission and the Human Rights Council addressing
various aspects of violence against women and girls of all ages,
Recalling also the agreed conclusions of the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
which addressed the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence against women and girls,733 and reiterating
the importance of crime prevention and criminal justice measures for the protection of women and girls,
Noting the significance of the updated Model Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of
Violence against Women in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice734 as a way to assist countries in
strengthening their national crime prevention and criminal justice capacities to respond to all forms of violence
against women and girls,
Reiterating its condemnation of all forms of violence against women and girls, expressing deep concern about
gender-related killing of women and girls, and recognizing the key role of the criminal justice system in preventing
and responding to gender-related killing of women and girls, including by ending impunity for such crimes,
Emphasizing the relevance of international instruments and United Nations standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice related to the treatment of prisoners, in particular women and juveniles,
Recalling the adoption of its resolution 65/229 of 21 December 2010 on the United Nations Rules for the
Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules), and in this
regard encouraging the efforts of Member States to implement the Bangkok Rules,
Recalling also the adoption of its resolution 67/184 of 20 December 2012 on follow-up to the Twelfth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations for the Thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, in which it decided, inter alia, that the main theme of the
Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice would be “Integrating crime
prevention and criminal justice into the wider United Nations agenda to address social and economic challenges and
to promote the rule of law at the national and international levels, and public participation”,
Recalling further its resolution 66/177 of 19 December 2011 on strengthening international cooperation in
combating the harmful effects of illicit financial flows resulting from criminal activities, in which it urged States
parties to the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of
1988, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption to apply fully the provisions of those Conventions, in particular measures to prevent and combat
money-laundering, including by criminalizing the laundering of proceeds of transnational organized crime,
Taking into consideration all relevant Economic and Social Council resolutions, in particular all those relating
to the strengthening of international cooperation, as well as the technical assistance and advisory services of the
United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in the fields of crime prevention and criminal justice, promotion and reinforcement of the rule of law and reform of
criminal justice institutions, including with regard to the implementation of technical assistance,
_______________
730

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.
Resolution 60/288.
732
See resolutions 62/272, 64/297 and 66/282.
733
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
734
Resolution 65/228, annex.
731

712

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Concerned at the growing involvement of organized criminal groups in all forms and aspects of trafficking in
cultural property and related offences,
Recalling its resolution 66/180 of 19 December 2011 on strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice
responses to protect cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking, in which it urged Member States and
relevant institutions to reinforce and fully implement mechanisms to strengthen international cooperation, including
mutual legal assistance, in order to combat all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related
offences, such as the theft, looting, damage, removal, pillage and destruction of cultural property, and to facilitate the
recovery and the return of stolen and looted cultural property, and its resolution 67/80 of 12 December 2012 on the
return or restitution of cultural property to the country of origin,
Recalling also its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010 on the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, reaffirming the need for the full implementation of the Global Plan of Action, expressing the
view that it will, inter alia, enhance cooperation and better coordination of efforts in fighting trafficking in persons
and promote increased ratification and full implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,735 and welcoming
the work of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children,
Noting Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolutions 22/7 of 26 April 2013 on
strengthening international cooperation to combat cybercrime736 and 22/8 of 26 April 2013 on promoting technical
assistance and capacity-building to strengthen national measures and international cooperation against
cybercrime,736
Noting with appreciation the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations system task force
on transnational organized crime and drug trafficking for the purpose of developing an effective and comprehensive
approach to transnational organized crime and drug trafficking within the United Nations system, and reaffirming
the crucial role of Member States in this regard, as reflected in the Charter of the United Nations,
Expressing its grave concern at the negative effects of transnational organized crime, including smuggling of
and trafficking in human beings, narcotic drugs and small arms and light weapons, on development, peace and
security and human rights, and at the increasing vulnerability of States to such crime,
Convinced that the rule of law and development are strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing and that the
advancement of the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through crime prevention and
criminal justice mechanisms, is essential for sustained and inclusive economic growth and sustainable development
and the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, all of
which, in turn, reinforce the rule of law,
Stressing the importance of strengthened international cooperation, based on the principles of shared
responsibility and in accordance with international law, in order to dismantle illicit networks and counter the world
drug problem and transnational organized crime, including money-laundering, trafficking in persons, trafficking in
arms and other forms of organized crime, all of which threaten national security and undermine sustainable
development and the rule of law,
Convinced of the importance of preventing youth crime, supporting the rehabilitation of young offenders and
their reintegration into society, protecting child victims and witnesses, including efforts to prevent their
revictimization, and addressing the needs of children of prisoners, and stressing that such responses should take into
account the human rights and best interests of children and young people, as called for in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto,737 where applicable, and in other relevant United Nations
standards and norms in juvenile justice, where appropriate,
_______________
735

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (E/2013/30 and Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. D.
737
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 1577, 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
736

713

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Concerned by the serious challenges and threats posed by the illicit trafficking in firearms, their parts and
components and ammunition, and concerned about its links with other forms of transnational organized crime,
including drug trafficking and other criminal activities, including terrorism,
Deeply concerned about the connections, in some cases, between some forms of transnational organized crime
and terrorism, and emphasizing the need to enhance cooperation at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels in order to strengthen responses to this evolving challenge,
Expressing concern at the growing involvement of organized criminal groups, as well as the substantial
increase in the volume, the rate of transnational occurrence and the range of criminal offences, related to illicit
trafficking in precious metals in some parts of the world, and the potential use of illicit trafficking in precious metals
as a source of funding for organized crime,
Concerned about the growing degree of penetration of criminal organizations and their proceeds into the
economy,
Recognizing that actions against transnational organized crime and terrorism are a common and shared
responsibility, and stressing the need to work collectively to prevent and combat transnational organized crime,
corruption and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
Emphasizing that transnational organized crime must be addressed in full respect for the principle of the
sovereignty of States and in accordance with the rule of law as part of a comprehensive response to promote durable
solutions through the promotion of human rights and more equitable socioeconomic conditions,
Expressing deep concern about environmental crimes, including trafficking in endangered and, where
applicable, protected species of wild fauna and flora, and emphasizing the need to combat such crimes by
strengthening international cooperation, capacity-building, criminal justice responses and law enforcement efforts,
Emphasizing that coordinated action is critical to eliminate corruption and disrupt the illicit networks that drive
and enable trafficking in wildlife, timber and timber products harvested in contravention of national laws,
Encouraging Member States to develop and implement, as appropriate, comprehensive crime prevention
policies, national and local strategies and action plans based on an understanding of the multiple factors that
contribute to crime and to address such factors in a holistic manner, in close cooperation with all stakeholders,
including civil society,
Recognizing the need to maintain a balance in the technical cooperation capacity of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime between all relevant priorities identified by the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council,
Stressing that social development should be an integral element of strategies to foster crime prevention and
economic development in all States,
Recognizing that, thanks to its broad membership and wide scope of application, the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime offers an important basis for international cooperation, inter alia,
for extradition, mutual legal assistance and confiscation, and represents in this regard a useful tool that should be
further utilized,
Mindful of the need to ensure universal adherence to and full implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, and urging States parties to make full
and effective use of these instruments,
Emphasizing the importance of integrating crime prevention and criminal justice into the wider United
Nations agenda to address, inter alia, social and economic challenges and to promote the rule of law at the national
and international levels, and public participation,
Noting the important contribution that public-private sector cooperation can make in efforts to prevent
criminal activities, including terrorism, in the tourism sector,
Recognizing the universal importance of good governance and the fight against corruption, and calling for
zero tolerance for corruption in all its forms, including bribery, as well as the laundering of proceeds of corruption
and other forms of economic crime,
714

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling the United Nations Convention against Corruption, which is the most comprehensive and universal
instrument on corruption, and recognizing the need to continue promoting ratification or accession to the
Convention and of its full implementation,
Welcoming the adoption by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime of a regional approach to
programming, based on continuing consultations and partnerships at the national and regional levels, particularly on
its implementation, and focused on ensuring that the Office responds in a sustainable and coherent manner to the
priorities of Member States,
Recognizing the general progress made by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the delivery of
advisory services and assistance to requesting Member States in the areas of crime prevention and criminal justice
reform, corruption, organized crime, money-laundering, terrorism, kidnapping, smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons, including the support and protection, as appropriate, of victims, their families and witnesses,
as well as drug trafficking and international cooperation, with special emphasis on extradition and mutual legal
assistance and the international transfer of sentenced persons,
Reiterating its concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General prepared pursuant to resolutions
64/293, 67/186, 67/189, 67/190 and 67/192;738
2. Reaffirms that the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols
thereto725 represent the most important tools of the international community to fight transnational organized crime;
3. Notes with appreciation that the number of States parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime has reached 179, which is a significant indication of the commitment shown by the
international community to combat transnational organized crime;
4. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,726 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,727 the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,728 the
United Nations Convention against Corruption729 and the international conventions and protocols related to
terrorism, and urges States parties to those conventions and protocols to make efforts towards their full
implementation;
5. Reiterates the need for the establishment of, inter alia, a transparent, efficient, non-intrusive, inclusive
and impartial mechanism for the review of the implementation of the Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocols thereto, aimed at assisting States parties in the full and effective application of those
instruments, and, bearing in mind the urgent need to improve the implementation of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto, invites Member States to continue the dialogue regarding the establishment of such a mechanism,
particularly in view of the holding of the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime in 2014;
6. Notes with appreciation the work of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to conduct a
comprehensive study of the problem of cybercrime and responses to it by Member States, the international
community and the private sector, including the exchange of information on national legislation, best practices,
technical assistance and international cooperation, with a view to examining options to strengthen existing and to
propose new national and international, legal or other responses to cybercrime, and encourages the expert group to
enhance its efforts to complete its work and to present the outcome of the study to the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice in due course;
7. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme in
promoting effective action to strengthen international cooperation in crime prevention and criminal justice, as well
as of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the fulfilment of its mandate in crime prevention
_______________
738

A/68/127.

715

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and criminal justice, including providing to Member States, upon request and as a matter of high priority, technical
cooperation, advisory services and other forms of assistance, and coordinating with and complementing the work of
all relevant and competent United Nations bodies and offices;
8. Underscores that the post-2015 development agenda should be guided by respect for and promotion of
the rule of law, and that crime prevention and criminal justice have an important role in that regard;
9. Recommends that Member States, as appropriate to their national contexts, adopt a comprehensive and
integrated approach to crime prevention and criminal justice reform, based on baseline assessments and data collection
and focusing on all sectors of the justice system, and develop crime prevention policies, strategies and programmes,
including those that focus on early prevention by using multi-disciplinary and participatory approaches, in close
cooperation with all stakeholders, including civil society, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
to continue to provide technical assistance, upon request, to Member States for this purpose;
10. Encourages all States to have national and local action plans for crime prevention in order to take into
account, in a comprehensive, integrated and participatory manner, inter alia, factors that place certain populations
and places at higher risk of victimization and/or of offending and to ensure that such plans are based on the best
available evidence and good practices, and stresses that crime prevention should be considered an integral element
of strategies to foster social and economic development in all States;
11. Calls upon Member States to strengthen their efforts to cooperate, as appropriate, at the bilateral,
subregional, regional and international levels to counter transnational organized crime effectively;
12. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to enhance its efforts, within existing resources
and within its mandate, in providing technical assistance and advisory services for the implementation of its regional
and subregional programmes in a coordinated manner with relevant Member States and regional and subregional
organizations;
13. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide, within its mandate,
technical assistance to Member States, upon their request, in the areas of crime prevention and criminal justice, with
a view to strengthening the capacity of national criminal justice systems to investigate, prosecute and punish all
forms of crime, while protecting the human rights and fundamental freedoms of defendants, as well as the legitimate
interests of victims and witnesses, and to ensure access to effective legal aid in criminal justice systems;
14. Emphasizes the importance of protecting persons in vulnerable groups or situations, and in that regard
expresses its concern about the increase in the activities of transnational and national organized criminal groups and
others who profit from crimes against migrants, especially women and children, without regard for dangerous and
inhumane conditions and in flagrant violation of national laws and international law;
15. Also emphasizes the importance of combating trafficking in persons for the purpose of extracting organs,
and in that regard expresses its concern about the increase in the activities of transnational and national organized
criminal groups and others who profit from such crimes;
16. Invites Member States to strengthen the crime prevention and criminal justice response to gender-related
killing of women and girls, in particular measures to support the capacity of Member States to prevent, investigate,
prosecute and punish all forms of such crime;
17. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to
Member States to combat money-laundering and the financing of terrorism through the Global Programme against
Money-Laundering, Proceeds of Crime and the Financing of Terrorism, in accordance with United Nations-related
instruments and internationally accepted standards, including, where applicable, recommendations of relevant
intergovernmental bodies, inter alia, the Financial Action Task Force and relevant initiatives of regional,
interregional and multilateral organizations against money-laundering;
18. Urges Member States to strengthen bilateral, regional and international cooperation to enable the return
of assets illicitly acquired from corruption to the countries of origin, upon their request, in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Convention against Corruption for asset recovery, in particular chapter V, requests
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its existing mandate, to continue providing assistance to
bilateral, regional and international efforts for that purpose, and also urges Member States to combat and penalize
corruption, as well as the laundering of its proceeds;
716

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. Welcomes the establishment of the International Anti-Corruption Academy as a centre of excellence for
education, training and academic research in the field of anti-corruption, including in the area of asset recovery, and
looks forward to its continued efforts to promote the goals and implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Corruption;
20. Calls upon States parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption to give particular and
timely consideration to the execution of requests for international mutual legal assistance, particularly those related
to the States concerned in the Middle East and North Africa, as well as to other requesting States in need of urgent
action, and to ensure that the competent authorities of the requesting States have adequate resources to execute the
requests, taking into account the particular importance of the recovery of the assets for sustainable development and
stability;
21. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to foster international and regional
cooperation, including by facilitating the development of regional networks active in the field of legal and law
enforcement cooperation in the fight against transnational organized crime, where appropriate, and by promoting
cooperation among all such networks, including by providing technical assistance where it is required, and
recognizes the efforts made by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to establish and assist such networks;
22. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to increase collaboration with intergovernmental,
international and regional organizations that have transnational organized crime mandates, as appropriate, in order to
share best practices, foster cooperation and take advantage of their unique and comparative advantage;
23. Recognizes the efforts made by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to assist Member States
in developing abilities and strengthening their capacity to prevent and combat kidnapping, and requests the Office to
continue to provide technical assistance with a view to fostering international cooperation, in particular mutual legal
assistance, aimed at countering effectively this growing serious crime;
24. Draws attention to the emerging policy issues identified in the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the mandates of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, with
particular reference to the technical cooperation activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, namely,
piracy, cybercrime, the use of new information technologies to abuse and exploit children, trafficking in cultural
property, illicit financial flows, environmental crime, including illicit trafficking in endangered species of wild fauna
and flora, as well as identity related crime, and invites the Office to explore, within its mandate, ways and means of
addressing those issues, bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 2012/12 of 26 July 2012 on the
strategy for the period 2012–2015 for the Office;
25. Invites Member States, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its existing
mandate, to continue strengthening the regular collection, analysis and dissemination of accurate, reliable and
comparable data and information, including, as appropriate, data disaggregated by sex, age and other relevant
criteria, and strongly encourages Member States to share such data and information with the Office;
26. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue developing, in close cooperation
with Member States, technical and methodological tools and trend analyses and studies to enhance knowledge on
crime trends and support Member States in designing appropriate responses in specific areas of crime, in particular
in their transnational dimension, taking into account the need to make the best possible use of existing resources;
27. Urges Member States and relevant international organizations to develop national and regional
strategies, as appropriate, and other necessary measures, in cooperation with the United Nations crime prevention
and criminal justice programme, to effectively address transnational organized crime, including drug trafficking,
trafficking in persons, smuggling of migrants and illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, as well as
corruption and terrorism;
28. Encourages Member States to enhance the effectiveness of countering criminal threats to the tourism
sector, including terrorist threats, through, when appropriate, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other relevant international organizations, in cooperation with the World Tourism Organization and the private
sector;
29. Urges States parties to use the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime for
broad cooperation in preventing and combating all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related
offences, especially in returning such proceeds of crime or property to their legitimate owners, in accordance with
717

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

article 14, paragraph 2, of the Convention, and invites States parties to exchange information on all forms and
aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences, in accordance with their national laws, and to
coordinate administrative and other measures taken, as appropriate, for the prevention, early detection and
punishment of such offences;
30. Urges Member States to introduce effective national and international measures to prevent and combat
illicit trafficking in cultural property, including publicizing legislation and offering special training for police,
customs and border services, and to consider such trafficking a serious crime, as defined in the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
31. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to assist Member States, upon request,
in combating illicit trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, and to support them in their
efforts to address its links with other forms of transnational organized crime, through, inter alia, technical assistance;
32. Reaffirms Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/40 of 25 July 2013, entitled “Crime prevention
and criminal justice responses to illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora,” which encouraged
Member States to make illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora involving organized criminal
groups a serious crime, as defined in article 2, paragraph (b), of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, in order to ensure that adequate and effective means of international cooperation
can be afforded under the Convention in the investigation and prosecution of those engaged in illicit trafficking in
protected species of wild fauna and flora;
33. Strongly encourages Member States to take appropriate measures, consistent with their domestic
legislation and legal frameworks, to strengthen law enforcement and related efforts to combat individuals and
groups, including organized criminal groups, operating within their borders, with a view to preventing, combating
and eradicating international trafficking in wildlife, forest products, including timber, and other forest biological
resources harvested in contravention of national laws and relevant international instruments;
34. Reaffirms Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/38 of 25 July 2013, entitled “Combating
transnational organized crime and its possible links to trafficking in precious metals”, which encouraged Member
States to take appropriate measures to prevent and combat illicit trafficking in precious metals by organized criminal
groups, including, where appropriate, the adoption and effective implementation of the necessary legislation for the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of illicit trafficking in precious metals;
35. Also reaffirms the importance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its regional offices
in building capacity at the local level in the fight against transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, and
urges the Office to consider regional vulnerabilities, projects and impact in the fight against transnational organized
crime, in particular in developing countries, when deciding to close and allocate offices, with a view to maintaining
an effective level of support to national and regional efforts in those areas;
36. Encourages Member States to continue supporting the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
providing targeted technical assistance, within its existing mandate, to enhance the capacity of affected States, upon
their request, to combat piracy and other forms of crime committed at sea, including by assisting Member States in
creating an effective law enforcement response and strengthening their judicial capacity;
37. Notes the progress achieved by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption in the implementation of their respective mandates, and encourages Member States to give full effect to
the resolutions adopted by these bodies;
38. Encourages States parties to continue to provide full support to the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Conference of the States Parties to the
United Nations Convention against Corruption, and to their subsidiary bodies, including providing information to
the conferences of the parties to the conventions regarding compliance with the treaties;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
with adequate resources to promote, in an effective manner, the implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972
Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 and the United Nations Convention against Corruption and
718

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to discharge its functions as the secretariat of the conferences of the parties to the conventions, the Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the United Nations congresses on
crime prevention and criminal justice, in accordance with its mandate;
40. Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption to continue to provide full
support to the review mechanism adopted by the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention;
41. Reiterates its request to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to enhance its technical
assistance to Member States, upon request, to strengthen international cooperation in preventing and combating
terrorism through the facilitation of the ratification and implementation of the universal conventions and protocols
related to terrorism, in close consultation with the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism (the Counter-Terrorism Committee) and its Executive Directorate, as well
as to continue to contribute to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and invites Member
States to provide the Office with appropriate resources for its mandate;
42. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to
Member States, upon request, to strengthen the rule of law, taking also into account the work undertaken by the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group of the Secretariat and other relevant United Nations bodies;
43. Encourages Member States to take relevant measures, as appropriate to their national contexts, to ensure
the diffusion, use and application of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal
justice, including the consideration and, where they deem it necessary, dissemination of existing manuals and
handbooks developed and published by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
44. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in collaboration and close consultation with
Member States and within existing resources, to continue to support the enhancement of capacity and skills in the
field of forensic sciences, including the setting of standards, and the development of technical assistance material for
training, such as manuals, compilations of useful practices and guidelines and scientific and forensic reference
material, for law enforcement officials and prosecution authorities, and to promote and facilitate the establishment
and sustainability of regional networks of forensic science providers in order to enhance their expertise and capacity
to prevent and combat transnational organized crime;
45. Reiterates the importance of providing the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme with sufficient, stable and predictable funding for the full implementation of its mandates, in conformity
with the high priority accorded to it and in accordance with the increasing demand for its services, in particular with
regard to the provision of increased assistance to developing countries, countries with economies in transition and
countries emerging from conflict, in the area of crime prevention and criminal justice reform;
46. Urges all Member States to provide the fullest possible financial and political support to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by widening its donor base and increasing voluntary contributions, in particular
general-purpose contributions, so as to enable it to continue, expand, improve and strengthen, within its mandates,
its operational and technical cooperation activities;
47. Expresses concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, emphasizes the need to provide the Office with adequate, predictable and stable resources and to ensure their
cost-effective utilization, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report, within existing reporting
obligations, on the financial situation of the Office and to continue to ensure that the Office has sufficient resources
to carry out its mandates fully and effectively;
48. Invites Member States and other interested parties to make further voluntary contributions to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and to the
United Nations Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery;
49. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on
the implementation of the mandates of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme,
reflecting also emerging policy issues and possible responses;
50. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in the report referred to in paragraph 49 above
information on the status of ratifications or accessions to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto.
719

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/194
A/RES/68/194

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)739

68/194. United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/191 of 20 December 2012 and all other relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,740
Bearing in mind that weaknesses in crime prevention lead to subsequent difficulties at the level of crime control
mechanisms, and bearing in mind also the urgent need to establish effective crime prevention strategies for Africa, as
well as the importance of law enforcement agencies and the judiciary at the regional and subregional levels,
Aware of the devastating impact of new and more dynamic crime trends on the national economies of African
States, such as the high levels of transnational organized crime being recorded in Africa, including the utilization of
digital technology to commit all types of cybercrime, and aware also of illicit trafficking in cultural property, drugs,
precious metals, rhinoceros horns and ivory, of piracy and money-laundering, and of the fact that crime is a major
obstacle to harmonious and sustainable development in Africa,
Emphasizing that combating crime is a collective endeavour to meet the global challenge of organized crime
and that investment of necessary resources in crime prevention is important to that aim and contributes to
sustainable development,
Noting with concern that in most African countries the existing criminal justice system does not have
sufficiently skilled personnel and adequate infrastructure and is therefore ill-equipped to manage the emergence of
new crime trends, and acknowledging the challenges that Africa faces in litigation processes and the management of
correctional institutions,
Recognizing that the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders is a focal point for all professional efforts aimed at promoting the active cooperation and collaboration of
Governments, academics, institutions and scientific and professional organizations and experts in crime prevention
and criminal justice,
Bearing in mind the revised African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control and Crime Prevention (2013–2017),
aimed at encouraging Member States to participate in and own the regional initiatives for effective crime prevention
and good governance and strengthened justice administration,
Recognizing the importance of promoting sustainable development as a complement to crime prevention
strategies,
Emphasizing the need to create necessary coalitions with all partners in the process of achieving effective
crime prevention policies,
Welcoming the undertaking and conclusion of a preliminary diagnostic study by a consultant of the Economic
Commission for Africa prior to the commencement of a full system-wide review process, including the significance
of the Institute as a viable mechanism for promoting cooperation among the relevant entities to respond to the crime
problem afflicting Africa,
Expressing concern over the resignation in May 2013 of the newly recruited Director of the Institute owing to
unsatisfactory conditions of service, and its likely negative impact on the activities of the Institute,
Noting with concern that the financial situation of the Institute has greatly affected its capacity to deliver
services to African Member States in an effective and comprehensive manner, and noting that one of the findings of
the diagnostic preliminary study is that the Institute urgently needs to increase its income,
_______________
739

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Uganda (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of African States) and the United States of America.
740
A/68/125.

720

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Commends the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders for its efforts to promote, coordinate and carry out more activities within its core mandate, including
regional technical cooperation related to crime prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa, despite the
resource constraints under which it is operating;
2. Also commends the initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in strengthening its
working relationship with the Institute by supporting and involving the Institute in the implementation of a number
of activities, including those contained in the revised African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control and Crime
Prevention (2013–2017), on strengthening the rule of law and criminal justice systems in Africa;
3. Reiterates the need to strengthen further the capacity of the Institute to support national mechanisms for
crime prevention and criminal justice in African countries;
4. Also reiterates the benefits, in some cases, of the utilization of alternative remedial measures, where
appropriate, applying standards of ethical conduct and using local traditions, counselling and other emerging
correctional rehabilitation measures, consistent with the obligations of States under international law;
5. Notes the efforts of the Institute to establish contacts with organizations in those countries which are
promoting crime prevention programmes and its maintenance of close links with regional and subregional political
entities, such as the African Union Commission, the East African Community, the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the Southern African
Development Community;
6. Encourages the Institute, in cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies, to take into account the
various planning authorities in the region that focus attention on the coordination of activities that promote
development based on sustainable agricultural production and preservation of the environment in developing its
crime prevention strategies;
7. Urges the States members of the Institute to continue to make every possible effort to meet their
obligations to the Institute;
8. Welcomes the undertaking and conclusion of a preliminary diagnostic study in accordance with the
decision of the Governing Board of the Institute, at its eleventh ordinary session, held in Nairobi on 27 and 28 April
2011, to carry out a review of the Institute to ensure that it can fulfil its mandate and assume a more prominent role
in dealing with existing crime;
9.

Encourages the Institute, partner agencies and other stakeholders to expedite the review process;

10. Welcomes the introduction by the Institute of a cost-sharing initiative in its execution of various
programmes with Member States, partners and United Nations entities;
11. Urges all Member States and non-governmental organizations and the international community to
continue adopting concrete practical measures to support the Institute in the development of the requisite capacity
and in the implementation of its programmes and activities aimed at strengthening crime prevention and criminal
justice systems in Africa;
12. Urges all States that have not already done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,741 as well as the United Nations
Convention against Corruption;742
13. Encourages African States that are not yet members of the Institute to consider becoming member States
in order to strengthen the fight against crime and terrorism, which hamper individual and collective development
efforts on the continent;
14. Commends the continued support provided by the Government of Uganda as host country, including
resolving the issue of the ownership of the land on which the Institute is located and facilitating the Institute’s
collaboration with other stakeholders within Uganda and the region and with international partners;
_______________
741
742

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

721

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

15. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to mobilize all relevant entities of the United Nations
system to provide the necessary financial and technical support to the Institute to enable it to fulfil its mandate,
bearing in mind that the precarious financial situation of the Institute greatly undermines its capacity to deliver
services effectively;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize the financial resources necessary
to maintain the Institute with the core Professional staff required to enable it to function effectively in the fulfilment
of its mandated obligations;
17. Encourages the Institute to consider focusing on specific and general vulnerabilities of each programme
country and to maximize the use of available initiatives to address crime problems with existing funds, as well as
available capacity, by creating useful coalitions with regional and local institutions;
18. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to work closely with the Institute,
and requests the Institute to provide the annual report on its activities to the Office as well as to the Economic
Commission for Africa Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to enhance the promotion of regional cooperation, coordination and
collaboration in the fight against crime, especially in its transnational dimension, which cannot be dealt with
adequately by national action alone;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue making concrete proposals, including for the provision
of additional core Professional staff, to strengthen the programmes and activities of the Institute, and to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/195
A/RES/68/195

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/457, para. 47)743

68/195. Preventing and combating corrupt practices and the transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating
asset recovery and returning such assets to legitimate owners, in particular to countries of origin, in
accordance with the United Nations Convention against Corruption
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/205 of 22 December 1999, 55/61 of 4 December 2000, 55/188 of 20 December
2000, 56/186 of 21 December 2001 and 57/244 of 20 December 2002, and recalling also its resolutions 58/205 of
23 December 2003, 59/242 of 22 December 2004, 60/207 of 22 December 2005, 61/209 of 20 December 2006,
62/202 of 19 December 2007, 63/226 of 19 December 2008, 64/237 of 24 December 2009, 65/169 of 20 December
2010, 67/189 and 67/192 of 20 December 2012 and all relevant Human Rights Council resolutions, including
resolution 23/9 of 13 June 2013,744
Welcoming the entry into force on 14 December 2005 of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,745
Recalling the United Nations Convention against Corruption, which is the most comprehensive and universal
instrument on corruption, and recognizing the need to continue to promote ratification or accession to the
Convention and its full implementation,
Recognizing that fighting corruption at all levels is a priority and that corruption is a serious barrier to effective
resource mobilization and allocation and diverts resources away from activities that are vital for poverty eradication
and sustainable development,
_______________
743

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Armenia, Australia, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Israel, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Malawi,
Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation, Senegal, South Sudan, Spain, Swaziland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Vanuatu and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
744
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
745
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.

722

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the importance of respect for human rights, the rule of law, good governance and democracy in
the fight against corruption,
Recognizing that supportive national legal systems are essential in preventing and combating corrupt practices,
facilitating asset recovery and returning the proceeds of corruption to legitimate owners,
Bearing in mind the need to promote and strengthen measures to prevent and combat corruption more
efficiently and effectively, that the return of assets is one of the main objectives and a fundamental principle of the
Convention and that the States parties to the Convention are obligated to afford one another the widest measure of
cooperation in that regard,
Recalling the purposes of the Convention, including to promote the integrity, accountability and proper
management of public affairs and public property,
Reaffirming the obligations set out in chapter V of the Convention, in order to prevent, detect and deter in a
more effective manner the international transfer of proceeds of crime and to strengthen international cooperation in
asset recovery,
Acknowledging that the fight against all forms of corruption requires comprehensive anti-corruption
frameworks and strong institutions at all levels, including at the local and international levels, able to undertake
efficient preventive and law enforcement measures in accordance with the Convention, in particular chapters II
and III,
Recognizing that the success of the Mechanism for the Review of Implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption depends on the full commitment and constructive engagement of all States parties to
the Convention in a progressive and comprehensive process, and recalling in that regard resolution 3/1 of
13 November 2009 of the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption,746
including the terms of reference of the Mechanism contained in the annex to that resolution,
Noting with appreciation that more than 160 States parties to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption have been involved in the ongoing review process and the support provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in this regard,
Bearing in mind that the prevention and eradication of corruption is a responsibility of all States and that they
must cooperate with one another, with the support and involvement of individuals and groups outside the public
sector, such as civil society, non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations, if their efforts in
this area are to be effective,
Reaffirming its concern about the laundering and transfer of stolen assets and proceeds of corruption, and
stressing the need to address this concern in accordance with the Convention,
Noting the efforts made by all States parties to the Convention in tracing, freezing and recovering their stolen
assets, in particular States parties in the Middle East and North Africa, taking into consideration recent
developments in those States in fighting corruption, and the efforts of and willingness expressed by the international
community to assist them in the recovery of those assets in order to preserve stability and sustainable development,
Recognizing that States continue to face challenges in recovering assets owing to, inter alia, differences among
legal systems, the complexity of multijurisdictional investigations and prosecutions, lack of familiarity with the
mutual legal assistance procedures of other States and difficulties in identifying the flow of corruption proceeds, and
noting the particular challenges posed in recovering the proceeds of corruption in cases involving individuals who
are or have been entrusted with prominent public functions and their family members and close associates,
Concerned about the difficulties, particularly the practical difficulties, that both requested and requesting
States face in asset recovery, taking into account the particular importance of the recovery of stolen assets for
sustainable development and stability, and noting the difficulty of providing information establishing a link between
proceeds of corruption in the requested State and the crime committed in the requesting State, which in many cases
can be difficult to prove,
_______________
746

See CAC/COSP/2009/15, sect. I.A.

723

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reiterating its concern about the seriousness of problems and threats posed by corruption to the stability and
security of societies, undermining the institutions and the values of democracy, ethical values and justice and
jeopardizing sustainable development and the rule of law, in particular when an inadequate national and
international response leads to impunity,
Concerned about the negative impact of widespread corruption on the enjoyment of human rights,
recognizing that corruption constitutes one of the obstacles to the effective promotion and protection of human
rights, as well as to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed
development goals, and recognizing also that corruption may disproportionately affect the most disadvantaged
individuals of society,
Noting with appreciation the ongoing efforts by regional organizations and forums to strengthen cooperation
in combating corruption, which aim, inter alia, to ensure openness and transparency, combat domestic and foreign
bribery, tackle corruption in high-risk sectors, strengthen international cooperation and promote public integrity and
transparency in the fight against corruption, which fuels illicit trade and insecurity and is a tremendous barrier to
economic growth and the safety of citizens,
Taking note of the Course of Action on Fighting Corruption and Ensuring Transparency and the Santiago
Commitment to Fight Corruption and Ensure Transparency of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the AntiCorruption Action Plan, the Saint Petersburg Development Strategy, the non-binding Guiding Principles on
Enforcement of the Foreign Bribery Offence and the Guiding Principles to Combat Solicitation of the Group of 20,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;747

2. Condemns corruption at all levels and in all its forms, including bribery, as well as the laundering of
proceeds of corruption and other forms of economic crime;
3. Expresses concern about the magnitude of corruption at all levels, including the scale of stolen assets
and proceeds of corruption, and in this regard reiterates its commitment to preventing and combating corrupt
practices at all levels, in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Corruption;745
4. Welcomes the significant number of Member States that have already ratified or acceded to the
Convention, and in this regard urges all Member States and competent regional economic integration organizations,
within the limits of their competence, that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention
as a matter of priority, and urges all States parties to take appropriate measures to ensure its full and effective
implementation;
5. Notes with appreciation the discussion of the Human Rights Council on the negative impact of
corruption on the enjoyment of human rights;
6. Also notes with appreciation the work carried out under the Mechanism for the Review of
Implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption and by the Implementation Review Group,
and urges Member States to continue to support this work and make every possible effort to provide comprehensive
information and adhere to the timelines for review as contained in the guidelines for governmental experts and the
secretariat in the conduct of country reviews;748
7. Welcomes the progress made in the first review cycle of the Mechanism and the efforts made by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in support of the Mechanism, and encourages the use of the lessons
learned during the first review cycle in order to improve the implementation of the Convention;
8. Encourages Member States to engage actively in the preparation of the review of chapter II, on
prevention measures, and chapter V, on asset recovery, of the United Nations Convention against Corruption in the
second review cycle of the Mechanism;
9. Notes with appreciation the work of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Groups on Asset
Recovery, on the Prevention of Corruption and on Review of the Implementation of the United Nations Convention
_______________
747
748

724

A/68/127.
CAC/COSP/IRG/2010/7, annex I.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

against Corruption and the open-ended intergovernmental expert meeting to enhance international cooperation
under the United Nations Convention against Corruption, and calls upon States parties to the Convention to support
the work of all of the subsidiary bodies of the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Corruption;
10. Renews the commitment of all States parties to the Convention to effective national action and
international cooperation to give full effect to chapter V of the Convention and to contribute effectively to the
recovery of the proceeds of corruption;
11. Urges Member States to combat and penalize corruption in all its forms, as well as the laundering of
proceeds of corruption, to prevent the acquisition, transfer and laundering of proceeds of corruption and to work for
the prompt recovery of such assets in accordance with the principles of the Convention, including chapter V;
12. Urges States parties to the Convention that have not already done so to designate a central authority for
international cooperation in accordance with the Convention and, where appropriate, focal points for asset recovery,
and also calls upon States parties to give timely consideration to the requests for assistance made by such
authorities;
13. Encourages States parties to the Convention to use and promote informal channels of communication, in
particular prior to making formal requests for mutual legal assistance, by, inter alia, designating officials or
institutions, as appropriate, with technical expertise in international cooperation in asset recovery to assist their
counterparts in effectively meeting requirements for formal mutual legal assistance;
14. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to remove barriers to asset recovery, including by
simplifying their legal procedures and preventing abuse of those procedures;
15. Encourages States parties to the Convention to give full effect to the resolutions of the Conference of the
States Parties to the Convention;
16. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to afford one another the widest possible cooperation
and assistance in the identification and recovery of stolen assets and proceeds of corruption and to give
particular and timely consideration to the execution of requests for international mutual legal assistance, in
accordance with the Convention, and to afford one another the widest possible cooperation and assistance in
the extradition of individuals accused of the predicate offences, in accordance with their obligations under the
Convention;
17. Urges States parties to the Convention to ensure that procedures for international cooperation allow for
the seizure and restraint of assets for a time period sufficient to preserve those assets in full pending proceedings in
another State and to allow or expand cooperation in the enforcement of foreign judgements, including through
awareness-raising for judicial authorities, in accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
18. Encourages Member States, where appropriate and consistent with their national legal systems, to
consider assisting each other in investigations of and proceedings in civil and administrative matters relating to
corruption;
19. Also encourages Member States to fight against all forms of corruption by increasing transparency,
integrity, accountability and efficiency in the public and private sectors, and recognizes in this regard the need to
prevent impunity by prosecuting corrupt officials and those who corrupt them and to cooperate in their extradition,
in accordance with the obligations under the Convention;
20. Stresses the need for transparency in financial institutions, invites Member States to work on the
identification and tracing of financial flows linked to corruption, the freezing or seizing of assets derived from
corruption and the return of such assets, in accordance with the Convention, and encourages the promotion of
human and institutional capacity-building in that regard;
21. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to give timely consideration to mutual legal assistance
requests relating to the identification, freezing, tracing and/or recovery of proceeds of corruption and to respond
effectively to requests for exchange of information related to proceeds of crime, property, equipment or other
instruments referred to in article 31 of the Convention situated in the territory of the requested State party, in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention, including article 40;
725

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

22. Calls upon States to develop and implement or maintain effective, coordinated anti-corruption policies
that promote the participation of society and reflect the principles of the rule of law, proper management of public
affairs and public property, integrity, transparency and accountability;
23. Welcomes the efforts of Member States that have enacted laws and taken other positive measures in the
fight against corruption in all its forms, and in this regard encourages Member States that have not yet done so to
enact such laws and to implement effective measures at the national level, in accordance with the Convention;
24. Reaffirms the need for Member States to take measures to prevent the transfer abroad and laundering of
assets derived from corruption, including to prevent the financial institutions in both countries of origin and
countries of destination from being used to transfer or receive illicit funds, as well as to assist in their recovery and
to return such assets to the requesting State, in accordance with the Convention;
25. Calls upon Member States to continue to work with all stakeholders in international and domestic
financial markets to deny safe haven to assets acquired illicitly by individuals engaged in corruption, to deny entry
and safe haven to corrupt officials and those who corrupt them and to enhance international collaboration in the
investigation and prosecution of corruption offences, as well as in the recovery of proceeds of corruption;
26. Urges all Member States to abide by the principles of proper management of public affairs and public
property, fairness, responsibility and equality before the law and the need to safeguard integrity and to foster a
culture of transparency, accountability and rejection of corruption, in accordance with the Convention;
27. Calls for further international cooperation, inter alia, through the United Nations system, in support of
national, subregional and regional efforts to prevent and combat corrupt practices and the transfer and laundering of
proceeds of corruption, in accordance with the principles of the Convention, and in this regard encourages close and
enhanced coordination, cooperation and synergies between anti-corruption agencies, law enforcement agencies and
financial intelligence units;
28. Stresses the need for further cooperation and coordination among the different international, regional and
subregional organizations and initiatives mandated to prevent and combat corruption;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
with the resources necessary to enable it to promote, in an effective manner, the implementation of the Convention
and to discharge its functions as the secretariat of the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention, and also
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mechanism for the Review of Implementation of the Convention is
adequately funded, consistent with the resolution adopted by the Conference of the States Parties at its
fourth session;749
30. Reiterates its call upon the private sector, at both the international and the national levels, including
small and large companies and transnational corporations, to remain fully engaged in the fight against corruption,
notes in this context the role that the Global Compact can play in fighting corruption and promoting transparency,
and emphasizes the need for all relevant stakeholders, including within the United Nations system, as appropriate, to
continue to promote corporate responsibility and accountability;
31. Recognizes the important role of business and public-private partnerships in promoting measures to fight
corruption, especially measures that support the promotion of ethical business practices in interactions between
government, business and other stakeholders;
32. Acknowledges that non-tolerance of corruption will be achieved by working in partnership with
businesses and civil society, and encourages Member States to implement and raise awareness regarding effective
anti-corruption education programmes;
33. Urges the international community to provide, inter alia, technical assistance to support national efforts
to strengthen human and institutional capacity aimed at preventing and combating corrupt practices and the transfer
of proceeds of corruption and to facilitate asset recovery and the return of such proceeds in accordance with the
Convention, and to support national efforts in formulating strategies for mainstreaming and promoting anticorruption efforts, transparency and integrity in both the public and the private sectors;
_______________
749

726

CAC/COSP/2011/14, sect. I.A, resolution 4/1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

34. Urges States parties and signatories to the Convention to strengthen the capacity of legislators, law
enforcement officials, judges and prosecutors to deal with matters relating to asset recovery, including in the
areas of mutual legal assistance, confiscation, criminal confiscation and, where appropriate, non-convictionbased forfeiture, in accordance with national law and the Convention, and civil proceedings, and to give the
highest consideration to providing technical assistance in those fields, upon request;
35. Encourages Member States to exchange and share with each other, including through regional and
international organizations, as appropriate, information on lessons learned and good practices, as well as information
related to technical assistance activities and initiatives in order to strengthen international efforts to prevent and
combat corruption;
36. Encourages States parties to the Convention to provide regular updates and to expand, where
appropriate, the information contained in the relevant databases of knowledge on assets recovery, such as Tools and
Resources for Anti-Corruption Knowledge and Asset Recovery Watch, taking into consideration constraints on
information-sharing based on confidentiality requirements;
37. Encourages the collection and systematization of good practices and tools in the cooperation for asset
recovery, including the use and expansion of secure information-sharing tools with a view to enhancing early and
spontaneous information exchange insofar as possible and in accordance with the Convention;
38. Also encourages the collection of substantial information duly researched and regularly published by
recognized organizations and representatives of civil society;
39. Recommends that States parties to the Convention share, on a voluntary basis, lessons learned from past
cases and good practices by requesting and requested States, with a view to compiling non-binding guidelines for
efficient asset recovery and disseminating effective approaches for future asset recovery cases;
40. Encourages requesting States to ensure that adequate national investigative procedures have been
initiated and substantiated for the purpose of presenting mutual legal assistance requests, and in this context
encourages requested States to provide, when appropriate, information on legal frameworks and procedures to the
requesting State;
41. Encourages States parties to the Convention to compile and provide information in accordance with
article 52 of the Convention and to undertake other actions that help to establish the linkage between assets and
offences under the Convention;
42. Notes with appreciation the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the World Bank and its cooperation with relevant partners, including the International Centre for Asset
Recovery, and encourages coordination among existing initiatives;
43. Notes the work of other initiatives in the field of asset recovery, such as the Arab Forum on Asset
Recovery, and welcomes their efforts to enhance cooperation between requesting and requested States;
44. Welcomes the work of the International Anti-Corruption Academy, a centre of excellence for education,
training and academic research in the anti-corruption field, including in the area of asset recovery, and looks forward
to its continued efforts in this regard to promote the goals and implementation of the Convention;
45. Also welcomes the holding of the fifth session of the Conference of States Parties to the Convention, in
Panama City from 25 to 29 November 2013, looks forward to its outcome and contributions to promoting the
implementation of the Convention, and expresses its appreciation for the offer by the Government of the Russian
Federation to host the sixth session of the Conference of the States Parties in 2015;
46. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing reporting obligations, to include in his report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session under the item on crime prevention and criminal justice a section entitled
“Preventing and combating corrupt practices and the transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset recovery
and returning such assets to legitimate owners, in particular to countries of origin, in accordance with the United
Nations Convention against Corruption”, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Assembly the report of the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on its fifth session.

727

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 68/196
A/RES/68/196

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/458, para. 11)750

68/196. United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that the world drug problem must be addressed in accordance with the provisions of the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,751 the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971752 and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances of 1988,753 which constitute the framework of the international drug control system,
Bearing in mind the content of article 14 of the 1988 Convention, regarding measures to eradicate illicit
cultivation of narcotic plants and cooperation to increase the effectiveness of those efforts,
Fully aware that the world drug problem remains a common and shared responsibility that requires effective
and increased international cooperation and demands an integrated, multidisciplinary, mutually reinforcing and
balanced approach to supply and demand reduction strategies,
Reaffirming the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session754 and
the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative
Development, 755 and stressing the commitment contained in the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,756
adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at the high-level segment of its fifty-second session and by the
Assembly in its resolution 64/182 of 18 December 2009,
Recalling Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 52/6 of 20 March 2009,756 53/6 of 12 March 2010,757
54/4 of 25 March 2011758 and 55/4 of 16 March 2012,759 which resulted in the International Seminar Workshop on
Sustainable Alternative Development, held in the provinces of Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai, Thailand, from 6 to
11 November 2011, and the high-level International Conference on Alternative Development, held in Lima from
14 to 16 November 2012, hosted by the Governments of Thailand and Peru, respectively, in close collaboration with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, at which Member States considered and adopted the International
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development,760
Recalling also its resolution 67/193 of 20 December 2012, in which it noted the need for Member States to
undertake to increase long-term investment in sustainable crop control strategies targeting the illicit cultivation of
crops, in coordination with other development measures, in order to contribute to the sustainability of social and
economic development and poverty eradication, and recognized the significant role played by developing countries
with extensive expertise in alternative development, including preventive alternative development, in promoting
best practices and lessons learned from such programmes and invited them to continue sharing those best practices
with States affected by illicit crop cultivation,
_______________
750

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
752
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
753
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
754
Resolution S-20/2, annex.
755
Resolution S-20/4 E.
756
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.
757
Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 8 (E/2010/28), chap. I, sect. C.
758
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 8 (E/2011/28), chap. I, sect. C.
759
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 8 (E/2012/28), chap. I, sect. C.
760
See E/CN.7/2013/8.
751

728

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Acknowledging that alternative development761 is an important, lawful, viable and sustainable alternative to
illicit cultivation of drug crops and an effective measure to counter the world drug problem and other drug-related
crime challenges, as well as a choice in favour of societies free of drug abuse, that it is one of the key components of
policies and programmes for reducing illicit drug production and that it is an integral part of efforts made by
Governments to achieve sustainable development within their societies,
Reaffirming that development-oriented drug policies and programmes should be undertaken in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and, in particular, respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, human rights and fundamental freedoms and the principles of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,762 and the principle of common and shared responsibility, as well as the
Millennium Development Goals, and also taking into account the specific situation of countries and regions and,
where appropriate, security concerns,
1. Welcomes the outcome of the high-level International Conference on Alternative Development, held in
Lima from 14 to 16 November 2012, including the adoption of the Lima Declaration on Alternative Development
and the International Guiding Principles on Alternative Development;760
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime on the outcome of that Conference;760
3. Adopts the aforementioned Lima Declaration on Alternative Development and the International Guiding
Principles on Alternative Development as the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development,
annexed to the present resolution;
4. Encourages Member States, international organizations, international financial institutions, entities and
other relevant stakeholders to take into account the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
when designing and implementing alternative development programmes;
5. Expresses its appreciation and gratitude to the Governments of Thailand and Peru for the convening of
the International Seminar Workshop on Sustainable Alternative Development and the high-level International
Conference on Alternative Development, respectively.
Annex
United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
Lima Declaration on Alternative Development
We, the representatives convened in Lima for the high-level International Conference on Alternative
Development on 16 November 2012,
Underscoring that the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,763 the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971764 and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,765 in particular its article 14, paragraphs 2 and 3, constitute
the framework of the international drug control system, and urging their full and effective implementation,
Reaffirming the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session in
1998766 and the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, adopted by the General Assembly in 2009,767
_______________
761

In accordance with Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/33, 2007/12 and 2008/26, the concept of alternative development
includes preventive alternative development in a manner focusing on the sustainability and integrality of uplifting people’s livelihood.
762
Resolution 217 A (III).
763
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
764
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
765
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
766
Resolution S-20/2, annex.
767
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.

729

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting that, as was stated at the International Seminar Workshop on Sustainable Alternative Development,
held in Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai, Thailand, from 6 to 11 November 2011, the Political Declaration and Plan of
Action mentioned above, together with the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit
Drug Crops and on Alternative Development, 768 represent a significant advance, as they promote alternative
development within the framework of broad national rural development, emphasize the need to address poverty,
inter alia, as a driver of illicit crop cultivation and suggest the coupling of both human development and crop
reduction indicators to measure the success of alternative development efforts,
Reaffirming that development-oriented drug policies and programmes should be undertaken in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and, in particular, respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 769 and the principle of common and shared
responsibility, as well as the Millennium Development Goals, also taking into account the rule of law, the specific
situations of countries and regions and, where appropriate, security concerns,
Recalling Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 53/6 of 12 March 2010,770 54/4 of 25 March 2011,771
and 55/4 and 55/8 of 16 March 2012,772
Recognizing that alternative development, which, in accordance with Economic and Social Council
resolutions, includes, as appropriate, preventive alternative development, is part of sustainable and effective crop
control strategies, which may also include eradication and law enforcement measures,
Recognizing also that alternative development is a process to prevent and eliminate the illicit cultivation of
plants containing narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances through specifically designed rural development
measures in the context of sustained national economic growth and sustainable development efforts in countries
taking action against drugs, and recognizing the particular sociocultural characteristics of the target communities
and groups, within the framework of a comprehensive and permanent solution to the problem of illicit drugs,
Recognizing further that the problem of the illicit production and manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances is often related to development problems and that those links require, within the context of
common and shared responsibility, close cooperation among States, the competent organs of the United Nations
system, in particular, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, regional bodies and international financial
institutions,
Acknowledging the principal role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as a governing body of the United
Nations Office on Drug and Crime, along with its subsidiary bodies, together with the International Narcotics
Control Board, as the United Nations organs with prime responsibility for drug control matters,
Reaffirming that alternative development is one of the tools to fight against the world drug problem,
Recalling and noting with appreciation the inputs for the draft international guiding principles on alternative
development agreed by participants at the International Seminar Workshop on Sustainable Alternative
Development, held in the provinces of Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai, Thailand, from 6 to 11 November 2011,773
1. Welcome the outcome of the high-level International Conference on Alternative Development, held in
Lima from 14 to 16 November 2012, which includes the present Declaration and the International Guiding
Principles on Alternative Development, as contained in the appendix hereto;
2. Encourage States, competent international organizations, entities and other relevant stakeholders to take
into account the present Declaration and the International Guiding Principles on Alternative Development when
designing and implementing alternative development strategies and programmes;
_______________
768

Resolution S-20/4 E.
Resolution 217 A (III).
770
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2010, Supplement No. 8 (E/2010/28), chap. I, sect. C.
771
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 8 (E/2011/28), chap. I, sect. C.
772
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 8 (E/2012/28), chap. I, sect. C.
773
See E/CN.7/2012/8.
769

730

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Submit the present Declaration, including its appendix, to the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, for inclusion in his report to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-sixth
session;
4. Express our appreciation and gratitude to the Government of Peru for the convening of the high-level
International Conference on Alternative Development.
Appendix
International Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
A.

General provisions

1. Alternative development policies are an important component of enhancing development in States affected by,
or in some cases at risk of, the illicit cultivation of crops used for illicit drug production and manufacture, and play
an important role in national, regional and international development policies and in comprehensive policies of
poverty reduction and cooperation.
2. Alternative development, as an integral component of policies and programmes for reducing drug production,
is an important, viable and sustainable option for preventing, eliminating or significantly and measurably reducing
the illicit cultivation of crops used for the production and manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances through tackling poverty and providing livelihood opportunities.
3. Alternative development, including in some cases preventive alternative development, constitutes an
international policy founded on the principle of shared and common responsibility that seeks to discourage the
cultivation of illicit crops in countries affected by that problem and in those countries which are vulnerable to illicit
activities.
4. Alternative development, which includes, as appropriate, preventive alternative development strategies and
programmes, should be formulated and implemented by taking into account the vulnerability and specific needs of
the communities and groups affected by illicit cultivation of crops used for drug production and manufacture, within
the broader framework of national policies.
5. Effective alternative development strategies and programmes require, as appropriate, the strengthening of
relevant governmental institutions at the national, regional and local levels. Public policies should be supported to
the extent possible by, inter alia, strengthening legal frameworks, involving local communities and relevant
organizations, identifying and providing adequate financial support, technical assistance and increased investment,
and recognizing and enforcing property rights, including access to land.
6. Local communities and relevant organizations should be involved in the design, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation of all alternative development programmes in order to truly reflect the needs of targeted
communities.
7. Civil society can contribute significantly to the formulation of effective and sustainable alternative
development programmes, and its active participation should therefore be encouraged in all phases of alternative
development programmes.
8. An integrated and complementary approach to alternative development programmes and strategies is crucial
and should be implemented in concert with broader drug control policies, including demand reduction, law
enforcement, illicit crop elimination and awareness-raising, taking into account demographic, cultural, social and
geographic considerations, as appropriate, and in line with the three drug control conventions.
9. States should ensure the proper and coordinated sequencing of development interventions when designing
alternative development programmes, and in that regard should take into account issues related to the establishment
of agreements and viable partnerships with small producers, favourable climatic conditions, strong political support
and adequate market access.
10. Alternative development programmes in the areas where crops are cultivated for illicit drug production and
manufacture should be undertaken with a clear understanding of the overall objectives, as appropriate, of
eliminating or significantly and measurably reducing the supply of drugs while promoting comprehensive
731

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

development and social inclusion, alleviating poverty and strengthening social development, the rule of law, security
and stability at the country and regional levels, taking into account the promotion and protection of human rights.
11. Alternative development programmes should include measures to protect the environment at the local level,
according to national and international law and policies, through the provision of incentives for conservation, proper
education and awareness programmes so that the local communities can improve and preserve their livelihoods and
mitigate negative environmental impacts.
12. Alternative development programmes, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development
programmes, should be designed to address subregional and regional needs and should be integrated, when
circumstances require, into broader regional, subregional and bilateral treaties and arrangements.
13. International cooperation, coordination and stakeholder ownership are essential for the successful
implementation and sustainability of alternative development programmes. Alternative development should be
considered by all parties involved as a long-term commitment whose results may require time to attain.
14. International cooperation programmes aimed at alternative development should take into account the
experiences of different countries, including with regard to South-South cooperation, should draw on best practices
and lessons learned in alternative development programmes and projects and should take into account the available
financial and technical support provided by donors.
15. Alternative development policies, as one of the tools available in the fight against the world drug problem,
should be implemented alongside efforts made by States to strengthen the rule of law and promote health, safety and
security so as to ensure a comprehensive approach to tackling the challenges that may be posed by the possible links
between drug trafficking, corruption and different forms of organized crime and, in some cases, terrorism.
16. Alternative development can be an integral element of an overall development strategy and should
complement economic efforts in the fight against poverty.
17. The impact of alternative development programmes should be assessed by taking into account their
contribution to the control of illicit crop cultivation, including the eradication of such crops, and through estimates
based on human development indices, socioeconomic and environmental indicators and impartial and accurate
evaluations.
B.

Actions and implementation measures

18. States Members of the United Nations, international organizations, regional organizations, development
agencies, donors and international financial institutions, as well as civil society, should apply their utmost efforts, as
appropriate:
(a) To target illicit cultivation and production of crops used for the production and manufacture of illicit drugs,
and address related factors, by alleviating poverty, by strengthening the rule of law and institutional frameworks, as
appropriate, and by promoting sustainable development aimed at enhancing the welfare of the population;
(b) To build and maintain confidence, dialogue and cooperation with and between stakeholders, from
people at the community level and local authorities to leaders at the national and regional levels, so as to ensure
participation and ownership for long-term sustainability;
(c) To implement long-term projects and programmes to provide opportunities to fight poverty, diversify
livelihoods and strengthen development, institutional frameworks and the rule of law;
(d) To develop policies and programmes that take into account an evidence- and science-based assessment
of the potential impact of alternative development on the illicit cultivation of crops used for the illicit production and
manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, and on rural and socioeconomic development,
including the gender dimension related thereto, and the environment;
(e) To take into account the need to promote the diversification of licit crops cultivated and licit economic
activities undertaken when implementing alternative development programmes;
(f) Owing to the transnational nature of drug-related crimes, to encourage and support coordinated crossborder collaboration and alternative development activities, where appropriate and feasible, with the support of
international cooperation;
732

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(g) To address with specific measures the situation of women, children, youth and other high-risk
populations, including, in some cases, dependent drug users, owing to their vulnerability and exploitation in the
illicit drug economy;
(h) To provide, within a holistic and integrated development approach, essential basic services and legal
livelihood opportunities to the communities affected by, or in some cases vulnerable to, illicit crop cultivation;
(i) To recognize that alternative development, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative
development, requires the implementation of articulated short-, medium- and long-term plans and actions from all
relevant stakeholders to promote positive and sustainable socioeconomic changes in the affected and, in some cases,
vulnerable areas;
(j) To promote coordination and encourage alternative development programmes which contain
complementary measures at the local, regional and national levels;
(k) To ensure, when considering crop control measures, that small-farmer households have opportunities for
viable and sustainable licit livelihoods so that the measures may be properly sequenced in a sustainable fashion and
appropriately coordinated, taking into account the circumstances of the region, country or area concerned;
(l) To ensure that programmes or projects related to alternative development effectively discourage the
illicit cultivation of crops used for the illicit production and manufacture of drugs;
(m) To also ensure that drug control programmes are implemented in a comprehensive and balanced manner,
so as to avoid the shifting of illicit crop cultivation domestically, as well as from one country or region to another;
(n) To respect the legitimate interests and specific needs of the local affected and, in some cases, vulnerable
population when designing and implementing alternative development programmes;
(o) To address basic human needs, in full conformity with the three drug conventions and relevant human
rights instruments, in order to promote the welfare of targeted communities;
(p) To integrate those communities which are in marginalized regions into the economic and political
mainstream; as appropriate, such integration should involve supporting access to roads, schools, primary health-care
services, electricity and other services and infrastructure;
(q) To promote increased coordination and cooperation between relevant governmental agencies, when
appropriate, and adopt an integrated approach to drug control that involves all relevant stakeholders;
(r) To ensure that the implementation of alternative development programmes is conducted in a manner that
helps to enhance synergy and confidence among national Governments, regional authorities and local
administrations and communities with regard to building local ownership and coordination and cooperation;
(s) To promote the strengthening of the justice and security sectors and social development, as well as
institutional legal frameworks and anti-corruption measures, in a manner conducive to enhancing alternative
development efforts;
(t) To promote governance capabilities, when appropriate, in order to strengthen the rule of law, including
at the local level;
(u) To ensure that measures aimed at strengthening the rule of law are included in development-oriented
drug control policies in order to, inter alia, support farmers in their efforts to stop, and in some cases prevent, the
cultivation of illicit crops;
(v) To apply, in addition to estimates of illicit cultivation and other illicit activities related to the world drug
problem, indicators related to human development, socioeconomic conditions, rural development and the alleviation
of poverty, as well as institutional and environmental indicators, when assessing alternative development
programmes in order to ensure that the outcomes are in line with national and international development objectives,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and that they reflect accountable use of donor funds and truly benefit
the affected communities;
(w) To utilize objective impact evaluations that examine a broad range of social, economic and
environmental factors and incorporate the lessons learned from these evaluations in future projects to ensure that the
733

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

design and implementation of alternative development programmes are based on a reliable and evidence-based
evaluation and thorough analysis of local socioeconomic, geographical and cultural realities, as well as the
assessment of benefits and risks;
(x) To undertake further research and strengthen data collection with a view to providing a basis for more
effective and evidence-based alternative development programmes, as well as conduct research to assess the factors
leading to the illicit cultivation of drug crops used for the production and manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;
(y) To utilize data and conduct analysis to identify areas, communities and affected populations that are
vulnerable to illicit cultivation and its related illicit activities, and tailor the implementation of programmes and
projects to address identified needs;
(z) To encourage partners in cross-border alternative development activities to consider measures to support
the implementation of alternative development strategies and programmes, which may include special preferential
policies, protection of property rights and facilitation of the import and export of products, in accordance with
relevant international law, including trade agreements;
(aa) To enhance technical support, including exchange of expertise, best practices and resources, while
seeking to secure long-term flexible funding for alternative development programmes in order to ensure their
sustainability;
(bb) To consider the possibility of creating an international fund for alternative development programmes that
could be used to face major emergency situations, in order to ensure continuity;
(cc) To recognize that international cooperation resources for the implementation of alternative development
programmes should be used in consultation and in coordination with partner countries to support joint efforts to
eliminate, reduce and, in some cases, prevent the cultivation of illicit crops through reducing poverty and enhancing
rural development in areas affected by, or in some cases vulnerable to, illicit cultivation and engaging in effective
law enforcement measures;
(dd) To recognize that long-term cooperation, coordination and the commitment of multilevel and
multisectoral stakeholders are essential to a holistic and integrated approach to the effectiveness and sustainability of
alternative development programmes;
(ee) To consider voluntary and pragmatic measures in appropriate forums, with a view to enabling alternative
development products to gain easier access to international markets, in accordance with applicable multilateral trade
rules and treaties and taking into consideration the ongoing negotiation processes in the framework of the World
Trade Organization; these might include promoting cost-effective marketing regimes in the field of alternative
development, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development, such as a global stamp for products
stemming from alternative development programmes and voluntary certification to support the sustainability of
alternative development products;
(ff) To promote, where appropriate, a favourable socioeconomic infrastructure, including the development
of roads and transportation networks, the promotion and enhancement of farmer associations, microfinance schemes
and schemes aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the management of available financing resources;
(gg) To combine local wisdom, indigenous knowledge, public-private partnerships and available resources to
promote, inter alia, a legal market-driven product development approach when applicable, capacity-building, skills
training of the involved population, effective management and the entrepreneurial spirit, in order to support the
creation of internal and sustainable commercial systems and a viable value chain at the local level, when applicable;
(hh) To support policies conducive to cooperation with the international financial institutions and, where
appropriate, private sector involvement and investment to help to ensure long-term sustainability, including through
the use of public-private partnerships, and to encourage alternative development in rural associations or cooperatives
and support their management capacity, in order to maximize value from primary production and to ensure the
integration of areas affected by, or in some cases vulnerable to, illicit cultivation into national, regional and, as
appropriate, international markets;
(ii) To promote local ownership and participation of the involved parties in the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of alternative development programmes and projects;
734

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(jj) To foster empowerment, including articulation, communication and participation, of the community and
local authorities and other stakeholders, to sustain the achievements of the projects and programmes;
(kk) To take into account land rights and other related land management resources when designing,
implementing, monitoring and evaluating alternative development programmes, including those of indigenous
peoples and local communities, in accordance with national legal frameworks;
(ll) To raise awareness among rural communities of the negative impacts that illicit drug crop cultivation,
related deforestation and the illicit use of natural resources, in disregard of national or international laws, may have
on long-term development and the environment.
RESOLUTION 68/197
A/RES/68/197

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/458, para. 11)774

68/197. International cooperation against the world drug problem
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session,775 the
Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction,776 the Action Plan on International Cooperation
on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development,777 the Action Plan for the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction,778 the joint ministerial statement adopted
at the ministerial segment of the forty-sixth session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs779 and the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development,780
Reaffirming also the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,781 adopted by the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session, and calling upon States to take the measures necessary to fully implement the actions set out
therein, with a view to attaining, in a timely manner, their goals and targets,
Recalling its resolution 53/115 of 9 December 1998, in which it urged Governments, the relevant United
Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other international organizations to assist and support, upon request,
transit States, in particular developing countries in need of such assistance and support, aiming at enhancing their
capacity to fight the illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration,782 the provisions of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome addressing the world drug problem, 783 the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS 784 and other relevant
_______________
774

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bahamas, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, France,
Gabon, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Serbia, Singapore, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United States of America and Vanuatu.
775
Resolution S-20/2, annex.
776
Resolution S-20/3, annex.
777
Resolution S-20/4 E.
778
Resolution 54/132, annex.
779
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 8 (E/2003/28/Rev.1), chap. I, sect. C.
780
Resolution 68/196, annex.
781
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.
782
Resolution 55/2.
783
See resolution 60/1.
784
Resolution 60/262, annex.

735

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

United Nations resolutions, including General Assembly resolution 67/193 of 20 December 2012 and those on
regional and international cooperation to prevent the diversion and smuggling of precursors,
Recalling further the adoption by the Economic and Social Council of its resolution 2012/12 of 26 July 2012
on the strategy for the period 2012–2015 for the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the Secretary-General to develop, within the United Nations system, an
effective and comprehensive approach to transnational organized crime and the world drug problem, and
reaffirming the crucial role of Member States in this regard,
Welcoming the efforts made by Member States to comply with the provisions of the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,785 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971786
and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,787
Recognizing the importance both of the universality of the three above-mentioned international drug control
conventions and of their implementation,
Welcoming the measures taken by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to develop a thematic and
regional programme approach to its activities, and noting the progress in the implementation of such an approach,
Recalling all resolutions adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-sixth session,788
Gravely concerned that, despite continuing increased efforts by States, relevant organizations, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, the world drug problem continues to constitute a serious threat to public health and
safety and the well-being of humanity, in particular children and young people and their families, and to the national
security and sovereignty of States, and that it undermines socioeconomic and political stability and sustainable
development,
Deeply concerned about the need to take all appropriate measures, including legislative, administrative, social
and educational measures, to protect children and young people against the use or abuse of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, as defined in the relevant treaties, and to prevent the use of children and young people in
the illicit production of and trafficking in such substances, and urging Governments to implement Commission on
Narcotic Drugs resolution 53/10 of 12 March 2010,789
Recognizing the importance of preventing and addressing drug-related youth crime, considering its impact on
the social and economic development of societies, and supporting the rehabilitation and treatment of young
offenders and their reintegration into society,
Stressing the importance of the focus placed by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-sixth session on
the issues of the prevention of drug abuse, the challenges posed by new psychoactive substances and the treatment,
rehabilitation, reintegration and recovery of drug-dependent persons,
Noting with grave concern the global increased abuse of certain drugs and the proliferation of new substances,
such as those indicated in Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 56/4 of 15 March 2013,788 as well as the
increasing sophistication of the transnational organized criminal groups engaged in their manufacture and
distribution,
Noting with grave concern also the increased abuse and manufacture of amphetamine-type stimulants
worldwide, as well as the proliferation and diversion of chemical precursors used in the illicit manufacture of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and the emergence of new methods of diversion used by organized
criminal groups,
Recognizing that the use of new psychoactive substances that are not controlled under the international drug
control treaties and that may pose potential public-health risks has emerged in recent years in several regions of the
_______________
785

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
787
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
788
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 8 (E/2013/28), chap. I, sect. C.
789
Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 8 (E/2010/28), chap. I, sect. C.
786

736

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

world, and noting the increasing number of reports about the production or manufacture of substances, most
commonly herbal mixtures, including synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists that have psychoactive effects similar
to those produced by cannabis, and psychoactive substances that are increasingly being marketed as legal
alternatives to internationally controlled drugs,
Recognizing also the critical importance of forensic and scientific laboratory and treatment centre data and
qualitative information in understanding the problem of illicit synthetic drugs and the range of products available on
the illicit market,
Considering Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 56/5 of 15 March 2013,788 in which the Commission
encouraged the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to consider the dissemination of forensic drug profiling,
to the extent possible, in national and regional programmes,
Noting the need to promote adequate availability of internationally controlled narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances for medical and scientific purposes while preventing their diversion and abuse, in line with the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol and the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971, and recalling in that regard Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 53/4 of 12 March
2010789 and 54/6 of 25 March 2011,790
Recognizing that sustained and collective efforts through international cooperation in demand reduction and
supply reduction have shown that positive results can be achieved, and expressing its appreciation for the initiatives
at the bilateral, regional and international levels in this regard,
Recognizing also the principal role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and its subsidiary bodies, together
with the International Narcotics Control Board, as the United Nations organs with prime responsibility for drug
control matters, and recognizing further the need to promote and facilitate the effective implementation of and
follow-up to the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
Reaffirming that countering the world drug problem in all its aspects requires a political commitment to
reducing supply, as an integral component of a balanced and comprehensive drug control strategy, in accordance
with the principles enshrined in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special
session and the measures to enhance international cooperation to counter the world drug problem,791 including the
Action Plan on International Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development,
also adopted at that session, and the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development, noted as the
outcome of the International Seminar Workshop on Sustainable Alternative Development, held in the provinces of
Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai, Thailand, from 6 to 11 November 2011, and the high-level International Conference
on Alternative Development, held in Lima from 14 to 16 November 2012, hosted by the Governments of Thailand
and Peru, respectively, in close collaboration with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Reaffirming equally that reducing drug abuse and its consequences requires a political commitment to efforts
to reduce demand, which must be demonstrated by sustained widespread demand reduction initiatives that are ageand gender-sensitive and integrate a comprehensive public-health approach spanning the spectrum of prevention,
education, early detection and intervention, treatment, care and related support services, recovery support,
rehabilitation and social reintegration of drug users, in full compliance with the three international drug control
conventions and in accordance with the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction, adopted
by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, and with the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at the high-level segment of its fifty-second session, and other
relevant Assembly resolutions,
Conscious of the need to raise public awareness of the risks and threats posed to all societies by the different
aspects of the world drug problem,
Recalling the adoption, by its resolution 64/182 of 18 December 2009, of the Political Declaration and Plan of
Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug
_______________
790
791

Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 8 (E/2011/28), chap. I, sect. C.
Resolutions S-20/4 A–E.

737

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Problem, and the decision, contained in the Declaration, that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, at its fifty-seventh
session, in 2014, should conduct a high-level review of the implementation by Member States of the Declaration
and Plan of Action, the recommendation that the Economic and Social Council devote a high-level segment to a
theme related to the world drug problem and the recommendation that the General Assembly hold a special session
to address the world drug problem,
Reaffirming that the world drug problem remains a common and shared responsibility that requires effective
and increased international cooperation and demands an integrated, multidisciplinary, mutually reinforcing and
balanced approach to supply and demand reduction strategies,
Welcoming the efforts of countries that have worked for decades to counter the world drug problem and have
acquired knowledge, experience and institutional capacities that enable them to afford cooperation to other
countries, in application of the principle of common and shared responsibility,
Recalling its resolution 67/193, in which it decided to convene, early in 2016, a special session of the General
Assembly on the world drug problem, following the high-level review of the progress made in the implementation
by Member States of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, which will be conducted by the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-seventh session, in March 2014,
Recalling also its decision in the aforementioned resolution that the special session of the General Assembly
would review the progress in the implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, including an
assessment of the achievements and challenges in countering the world drug problem, within the framework of the
three international drug control conventions and other relevant United Nations instruments,
Noting its decision to conduct the special session and its preparatory process from within existing
resources,
1. Reiterates its call upon States to take, in a timely manner, the measures necessary to implement the
actions and attain the goals and targets set out in the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,781 adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
2. Reaffirms that countering the world drug problem is a common and shared responsibility that must be
addressed in a multilateral setting, that it requires an integrated and balanced approach and that it must be carried out
in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and other provisions of
international law, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights792 and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action793 on human rights and, in particular, with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
for the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and on the basis of the principles of equal rights and mutual respect;
3. Calls upon Member States to engage in effective cooperation and practical action aimed at addressing
the world drug problem on the basis of the principle of common and shared responsibility;
4. Encourages Member States to give adequate consideration to the negative effects of the world drug
problem and its consequences on development and on society in general;
5. Invites Member States to implement comprehensive drug abuse prevention measures from a perspective
that considers the individual as well as the community and society as a whole, including through public-health
education on the dangers of drug abuse, violence prevention, rehabilitation and aftercare to reintegrate former drug
users into society, as well as anticipate, detect and analyse various risks to communities associated with drug-related
violence and crime;
6. Undertakes to promote bilateral, regional and international cooperation, including through intelligencesharing and cross-border cooperation, aimed at countering the world drug problem more effectively, in particular by
_______________
792
793

738

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

encouraging and supporting such cooperation by those States most directly affected by illicit crop cultivation and the
illicit production, manufacture, transit, trafficking, distribution and abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances;
7. Reiterates the commitment of Member States to promoting, developing, reviewing or strengthening
effective, comprehensive, integrated drug demand reduction programmes, based on scientific evidence and covering
a range of measures, including primary prevention, education, early detection and intervention, treatment, care and
related support services, recovery support, rehabilitation and social reintegration efforts, aimed at promoting health
and social well-being among individuals, families and communities and reducing the adverse consequences of drug
abuse for individuals and society as a whole, taking into account the specific needs of women and the particular
challenges posed by high-risk drug users, in full compliance with the three international drug control conventions
and in accordance with national legislation, and commits Member States to investing increased resources in
ensuring access to those interventions on a non-discriminatory basis, including in detention facilities, bearing in
mind that those interventions should also consider vulnerabilities that undermine human development, such as
poverty and social marginalization;
8. Notes with great concern the adverse consequences of drug abuse for individuals and society as a whole,
reaffirms the commitment of all Member States to tackling those problems in the context of comprehensive,
complementary and multisectoral drug demand reduction strategies, in particular such strategies targeting children,
young people and their families, also notes with great concern the alarming rise in the incidence of HIV/AIDS and
other blood-borne diseases among injecting drug users, also reaffirms the commitment of all Member States to
working towards the goal of universal access to comprehensive prevention programmes and treatment, care and
related support services, in full compliance with the international drug control conventions and in accordance with
national legislation, taking into account all relevant General Assembly resolutions and, when applicable, the
technical guide for countries to set targets for universal access to HIV prevention, treatment and care for injecting
drug users, issued by the World Health Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, requests the Office to carry out its mandate in this area in close
cooperation with relevant organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, such as the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Development Programme and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, and takes note of Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 56/6 of 15 March 2013788 on these issues;
9. Urges Member States, where appropriate, to develop national responses to address the issue of drugaffected driving by, inter alia, exchanging information and best practices on effective responses, including through
engagement with the international scientific and legal communities;
10. Encourages Member States to promote, in accordance with Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions
53/4789 and 54/6,790 the adequate availability of internationally controlled narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
for medical and scientific purposes while preventing their diversion and abuse, and requests the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International Narcotics Control Board to continue their efforts in that regard;
11. Urges all Member States to enact comprehensive measures aimed at stemming the abuse of prescription
drugs, in particular through the establishment of awareness-raising initiatives targeting the general public and healthcare providers;
12. Acknowledges the continuing efforts made and the progress achieved in countering the world drug
problem, notes with great concern the continuing illicit production of and trafficking in opium, the continuing illicit
manufacture of and trafficking in cocaine, the increasing illicit production of and trafficking in cannabis, the
ongoing global spread of the illicit manufacture of amphetamine-type stimulants and the increasing diversion of
precursors, as well as the related distribution and use of illicit drugs, and stresses the need to strengthen and intensify
joint efforts at the national, regional and international levels to tackle those global challenges in a more
comprehensive manner, in accordance with the principle of common and shared responsibility, including by means
of enhanced and better-coordinated technical and financial assistance;
13. Expresses its concern that, despite the efforts of Member States and the international community, the
extent of illicit drug use has remained stable, although patterns of abuse, production and trafficking continue to shift
from country to country;
14. Stresses that it is absolutely imperative for Member States to strengthen international efforts in order to
achieve more effective results in countering the world drug problem;
739

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

15. Invites Member States to take appropriate measures so as to strengthen international cooperation and the
exchange of information regarding the identification of new routes and modi operandi of organized criminal groups
dedicated to the diversion or smuggling of substances frequently used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, in particular with respect to their trafficking via the Internet, and to continue to notify the
International Narcotics Control Board of such information;
16. Continues to encourage Member States to promote, in accordance with Commission on Narcotic Drugs
resolution 56/4,788 the sharing of information on the potential abuse of and trafficking in synthetic cannabinoid
receptor agonists, as well as the sharing of information with regard to patterns of use, risks to public health, forensic
data and the regulation of new psychoactive substances;
17. Encourages Member States to adopt, where necessary, measures to strengthen public awareness of the
risks, threats and negative impacts to society posed by the abuse of drugs;
18. Recognizes:
(a) That sustainable crop control strategies targeting the illicit cultivation of crops used for the production of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances require international cooperation based on the principle of shared
responsibility and an integrated and balanced approach, taking into account the rule of law and, where appropriate,
security concerns, with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the principle of nonintervention in the internal affairs of States and all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(b) That such crop control strategies include, inter alia, alternative development and, where appropriate,
preventive alternative development programmes, eradication and law enforcement measures;
(c) That alternative development is an important, lawful, viable and sustainable alternative to the illicit
cultivation of drug crops and an effective measure for countering the world drug problem and other drug-related
crime challenges, as well as a choice in favour of societies free of drug abuse, that it is one of the key components of
policies and programmes for reducing illicit drug production and that it is an integral part of efforts by Governments
to achieve sustainable development within their societies;
(d) That such crop control strategies should be in full conformity with article 14 of the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988787 and appropriately
coordinated and phased in accordance with national policies in order to achieve the sustainable eradication of illicit
crops and facilitate long-term development, noting furthermore the need for Member States to undertake to increase
long-term investment in such strategies, coordinated with other development measures, in order to contribute to the
sustainability of social and economic development and poverty eradication in affected rural areas, taking due
account of the traditional licit uses of crops where there is historical evidence of such use and giving due
consideration to the protection of the environment;
19. Welcomes the adoption of the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development,780 and
encourages Member States, international organizations, entities and other relevant stakeholders to take into due
account the Guiding Principles when designing and implementing alternative development programmes;
20. Recognizes the significant role played by developing countries with extensive expertise in alternative
development, including preventive alternative development, in promoting best practices and lessons learned from
such programmes, and invites them to continue sharing those best practices with States affected by illicit crop
cultivation, including those emerging from conflict, with a view to using them, where appropriate, in accordance
with the national specificities of each State;
21. Urges Member States to intensify their cooperation with and assistance to transit States affected by illicit
drug trafficking, directly or through the competent regional and international organizations, in accordance with
article 10 of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of
1988, and on the basis of the principle of shared responsibility and the need for all States to promote and implement
measures to counter the drug problem in all its aspects with an integrated and balanced approach;
22. Requests the international community, in particular the countries of destination, to continue to provide,
on the basis of the principle of shared responsibility, urgent and sufficient technical assistance and support to the
most affected transit States, in full cooperation with national authorities, in order to promote the capacities of such
States to counter the flow of illicit drugs;
740

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

23. Reiterates the urgent need for Member States to strengthen international and regional cooperation in
order to respond to the serious challenges posed by the increasing links between drug trafficking, money-laundering,
corruption and other forms of organized crime, including trafficking in persons, smuggling of migrants, trafficking
in firearms, cybercrime and, in some cases, terrorism and the financing of terrorism, and to the significant
challenges faced by law enforcement and judicial authorities in responding to the ever-changing means used by
transnational criminal organizations, including the corruption of State officials, to avoid detection and prosecution;
24. Recognizes the increasing links between drug trafficking and the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking
in firearms in some regions of the world and the need to prevent the spread of that problem to other regions, and
urges Member States to take adequate measures, consistent with their international treaty obligations and other
relevant international standards, to fully cooperate in preventing the acquisition and use of firearms and ammunition
by criminal organizations involved in drug trafficking and in combating the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking
in such firearms and ammunition;
25. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its regional offices in
building capacity at the local level in the fight against transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, and urges
the Office to consider regional vulnerabilities, projects and impact in the fight against drug trafficking, in particular
in developing countries, when deciding to close and allocate offices, with a view to maintaining an effective level of
support for national and regional efforts in countering the world drug problem;
26. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to increase collaboration with intergovernmental,
international and relevant regional organizations involved in addressing the world drug problem, as appropriate, in
order to share best practices and scientific standards, and to maximize the benefits from their unique comparative
advantage;
27. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, upon request, to continue providing technical
assistance to Member States so as to enhance capacity in countering the world drug problem, including enhancing
the analytical work of laboratories, by carrying out training programmes to develop indicators and instruments for
the collection and analysis of accurate, reliable and comparable data on all relevant aspects of the world drug
problem and, where appropriate, enhance or develop new national indicators and instruments, and invites Member
States to invest, where necessary and taking into account specific needs and available resources, in capacity-building
and quality-enhancing activities for the collection and reporting of information, and to participate in joint
cooperation efforts organized by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and/or by other national, regional
or international organizations and bodies, aimed at the exchange of technical knowledge of experts in the area of
data collection, analysis and evaluation and of practical experience in the area of drug data;
28. Recognizes the need to collect relevant data and information regarding international cooperation for
countering the world drug problem at all levels, and urges Member States to support dialogue through the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs in order to address this issue;
29. Urges Member States to regularly report data and information related to all aspects of the world drug
problem to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime through the annual report questionnaires, including the
data on significant individual drug seizures, as mandated by article 18 of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,785 and invites the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the central
policymaking body of the United Nations system on drug-related matters, to strengthen the capacity of the Office to
collect, analyse, use and disseminate accurate, reliable, objective and comparable data and to reflect such
information in the World Drug Report;
30. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue its efforts in supporting States to
establish, upon request, operational frameworks essential for communication within and across national borders and
in facilitating the exchange of information on and analysis of drug trafficking trends, with a view to increasing
knowledge about the world drug problem at the national, regional and international levels, recognizes the
importance of integrating laboratories and providing scientific support to drug control frameworks and of treating
quality analytical data as a primary source of information worldwide, and urges coordination with other
international entities, including the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL);
31. Urges all Member States to provide the fullest possible financial and political support to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by widening its donor base and increasing voluntary contributions, in particular
general-purpose contributions, so as to enable it to continue, expand, improve and strengthen, within its mandates,
741

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

its operational and technical cooperation activities, including with a view to assisting Member States with the full
implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated
and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at the
high-level segment of its fifty-second session and subsequently adopted by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session, as well as with the full implementation of relevant resolutions adopted by the Commission;
32. Expresses concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and emphasizes the need to provide the Office with adequate, predictable and stable resources and to ensure
their cost-effective utilization, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report, within existing reporting
obligations, on the financial situation of the Office and to continue to ensure that the Office has sufficient resources
to carry out its mandates fully and effectively;
33. Takes note of Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 56/11 of 15 March 2013788 on the
recommendations of the standing open-ended intergovernmental working group on improving the governance and
financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and encourages Member States and the Office
to continue addressing the issues within the mandate of the working group in a pragmatic, results-oriented, efficient
and cooperative manner;
34. Encourages the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the principal policymaking organ of the United
Nations on matters of international drug control and as the governing body of the drug programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the International Narcotics Control Board to strengthen their useful work
on the control of precursors and other chemicals used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, and, in accordance with Commission resolution 54/8 of 25 March 2011,790 urges the Board to further
strengthen communication with Member States and to work with them in identifying opportunities for more
effective control and monitoring of the trade in precursor chemicals frequently used in the illicit manufacture of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances;
35. Urges States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to, and States parties to implement,
as a matter of priority, all the provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the
1972 Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,786 the United Nations Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto 794 and the United Nations Convention against
Corruption;795
36. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide, in close collaboration
with the International Narcotics Control Board, as may be appropriate, adequate support and technical assistance to
Governments, inter alia, in Africa, Asia, Central America and the Caribbean, and Oceania, so as to enable them to
implement and fully meet their obligations under conventions and give adequate follow-up to subsequent
resolutions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly,
including for the strengthening of regulatory authorities and controls, provision of information and fulfilment of
reporting requirements, and urges donors to contribute to the Office for those purposes;
37. Takes note of the resolutions adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-sixth session,788
the World Drug Report 2013 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the most recent report of the
International Narcotics Control Board,796 and calls upon Member States to strengthen international and regional
cooperation and coordination to counter the threat to the international community caused by the illicit production of
and trafficking in drugs, especially those in the opium group, as well as other aspects of the world drug problem, and
to continue to take concerted measures within the framework of the Paris Pact797 and other relevant regional and
international initiatives and mechanisms, such as the “Heart of Asia” initiative, in order to strengthen cross-border
cooperation and information exchange with a view to countering drug trafficking with the support of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
_______________
794

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
796
International Narcotics Control Board, document E/INCB/2012/1.
797
See S/2003/641, annex.
795

742

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

38. Urges Member States to continue to actively cooperate with the International Narcotics Control Board in
the exercise of its mandate, and emphasizes the need to ensure that an appropriate level of resources is made
available to the Board to enable it to engage with Governments to effectively monitor compliance by States parties
with the drug control conventions;
39. Emphasizes the important role played by civil society, in particular non-governmental organizations, in
addressing the world drug problem, notes with appreciation their important contribution to the review process, and
also notes that representatives of affected populations and civil society entities, where appropriate, should be
enabled to play a participatory role in the formulation and implementation of drug demand and supply reduction
policy;
40. Encourages Member States to ensure that civil society plays a participatory role, where appropriate,
through consultation in the development and implementation of drug control programmes and policies, in particular
with regard to aspects of demand reduction;
41. Encourages the meetings of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies and of the
Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs to continue to contribute to the strengthening of regional and international cooperation, and in this
regard acknowledges the discussions conducted at the twenty-third meeting of Heads of National Drug Law
Enforcement Agencies, Africa, held in Addis Ababa from 16 to 20 September 2013, the twenty-third meeting for
Latin America and the Caribbean, held in Quito from 30 September to 4 October 2013, the tenth meeting for
Europe, held in Vienna from 2 to 5 July 2013, and the thirty-seventh meeting for Asia and the Pacific, held in
Bangkok from 21 to 24 October 2013;
42. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen cooperation in combating illicit trafficking in drugs,
addressing supply, demand and the diversion of precursor chemicals undertaken by regional organizations and
transregional initiatives such as the members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Triangular Initiative,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Eurasian Group on Combating Money-Laundering and Financing of Terrorism and other relevant
subregional and regional organizations and initiatives, including the counter-narcotics strategy of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization for the period 2011–2016, the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission of the
Organization of American States, the European pacts to combat international drug trafficking and against synthetic
drugs, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Senior Officials on Drug Matters workplan to combat illicit drug
production, trafficking and use (2009–2015), with the aim of achieving a drug-free South-East Asia by 2015, and
the South American Council on the World Drug Problem of the Union of South American Nations, as well as the
recent intensification of partnering between the States members of the Caribbean Community, the Dominican
Republic and the United States of America within the framework of the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative, which
aims, inter alia, to substantially reduce illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs, the Accra Declaration, adopted at the
twenty-second meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Africa, held in Accra from 25 to
29 June 2012, and the thirtieth International Drug Enforcement Conference, held in Moscow from 5 to 7 June 2013;
43. Invites Member States, in close consultation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, donors
and other relevant international organizations, to continue assisting African States in addressing health problems and
raising awareness of the dangers associated with the abuse of all drugs, in accordance with Commission on Narcotic
Drugs resolutions 54/14 of 25 March 2011790 and 55/9 of 16 March 2012,798 and in this regard welcomes the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
African Union Commission, in which the two organizations agreed to work together to enhance the
complementarities of their activities;
44. Calls upon the relevant United Nations agencies and entities and other international organizations, and
invites international financial institutions, including regional development banks, to mainstream drug control issues
into their programmes, and calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to maintain its leading role by
providing relevant information and technical assistance;
45. Welcomes Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 56/12 of 15 March 2013788 on the
preparations for the high-level review of the implementation by Member States of the Political Declaration
_______________
798

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2012, Supplement No. 8 (E/2012/28), chap. I, sect. B.

743

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the
World Drug Problem, which is to be held during the fifty-seventh session of the Commission, in 2014;
46. Invites Member States and observers to participate actively at the appropriate level in the high-level
review, noting that the outcome of the high-level review shall be submitted through the Economic and Social
Council to the General Assembly, in view of the special session of the Assembly on the world drug problem to be
held in 2016;
47. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the United Nations organ with prime responsibility for
drug control matters, to engage in the preparatory process for the special session, including by presenting proposals
from the fifty-seventh and fifty-eighth sessions of the Commission through the Economic and Social Council in
support of the preparatory process, including progress made in the implementation of the Political Declaration and
Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World
Drug Problem, to be considered by the General Assembly starting at its sixty-ninth session;
48. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 799 and requests that he submit to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/240
A/RES/68/240

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.1, para. 20)800

68/240. Human Rights Committee
The General Assembly,
Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols thereto,801
Welcoming the work of the Human Rights Committee, and encouraging sustained efforts by the Committee to
improve the efficiency of its working methods,
Regretting the persistent backlog of communications under the first Optional Protocol to the Covenant802
awaiting consideration, which prevents the Committee from considering communications in a timely manner and
without undue delay,
Recalling its resolutions 66/254 of 23 February 2012, 66/295 of 17 September 2012 and 68/2 of 20 September
2013 on the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system, and recognizing in this regard that a long-term solution to the
problem of the increasing backlog of communications awaiting review by the Committee may be found in this context,
Noting the request of the Committee that the General Assembly authorize an extension of its meeting time by
one week in 2014 and one week in 2015,
Noting also that documentation costs constitute the largest part of the budget for the Committee,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made so far by the Human Rights Committee to improve the
efficiency of its working methods, including with a view to further harmonizing the working methods of the treaty
bodies, and urges the Committee to continue its activities in this regard;
_______________
799

A/68/126.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta,
Mauritius, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine
and Uruguay.
801
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex; and United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1642, No. 14688.
802
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
800

744

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Authorizes, without prejudice to the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system, the addition of one
week of meeting time for the Committee in 2014, including an adequate level of Secretariat resources, as a
temporary measure, in order to address the backlog of communications under the first Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights802 awaiting consideration.
RESOLUTION 68/241
A/RES/68/241

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/456/Add.2,
para. 146),803 by a recorded vote of 132 to 1, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen
Against: Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining: Ethiopia

68/241. United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia
and the Arab Region
The General Assembly,
Guided by the fundamental and universal principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,804
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993,805 which reiterated the need to consider
the possibility of establishing regional and subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human
rights where they do not already exist,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/127 of 16 December 1977 and 51/102 of 12 December 1996 and all its
subsequent resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling further its resolutions 60/153 of 16 December 2005 and 67/162 of 20 December 2012 on the United
Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March 1993 806 and all its subsequent
resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Reaffirming that regional cooperation plays a fundamental role in promoting and protecting human rights and
should reinforce universal human rights, as contained in international human rights instruments, and their protection,
_______________
803

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Cameroon,
Comoros, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America and Yemen.
804
Resolution 217 A (III).
805
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
806
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1993/23 and Corr.2, 4 and 5),
chap. II, sect. A.

745

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting that the developments in the Middle East and North Africa have generated growing demand for the
services of the Centre, and recognizing that the report of the Secretary-General807 indicates that the Centre will be
unable to effectively meet these demands and fully discharge its mandate without the allocation of appropriate
funding and adequate resources,
Mindful of the vastness and the diversity of the needs in the field of human rights within South-West Asia and
the Arab region, and taking into account the need for more appropriate and sustainable funding of the Centre to fully
realize its significant function and crucial role in the region,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;807

2. Notes with appreciation the successful assistance that the Centre has provided through human rights
capacity-building activities, technical assistance programmes, training activities and regional consultations on the
topics of United Nations human rights mechanisms, human trafficking, the media and human rights education;
3. Underlines the Centre’s role as a source for regional expertise and the need to meet an increasing
number of requests for training and documentation, including in the Arabic language, which require additional
resources and the reinforcement of its activities;
4. Notes that the current levels of human and financial resources are limiting the Centre’s capacity to
respond in a timely and sustainable manner to the increasing requests to provide continuous follow-up support to the
countries of the region and to appropriately respond to their needs;
5. Encourages the continued engagement of the Centre to work with other United Nations regional offices
to strengthen its work and to avoid duplication;
6. Reaffirms the request contained in paragraph 5 of its resolution 67/162, and endorses the proposal of the
Secretary-General to strengthen the Centre, as proposed in his report, with the costs to be borne by the regular
budget and extrabudgetary resources, as recommended by the Secretary-General, in order to ensure the full
implementation of the mandate of the Centre;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report, in
accordance with existing rules and procedures, on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/242
A/RES/68/242

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/456/Add.3, para. 27)808

68/242. Situation of human rights in Myanmar
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 809 the
International Covenants on Human Rights810 and other relevant human rights instruments, and recalling its previous
resolutions on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, the most recent of which is resolution 67/233 of
24 December 2012, those of the Commission on Human Rights, and those of the Human Rights Council, the most
recent of which is resolution 22/14 of 21 March 2013,811
_______________
807

A/68/287.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America.
809
Resolution 217 A (III).
810
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
811
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
808

746

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in Myanmar 812 and the
facilitation by the Government of Myanmar of the visits of his Special Adviser to the country from 13 to 16 January,
3 to 6 February, 21 to 25 March, 25 August to 2 September and 7 to 10 October 2013,
Welcoming also the report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar813 and the
access granted to him during his visits to Myanmar from 11 to 16 February and 11 to 21 August 2013,
1. Welcomes the positive developments in Myanmar and the stated commitment of the Government of
Myanmar to continue on the path of political and economic reform, democratization and national reconciliation and
the promotion and protection of human rights, recognizing the scale of the reform effort undertaken to date;
2. Also welcomes the continued engagement of the Government of Myanmar with political actors within the
parliament, civil society and opposition parties, and urges the Government to continue constitutional and electoral
reform in order to ensure that the elections to be held in 2015 are genuinely credible, inclusive and transparent;
3. Further welcomes the increasing space for political activity, assembly, speech and the press, and
encourages the Government of Myanmar to fulfil its commitment to carry out comprehensive media reform and to
protect the right to freedom of expression, association and of peaceful assembly, including to allow for free and
independent media and to ensure the safety, security and freedom of human rights defenders to pursue their activities;
4. Welcomes the statement by the President of Myanmar that no prisoners of conscience will remain in
prison by the end of 2013, the continued release of prisoners of conscience during the past year and the work of the
political prisoner review committee, and urges the Government of Myanmar to continue the process and to fulfil its
commitment to release them by the end of 2013, without conditions, and to ensure the full restoration of their rights
and freedoms;
5. Expresses concern about remaining human rights violations, including arbitrary arrests and detentions of
political activists and human rights defenders, forced displacement, land confiscations, rape and other forms of
sexual violence and torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, as well as violations of international
humanitarian law, and urges the Government of Myanmar to step up its efforts to put an end to such violations;
6. Welcomes ongoing efforts aimed at reviewing and reforming legislation, including the Constitution,
recalls the importance of ensuring its compatibility with international standards and democratic principles, in this
regard acknowledges with interest the draft legislation on the National Human Rights Commission intended to bring
its functioning into line with the Paris Principles,814 and calls upon the Government of Myanmar to continue legal
reform, including by repealing laws restricting fundamental freedoms, and to consider ratifying additional
international instruments, including international human rights conventions;
7. Encourages the Government of Myanmar to take further steps to strengthen the rule of law, including
through legislative and institutional reform, and to address the need for an independent, impartial and effective
judiciary, and repeats its call upon the Government to take necessary measures to ensure accountability and end
impunity, including by undertaking a full, transparent and independent investigation into all reports of violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law;
8. Welcomes the signing of ceasefire agreements between the Government of Myanmar and ethnic armed
groups, and the recent signing of a seven-point agreement with regard to Kachin State and urges full implementation
of it and of ceasefire agreements between other groups and the Government, including for all parties to protect the
civilian population against ongoing violations of human rights and international humanitarian law and for safe,
timely, full and unhindered humanitarian access to be granted to all areas, also welcomes the commitment by the
Government to reach a nationwide ceasefire with ethnic armed groups, and encourages an all-inclusive political
dialogue with the objective of achieving lasting peace;
9. Urges the Government of Myanmar to accelerate its efforts to address discrimination, human rights
violations, violence, displacement and economic deprivation affecting various ethnic and religious minorities;
_______________
812

A/68/331.
A/68/397.
814
Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (resolution 48/134, annex).
813

747

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Reiterates its serious concern about the situation of the Rohingya minority in Rakhine State, including
repeated instances of communal violence and other abuses in the past year, and about attacks against Muslim
minorities elsewhere in the country, calls upon the Government of Myanmar to protect the civilian population from
ongoing violence, to ensure full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including full access to
humanitarian assistance without discrimination, unhindered access across Rakhine State and the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons and refugees to their communities of origin, to allow freedom of movement, equal
access to full citizenship for the Rohingya minority and to address issues of land ownership and restitution of
property, and, while welcoming some measures taken by the Government in this regard, encourages the
Government to facilitate intercommunity dialogue and address the root causes of the issue, to undertake full,
transparent and independent investigations into all reports of human rights violations and to ensure accountability
and bring about reconciliation;
11. Welcomes steps taken by the Government of Myanmar towards further engagement with a number of
regional and other actors, and in this regard welcomes the visit of the Secretary-General of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and a group of ministers in November 2013;
12. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to step up its efforts to promote tolerance and peaceful
coexistence in all sectors of society by, inter alia, encouraging interfaith dialogue and understanding and supporting
community leaders in this direction;
13. Welcomes the steps taken by the Government of Myanmar to improve engagement and cooperation with
the United Nations and other international actors, including the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the International Labour
Organization, and the progress made towards ending the recruitment and use of child soldiers in Myanmar and
towards the elimination of forced labour, and encourages the full implementation of relevant agreements, including
of the action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children by the armed forces and the commitment to
end forced labour by 2015;
14. While noting ongoing negotiations, expresses concern at delays, and calls upon the Government of
Myanmar to speed up the process of establishing a country office of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in accordance with the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights;
15. Encourages the international community to continue to support the Government of Myanmar in the
fulfilment of its international human rights obligations and commitments, the implementation of its democratic
transitional process and its economic and social development;
16. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to provide his good offices and to pursue his discussions on the situation of human rights,
the transition to democracy and the national reconciliation process with the Government and the people of
Myanmar, involving all relevant stakeholders, including democracy and human rights groups, and to offer technical
assistance to the Government in this regard;
(b) To give all assistance necessary to enable the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Myanmar and
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar to discharge their mandates fully, effectively
and in a coordinated manner;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, as well as to the Human Rights Council, on
the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
17. Decides to remain seized of the matter on the basis of the reports of the Secretary-General and the
Special Rapporteur.

748

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

∗

68/5.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations: requests under Article 19 of
the Charter ........................................................................................................................................................... 750

68/19.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors............................................ 750

68/20.

Programme planning............................................................................................................................................. 752

68/21.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services ......................................................................... 753

68/244.

Managing after-service health insurance liabilities .................................................................................................. 755

68/245.

Programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013 .................................................................................................... 756
A.

Final budget appropriations for the biennium 2012–2013 ............................................................................... 756

B.

Final income estimates for the biennium 2012–2013 ...................................................................................... 759

68/246.

Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015 ................................................. 760

68/247.

Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015......................................... 765

68/248.

Programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015 .................................................................................................... 780
A.

Budget appropriations for the biennium 2014–2015 ....................................................................................... 780

B.

Income estimates for the biennium 2014–2015 .............................................................................................. 782

C.

Financing of appropriations for the year 2014 ................................................................................................ 782

68/249.

Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium 2014–2015 ...................................................................... 783

68/250.

Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2014–2015 ............................................................................................... 784

68/251.

Pattern of conferences........................................................................................................................................... 785

68/252.

Human resources management.............................................................................................................................. 794

68/253.

United Nations common system: report of the International Civil Service Commission............................................. 797

68/254.

Administration of justice at the United Nations....................................................................................................... 800

68/255.

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.............................................................................. 803

68/256.

Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991............................ 806

68/257.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.............................................................. 808

68/258.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei ........................................................................... 810

68/259.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali...................................... 811

68/260.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force............................................................................. 814

_______________
∗

Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chair or another officer of the Bureau of the Committee.

749

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/5
A/RES/68/5

Adopted at the 32nd plenary meeting, on 9 October 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/504, para. 6)

68/5.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations: requests under
Article 19 of the Charter
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the Committee on Contributions on its seventy-third session,1

Reaffirming the obligation of Member States under Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations to bear the
expenses of the Organization as apportioned by the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its role in accordance with the provisions of Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations
and the advisory role of the Committee on Contributions in accordance with rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly;
2.

Also reaffirms its resolution 54/237 C of 23 December 1999;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to bring to the attention of Member States the deadline
specified in resolution 54/237 C, including through an early announcement in the Journal of the United Nations and
through direct communication;
4. Urges all Member States requesting exemption under Article 19 of the Charter to submit as much
information as possible in support of their requests and to consider submitting such information in advance of the
deadline specified in resolution 54/237 C so as to enable the collation of any additional detailed information that
may be necessary;
5. Agrees that the failure of the Central African Republic, the Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and
Principe and Somalia to pay the full minimum amount necessary to avoid the application of Article 19 of the
Charter was due to conditions beyond their control;
6. Decides that the Central African Republic, the Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe and
Somalia shall be permitted to vote in the General Assembly until the end of its sixty-eighth session.
RESOLUTION 68/19
A/RES/68/19

Adopted at the 59th plenary meeting, on 4 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/610, para. 7)

68/19.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/212 B of 31 March 1998 and its decision 57/573 of 20 December 2002,
Recalling also its resolutions 67/235 A of 24 December 2012 and 67/235 B of 28 June 2013,
Having considered, for the period ended 31 December 2012, the financial reports and audited financial
statements and the reports and audit opinions of the Board of Auditors on the United Nations Development
Programme,2 the United Nations Capital Development Fund,3 the United Nations Children’s Fund,4 the United

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/68/11).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 5A (A/68/5/Add.1).
3
Ibid., Supplement No. 5N and corrigendum (A/68/5/Add.14 and Corr.1).
4
Ibid., Supplement No. 5B (A/68/5/Add.2).
2

750

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,5 the voluntary funds administered by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,6 the United Nations Population Fund,7 the United Nations Office
for Project Services,8 the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),9
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Board of Auditors on the implementation of its
recommendations relating to the biennium 2010–2011,10 the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its reports on the United Nations funds and
programmes for the financial period ended 31 December 201211 and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,12
1. Accepts the financial reports and audited financial statements and the reports and audit opinions of the
Board of Auditors for the above-mentioned organizations;2–9
2.

Approves the recommendations and conclusions contained in the reports of the Board of Auditors;

3. Endorses the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;12
4. Reaffirms that the Board of Auditors shall be completely independent and solely responsible for the
conduct of audits;
5.
thereof;

Commends the Board of Auditors for the continued high quality of its reports and the streamlined format

6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Board of Auditors contained in its reports on the United Nations funds and programmes for the financial period
ended 31 December 2012;11
7. Welcomes the progress made in the implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards by the eight additional entities audited for the year ended 31 December 2012, and in this regard requests
the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to facilitate the dissemination of lessons learned and best practices from this implementation to other
entities where the implementation of the Standards remains under way;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the Chief Executives Board for Coordination,
to invite the heads of the entities to continue to address underlying challenges related to the implementation of the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards, including those related to inventory;
9. Emphasizes that the full implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards is a
tool for establishing better accountability and financial management, and requests the Secretary-General, in his
capacity as Chair of the Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to encourage the heads of the entities to ensure
the arrangements necessary to realize the maximum benefits of the implementation of the Standards and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session in the context of the progress report on the Standards;
10. Notes that, in the context of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards, the Board of Auditors
will be issuing on an annual basis a combined report containing a concise summary of principal findings and
conclusions and the status of the implementation of recommendations;
11. Reiterates the need to strengthen administrative and institutional measures to address the root causes of
recurring issues and to minimize the ageing of the previous recommendations of the Board of Auditors;
_______________
5

Ibid., Supplement No. 5C (A/68/5/Add.3).
Ibid., Supplement No. 5E (A/68/5/Add.5).
7
Ibid., Supplement No. 5G (A/68/5/Add.7).
8
Ibid., Supplement No. 5J and corrigendum (A/68/5/Add.10 and Corr.1).
9
Ibid., Supplement No. 5M and corrigenda (A/68/5/Add.13 and Corr.1 and 2).
10
A/68/163.
11
A/68/350.
12
A/68/381.
6

751

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the Chief Executives Board for Coordination,
to invite the executive heads of the funds and programmes of the United Nations to consider, where they have not
done so, exploring web-based follow-up systems, in line with lessons learned and best practices, to track the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors, including the updated status of their acceptance, implementation and
impact;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the funds and programmes of
the United Nations to ensure full implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the related
recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt and timely manner, to continue to hold programme
managers accountable for the non-implementation of recommendations and to effectively address the root causes of
the problems highlighted by the Board;
14. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide in his reports on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors a full explanation for the delays in the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board, in particular those recommendations not yet fully implemented that are two or more
years old;
15. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to indicate in future reports an expected time frame
for the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors, as well as the priorities for their
implementation and the office holders to be held accountable;
16. Recalls paragraphs 7 and 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee, notes with deep concern the
recurrence of cross-cutting and systemic risks identified by the Board of Auditors, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to invite the heads of
the United Nations entities to take corrective actions on cross-cutting issues and to implement, as a priority, all the
related recommendations of both the Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee;
17. Requests the Advisory Committee to request the Board of Auditors to continue to report on these crossentity issues in its future reports;
18. Recalls paragraph 25 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General, in
his capacity as Chair of the Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to invite the head of the United Nations
Children’s Fund to enhance oversight of the implementation of the cooperation agreements between the Fund
and the National Committees and to consider the need for reviewing the cooperation agreements, where
appropriate;
19. Also recalls paragraph 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee, welcomes the efforts undertaken by
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to increase and broaden its
donor base, and in this regard supports additional efforts to ensure that the financial health of the Agency is
sustained over time.
RESOLUTION 68/20
A/RES/68/20

Adopted at the 59th plenary meeting, on 4 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/611, para. 7)

68/20.

Programme planning

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/234 of 21 December 1982, 38/227 A of 20 December 1983, 41/213 of
19 December 1986, 55/234 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001, 57/282 of 20 December 2002,
58/268 and 58/269 of 23 December 2003, 59/275 of 23 December 2004, 60/257 of 8 May 2006, 61/235 of
22 December 2006, 62/224 of 22 December 2007, 63/247 of 24 December 2008, 64/229 of 22 December 2009,
65/244 of 24 December 2010, 66/8 of 11 November 2011 and 67/236 of 24 December 2012,
Recalling also the terms of reference of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, as outlined in the
annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976,
752

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the work of its fifty-third
session,13
1. Reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as the main subsidiary organ of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for planning, programming and coordination;
2. Re-emphasizes the role of the plenary and the Main Committees of the General Assembly in reviewing
and taking action on the appropriate recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination relevant
to their work, in accordance with regulation 4.10 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the
Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation;14
3. Stresses that setting the priorities of the United Nations is the prerogative of the Member States, as
reflected in legislative mandates;
4. Also stresses the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget preparation process, from its
early stages and throughout the process;
5. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on
evaluation,15 on the annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination
for 2012,16 on United Nations system support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development17 and on the
reports of the Joint Inspection Unit.18
RESOLUTION 68/21
A/RES/68/21

Adopted at the 59th plenary meeting, on 4 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/612, para. 6)

68/21.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services

The General Assembly,
I
Activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December 1999, 59/272 of 23 December
2004, 60/259 of 8 May 2006, 63/265 of 24 December 2008, 64/232 of 22 December 2009, 64/263 of 29 March
2010, 65/250 of 24 December 2010, 66/236 of 24 December 2011 and 67/258 of 12 April 2013,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on its activities for the period from
1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013,19
1.
2.
matters;

Reaffirms its primary role in considering and taking action on reports submitted to it;
Also reaffirms its oversight role and the role of the Fifth Committee in administrative and budgetary

3. Further reaffirms the independence and the separate and distinct roles of the internal and external
oversight mechanisms;
_______________
13

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/68/16).
ST/SGB/2000/8.
15
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/68/16), chap. II.B.
16
Ibid., chap. III.A.
17
Ibid., chap. III.B.
18
Ibid., chap. IV.
19
A/68/337 (Part I) and Add.1.
14

753

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Recalls that the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat shall exercise operational
independence relating to the performance of its internal oversight functions, under the authority of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with the relevant resolutions;
5. Encourages United Nations internal and external oversight bodies to further enhance the level of
cooperation with one another, such as through joint work-planning sessions, without prejudice to the independence
of each;
6.

Takes note of the report of the Office;19

7. Emphasizes the importance to effective internal oversight of good cooperation at all levels between
management and the Office;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant resolutions pertaining to the work of the Office
are brought to the attention of the relevant managers;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant resolutions, including those of a crosscutting nature, are brought to the attention of relevant managers and that the Office also takes those resolutions into
account in the conduct of its activities;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the full implementation of the accepted
recommendations of the Office, including those relating to cost avoidance, recovery of overpayments, efficiency
gains and other improvements, in a prompt and timely manner, and to provide detailed justifications in cases in
which recommendations of the Office are not accepted;
11. Encourages the Office, in future annual reports, to further enhance its analysis of general trends and
strategic challenges regarding internal oversight in the United Nations and to include an update of all critical
recommendations, taking into account the risk category, the target date for implementation and the office to be held
accountable for such implementation;
12. Notes the role of the Management Committee in monitoring closely the implementation of the
recommendations of oversight bodies, and stresses the importance of follow-up with programme managers to
ensure the full implementation of those recommendations in a prompt and timely manner;
13. Reaffirms that the Board of Auditors and the Joint Inspection Unit shall continue to be provided with
copies of all reports produced by the Office, requests that those reports be made available within one month of their
finalization, and emphasizes the need for comments by the Board and the Unit, as appropriate;
14. Recalls paragraph 68 of the report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on its activities for the
period from 1 August 2012 to 31 July 201320 regarding the proposal to transfer all investigations to the Office in the
long term, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly by no later
than the main part of its sixty-ninth session;
15. Encourages the Office to make every effort to ensure that oversight assignments by the Office, in
particular investigations, are completed in a timely manner;
16. Emphasizes the need for the Office to continue to refine its risk-based workplan in order to ensure that it
fully captures high-risk areas, such as those relating to procurement activities at the mission level;
17. Notes the external quality reviews conducted in different divisions of the Office, and looks forward to
receiving updates on the implementation of the recommendations of those reviews in the context of future annual
reports;
18. Welcomes the efforts made in addressing vacancy rates in the Office, and in this regard encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to fill the remaining vacant posts, particularly in the
Investigations Division and in the field, in accordance with the relevant provisions governing recruitment in the
United Nations;
19. Reaffirms section III of its resolution 67/258;
_______________
20

754

A/68/273.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

II
Activities of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee
Recalling its resolutions 61/275 of 29 June 2007, 64/263, section II of its resolution 66/236 and section II of its
resolution 67/258,
Having considered the report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on its activities for the period
from 1 August 2012 to 31 July 2013,
1.

Notes with appreciation the work of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee;

2.

Reaffirms the terms of reference of the Committee, as contained in the annex to its resolution 61/275;

3. Endorses the observations, comments and recommendations contained in paragraphs 16, 19, 22, 24, 27,
29, 33, 38, 41, 42, 45, 50, 54, 56, 58, 61, 63, 65, 68, 71, 76 and 77 of the report of the Committee;
4. Recalls paragraph 13 of its resolution 64/263, and in this regard invites the Committee, in the context of
its terms of reference, to continue to provide advice to the General Assembly on relevant issues relating to the
effectiveness, efficiency and impact of the audit activities and other oversight functions of the Office, as it deems
necessary.
RESOLUTION 68/244
A/RES/68/244

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/688, para. 9)

68/244. Managing after-service health insurance liabilities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/249 A of 23 December 2003, section III of its resolution 60/255 of 8 May 2006, its
resolutions 61/264 of 4 April 2007 and 64/241 and 64/245 of 24 December 2009, and section IV of its resolution
65/259 of 24 December 2010,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General21 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;21

2. Endorses the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Recalls paragraph 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
examine the option of broadening the mandate of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, based on input from
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, to include the cost-effective, efficient and sustainable administration
of after-service health insurance benefits, taking into account the advantages and disadvantages of this option,
including its financial and legal implications, without prejudice to the outcome of the examination, and to report
thereon at the seventieth session of the General Assembly;
4. Underlines that the request made in paragraph 3 above does not prevent the Secretary-General from
considering other options;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a survey of current health-care plans for active and retired
staff within the United Nations system, to explore all options to increase efficiency and contain costs and to report
thereon at its seventieth session.

_______________
21
22

A/68/353.
A/68/550.

755

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTIONS 68/245 A and B
A/RES/68/245AandB

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/688, para. 9)

68/245. Programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013
A
FINAL BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE BIENNIUM 2012–2013
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the programme budget for the
biennium 2012–2013,23 and endorses the observations and recommendations contained in the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 24 subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to further review unliquidated obligations with a view to ensuring that
only vital expenditures are ascribed to the programme budget for 2012–2013 and that other expenditures are
cancelled, and decides accordingly to reduce the resource allocation for unliquidated obligations by 40,000,000
United States dollars;
3.

Resolves that, for the biennium 2012–2013:

(a) The amount of 5,399,364,500 dollars appropriated by it in its resolutions 67/247 A of 24 December 2012
and 67/269 of 28 June 2013 shall be increased by 165,703,300 dollars, as follows:
Amount approved
in resolutions 67/247 A
and 67/269
Section

Increase/(decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

Part I. Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
1.

Overall policymaking, direction and coordination

108 571 700

2 986 500

111 558 200

2.

General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management

636 390 800

28 685 700

665 076 500

744 962 500

31 672 200

776 634 700

Subtotal, part I
Part II. Political affairs
3.

Political affairs

1 325 788 700

10 445 100

1 336 233 800

4.

Disarmament

23 001 800

2 322 900

25 324 700

5.

Peacekeeping operations

110 653 200

(1 125 400)

109 527 800

6.

Peaceful uses of outer space

7 981 900

562 900

8 544 800

1 467 425 600

12 205 500

1 479 631 100

Subtotal, part II
Part III. International justice and law
7.

International Court of Justice

47 567 700

2 296 900

49 864 600

8.

Legal affairs

45 861 000

1 637 000

47 498 000

93 428 700

3 933 900

97 362 600

Subtotal, part III

_______________
23
24

756

A/68/628.
A/68/656.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Amount approved
in resolutions 67/247 A
and 67/269
Section

Increase/(decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

Part IV. International cooperation for development
9.

Economic and social affairs

154 404 100

3 948 900

158 353 000

10.

Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States

7 348 600

203 000

7 551 600

United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development

12 746 600

(774 100)

11 972 500

12.

Trade and development

142 956 300

4 633 600

147 589 900

13.

International Trade Centre

40 141 800

(406 400)

39 735 400

14.

Environment

14 337 200

978 800

15 316 000

15.

Human settlements

21 345 600

699 800

22 045 400

16.

International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and
criminal justice

40 797 500

4 321 600

45 119 100

UN-Women

14 676 700

631 900

15 308 600

448 754 400

14 237 100

462 991 500

11.

17.

Subtotal, part IV
Part V. Regional cooperation for development
18.

Economic and social development in Africa

143 497 300

(6 546 000)

136 951 300

19.

Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific

103 187 700

3 252 800

106 440 500

20.

Economic development in Europe

68 606 300

6 709 400

75 315 700

21.

Economic and social development in Latin America and
the Caribbean

115 226 300

7 584 400

122 810 700

22.

Economic and social development in Western Asia

66 449 100

4 470 200

70 919 300

23.

Regular programme of technical cooperation

57 676 000

(5 059 900)

52 616 100

554 642 700

10 410 900

565 053 600

Subtotal, part V
Part VI. Human rights and humanitarian affairs
24.

Human rights

167 324 500

7 812 300

175 136 800

25.

International protection, durable solutions and assistance to
refugees

92 377 900

922 100

93 300 000

26.

Palestine refugees

48 930 500

5 155 700

54 086 200

27.

Humanitarian assistance

29 969 500

820 400

30 789 900

338 602 400

14 710 500

353 312 900

182 160 400

9 015 500

191 175 900

182 160 400

9 015 500

191 175 900

Subtotal, part VI
Part VII. Public information
28.

Public information
Subtotal, part VII
Part VIII. Common support services

29A.

Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management

15 088 000

1 410 200

16 498 200

29B.

Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts

36 770 600

2 257 400

39 028 000

29C.

Office of Human Resources Management

74 611 400

2 641 200

77 252 600

29D.

Office of Central Support Services

181 255 200

(1 080 200)

180 175 000

757

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Amount approved
in resolutions 67/247 A
and 67/269
Section

Increase/(decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

29E.

Administration, Geneva

153 603 200

11 261 900

164 865 100

29F.

Administration, Vienna

39 274 000

644 900

39 918 900

29G.

Administration, Nairobi

32 052 500

525 900

32 578 400

29H.

Office of Information and Communications Technology

75 800 200

(1 280 000)

74 520 200

608 455 100

16 381 300

624 836 400

38 877 300

(311 000)

38 566 300

38 877 300

(311 000)

38 566 300

Subtotal, part VIII
Part IX. Internal oversight
31.

Internal oversight
Subtotal, part IX
Part X. Jointly financed administrative activities and special
expenses

32.

Jointly financed administrative activities

10 897 500

600 100

11 497 600

33.

Special expenses

120 441 300

(436 900)

120 004 400

Subtotal, part X

131 338 800

163 200

131 502 000

Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance

65 051 600

1 153 800

66 205 400

Subtotal, part XI

65 051 600

1 153 800

66 205 400

223 123 300

25 836 400

248 959 700

223 123 300

25 836 400

248 959 700

29 243 200

–

29 243 200

29 243 200

–

29 243 200

473 298 500

26 294 000

499 592 500

Subtotal, part XIV

473 298 500

26 294 000

499 592 500

Total

5 399 364 500

165 703 300

5 565 067 800

Part XI. Capital expenditures
34.

Part XII. Safety and security
35.

Safety and security
Subtotal, part XII
Part XIII. Development Account

36.

Development Account
Subtotal, part XIII
Part XIV. Staff assessment

37.

Staff assessment

(b) Of the increase mentioned in paragraph 3 (a) above, an amount of 44,734,400 dollars shall be assessed
in accordance with the scale of assessment applicable to the regular budget;
(c)

The balance of 120,968,900 dollars shall be financed as follows:

(i) Applying the credit of 40,508,300 dollars gross (40,069,800 dollars net), which constitutes the
unencumbered balance for the biennium 2012–2013 of the Special Account for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible
for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994, the Special Account for the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 and the Special Account for the International Residual Mechanism for

758

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Criminal Tribunals, and decides in this regard that the provision for the application of credits under regulations
3.2 (d), 5.3 and 5.4 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations25 shall be suspended;
(ii) Authorizing the Secretary-General to credit from the Special Account established in resolution
3049 A (XXVII) of 19 December 1972 an amount of 26,648,200 dollars to the General Fund;
(iii) Applying the credit of 23,141,000 dollars of the cancellation of prior-period obligations corresponding to
the biennium 2010–2011, and decides in this regard that regulations 3.2 (d), 5.3 and 5.4 shall be suspended;
(iv) Applying the credit of the estimated increase in income of 31,109,900 dollars, consisting of 5,194,400
dollars in income other than staff assessment income plus 25,915,500 dollars in staff assessment income for
the biennium 2012–2013, as reflected in resolution B below;
(d) The Secretary-General shall be authorized to transfer credits between sections of the budget, with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee;
(e) In addition to the appropriations approved under paragraph 3 (a) above, an amount of 75,000 dollars
shall be appropriated for each year of the biennium 2012–2013 from the accumulated income of the Library
Endowment Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps and library equipment and for such other expenses
of the Library at the Palais des Nations in Geneva as are in accordance with the objects and provisions of the
endowment.
B
FINAL INCOME ESTIMATES FOR THE BIENNIUM 2012–2013
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the biennium 2012–2013:
(a) The estimates of income of 511,927,900 United States dollars approved by it in its resolutions 67/247 B
of 24 December 2012 and 67/269 of 28 June 2013 shall be increased by 31,109,900 dollars, as follows:
Amount approved
in resolutions
67/247 B and 67/269
Income section

1.

Increase/(decrease)

Final estimates

(United States dollars)

Income from staff assessment
Subtotal, income section 1

477 606 700

25 915 500

503 522 200

477 606 700

25 915 500

503 522 200

2.

General income

36 780 500

5 250 500

42 031 000

3.

Services to the public

(2 459 300)

(56 100)

(2 515 400)

Subtotal, income sections 2 and 3

34 321 200

5 194 400

39 515 600

Total

511 927 900

31 109 900

543 037 800

(b) The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
(c) Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, catering and related
services, garage operations, television services and the sale of publications not provided for under the budget
appropriations shall be charged against the income derived from those activities.

_______________
25

ST/SGB/2013/4.

759

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/246
A/RES/68/246

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/689, para. 43)

68/246. Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 42/211 of 21 December 1987, 45/248 B, section VI,
of 21 December 1990, 55/231 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001, 58/269 and 58/270 of
23 December 2003, 59/276, section XI, of 23 December 2004, 60/283 of 7 July 2006, 61/263 of 4 April 2007,
62/236 of 22 December 2007, 63/262 of 24 December 2008, 64/243 of 24 December 2009, 65/259 of 24 December
2010, 66/246 and 66/247 of 24 December 2011, 66/258 of 9 April 2012 and 67/248 of 24 December 2012,
Reaffirming also the respective mandates of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
and the Committee for Programme and Coordination in the consideration of the proposed programme budget,
Reaffirming further the role of the General Assembly, through the Fifth Committee, in carrying out a thorough
analysis and approval of posts and financial resources, as well as of human resources,
Having considered the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015,26 the eighth progress report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of projects financed from the Development Account,27 the report of
the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on internal oversight: proposed programme budget for the biennium
2014–2015,28 the report of the Secretary-General on consultations on consolidating the secretariat of the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination at United Nations Headquarters in New York,29 the fifth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the enterprise resource planning project,30 the note by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting the second annual progress report of the Board of Auditors on the implementation of the
United Nations enterprise resource planning system,31 the letters dated 22 October and 12 November 2013 from the
President of the General Assembly to the Chair of the Fifth Committee transmitting the letters dated 18 October and
11 November 2013 from the Secretary-General to the President of the General Assembly, 32 the report of the
Secretary-General on limited budgetary discretion 33 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,34
Having also considered chapter II, section A, of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
on its fifty-third session35 and the consolidated report of the Secretary-General on the changes to the biennial
programme plan as reflected in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015,36
Having further considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on the review of enterprise resource planning systems in United Nations organizations37 and the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination thereon,38
_______________
26

A/68/6 (Introduction), (Sects. 1–3), (Sect. 4) and Corr.1, (Sect. 5) and Corr.1, (Sect. 6) and Corr.1, (Sect. 7) and Corr.1, (Sects. 8–12),
(Sect. 13) and Add.1, (Sect. 14), (Sect. 15) and Corr.1, (Sects. 16–21), (Sect. 22) and Corr.1, (Sects. 23–25), (Sect. 26) and Corr.1,
(Sect. 27) and Corr.1, (Sects. 28 and 29), (Sects. 29A–G), (Sect. 29H) and Corr.1 and (Sects. 30–36) and (Income sects. 1–3).
27
A/68/92.
28
A/68/86 and Corr.1.
29
A/68/214.
30
A/68/375 and Add.1.
31
A/68/151.
32
A/C.5/68/10 and A/C.5/68/13.
33
A/68/490.
34
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/68/7); A/68/7/Add.7 and 9; and A/68/507.
35
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/68/16).
36
A/68/75.
37
A/68/344.
38
A/68/344/Add.1.

760

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly
entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters, and reaffirms the role of the Fifth
Committee in carrying out a thorough analysis and approving human and financial resources and policies, with a
view to ensuring full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the
implementation of policies in this regard;
2.

Also reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

3. Further reaffirms the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects
of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation;39
4. Reaffirms the established budgetary procedures and methodologies, based on its resolutions 41/213
and 42/211;
5. Also reaffirms that no changes to the budget methodology, to the established budgetary procedures and
practices or to the financial regulations may be implemented without prior review and approval by the General
Assembly, in accordance with established budgetary procedures;
6. Reiterates the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget preparation process, from its
early stages and throughout the process;
7. Emphasizes the importance of providing the consistent and timely information necessary to enable
Member States to make well-informed decisions;
8. Stresses that all Member States should fulfil their financial obligations as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations on time, in full and without conditions;
9. Recalls paragraph 7 of section X of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012, and reaffirms the need
for a comprehensive and satisfactory solution to the problem of controlling the effects of inflation and currency
fluctuations on the budget of the United Nations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to commission an independent study on recosting and options for the
Organization in dealing with fluctuations in exchange rates and inflation, drawing, inter alia, on the experience of
other international organizations, and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions at the main part of its sixty-ninth session;
11. Decides that a vacancy rate of 8.75 per cent for Professional staff and 6.4 per cent for General Service
staff shall be used as a basis for the calculation of the budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
12. Reiterates the priorities of the Organization for the biennium 2014–2015, as outlined in General
Assembly resolution 67/248;
13. Notes with concern the late issuance of the first report of the Advisory Committee on the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;40
14. Encourages the Secretary-General to take advantage of the potential of new systems and standards, such
as the Umoja enterprise resource planning system and the International Public Sector Accounting Standards, in
preparing his budget proposals, with a view to enhancing the quality and accuracy of information provided to
Member States;
15. Stresses that results-based budgeting and results-based management are mutually supportive
management tools and that improved implementation of results-based budgeting enhances both management and
accountability in the Secretariat, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard;
16. Reaffirms paragraph 28 of resolution 55/231, and stresses the importance of adequate training to ensure
the full implementation of results-based budgeting;

_______________
39
40

ST/SGB/2000/8.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/68/7).

761

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as
contained in chapter II, section A, of its report;35
18. Also endorses, subject to the provisions of the present resolution and without establishing a precedent,
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee concerning posts and non-post resources as contained in
chapter II of its first report on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
Part I
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
Section 1
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
19. Takes note of paragraphs I.11 and I.46 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and approves the
establishment of the four posts proposed by the Secretary-General for the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children;
20. Decides to defer consideration of the proposal of the Secretary-General to establish a Partnership
Facility to the first part of its resumed sixty-eighth session;
21. Recalls the letter dated 11 November 2013 from the Secretary-General to the President of the General
Assembly 41 and the associated report on operational arrangements and conditions of service of the Advisory
Committee,42 and decides to defer consideration of this matter to its sixty-ninth session;
Section 2
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management
22. Decides to approve one P-2 post in the Office of the President of the General Assembly;
23. Also decides to decrease the non-post resources allocated to the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management by 1.45 per cent;
Part II
Political affairs
Section 3
Political affairs
24. Decides not to abolish one P-2 post under subprogramme 1 in the Africa II Division;
25. Takes note of paragraph II.11 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish two
General Service (Other level) posts under subprogrammes 4, Decolonization, and 5, Question of Palestine;
26. Also takes note of paragraph II.14 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish
one General Service (Other level) post in the Office for the United Nations Register of Damage Caused by the
Construction of the Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory;
Section 4
Disarmament
27. Takes note of paragraph II.34 of the report of the Advisory Committee, recalls its resolution 62/216 of
22 December 2007, and decides not to approve the proposed abolishment of one Local level post in the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa;

_______________
41
42

762

A/C.5/68/13, annex.
Ibid., enclosure.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

28. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate support is provided to the group of governmental
experts established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 67/53 of 3 December 2012 on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, in order to enable the group to
meet for two sessions of two weeks in both 2014 and 2015;
Section 5
Peacekeeping operations
29. Decides not to abolish one P-3 post under subprogramme 1;
Part III
International justice and law
Section 7
International Court of Justice
30. Takes note of paragraph III.6 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to establish one
P-2 post in the Office of the President of the International Court of Justice;
31. Decides to decrease the non-post resources allocated to the International Court of Justice by
2.35 per cent;
Part IV
International cooperation for development
Section 9
Economic and social affairs
32. Decides to establish one P-2 post in support of the implementation of the projects under the
Development Account;
Section 12
Trade and development
33. Decides to establish one P-3 post of Programme Officer under executive direction and management;
Section 15
Human settlements
34. Decides not to abolish one P-2 post of Associate Human Settlements Officer;
Part V
Regional cooperation for development
Section 20
Economic development in Europe
35. Recalls paragraph V.51 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish one P-4 post
under subprogramme 4 and one P-3 post under subprogramme 6;
Section 21
Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean
36. Decides not to abolish one P-2 post under executive direction and management, one P-2 post under
subprogramme 1, one P-2 post and one Local level post under subprogramme 3, one P-2 post under
subprogramme 5, one Local level post under subprogramme 7, one Local level post under subprogramme 9, one
P-3 post under subprogramme 12, one P-2 post under subprogramme 13 and one P-2 and three Local level posts
under programme support;
763

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Section 22
Economic and social development in Western Asia
37. Decides not to approve the proposed abolishment of one P-3, one P-2 and seven Local level posts;
Part VI
Human rights and humanitarian affairs
Section 24
Human rights
38. Takes note of paragraph VI.8 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish one
P-4 post of Secretary of the Consultative Group under subprogramme 4;
39. Also takes note of paragraph VI.9 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish
one P-5 post of Chief, Civil Society Section, in the External Outreach Branch;
40. Decides not to abolish one P-3 post in the Development and Economic and Social Issues Branch under
subprogramme 1;
Section 26
Palestine refugees
41. Decides not to abolish one General Service (Other level) post in the West Bank;
42. Also decides to establish two Investigation Officer posts, one P-3 and one P-4, two P-4 Field Legal
Officer posts, one each in Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic, and one P-3 Curriculum Expert post in Gaza
specialized in the field of human rights;
43. Recalls its resolution 65/272 of 18 April 2011, and notes the financial stress under which the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East currently operates, despite the critical
work carried out by the Agency in providing vital assistance to Palestine refugees;
Part VII
Public information
Section 28
Public information
44. Decides not to abolish two Local level posts, one each at the United Nations information centres in
Panama and Ghana;
45. Also decides to decrease the non-post resources allocated to the Department of Public Information by
1.45 per cent;
Part X
Jointly financed administrative activities and special expenses
Section 31
Jointly financed administrative activities
46. Decides to decrease the non-post resources allocated to jointly financed administrative activities by
1 per cent;
Limited budgetary discretion
47. Recalls section I of its resolution 66/258, takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,33 and
endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee.43
_______________
43

764

A/68/7/Add.9.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex
Staffing table for the biennium 2014–2015
Category

Number of posts

Professional and higher
Deputy Secretary-General

1

Under-Secretary-General

33

Assistant Secretary-General

31

D-2

110

D-1

289

P-5

863

P-4/3

2 842

P-2/1

521
Subtotal

4 690

General Service and related
Principal level

273

Other level

2 580
Subtotal

2 853

Other
Security Service

314

Local level

1 963

Field Service

116

National Professional Officer

85

Trades and Crafts

97
Subtotal

2 575

Total

10 118

RESOLUTION 68/247
A/RES/68/247

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/689, para. 43)

68/247. Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
The General Assembly,
I
Conditions of service and compensation for officials, other than
Secretariat officials, serving the General Assembly: full-time members
of the International Civil Service Commission and the Chair of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Recalling its resolution 35/221 of 17 December 1980, section VII of its resolution 55/238 of 23 December
2000, its resolution 58/266 of 23 December 2003 and section III of its resolution 65/268 of 4 April 2011,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,44
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;44
_______________
44

A/68/187.

765

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

II
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
Recalling section IV of its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006, section V of its resolution 63/262 of 24 December
2008, its resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009, its resolution 65/243 A and section II.B of its resolution 65/259 of
24 December 2010, section I of its resolution 66/232 B of 21 June 2012, its resolution 66/246 and sections II and V
of its resolution 66/247 of 24 December 2011 and section IV of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012,
Having considered the sixth progress report of the Secretary-General on the adoption of the International
Public Sector Accounting Standards by the United Nations,45 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
third progress report of the Board of Auditors on the implementation of the Standards46 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,47
1. Takes note of the sixth progress report of the Secretary-General on the adoption of the International
Public Sector Accounting Standards by the United Nations45 and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
third progress report of the Board of Auditors on the implementation of the Standards;46
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;47
3.

Accepts the third progress report of the Board of Auditors;

4.

Approves the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report;

5. Notes the progress made since the issuance of the fifth progress report of the Secretary-General on the
adoption of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards by the United Nations, 48 and requests the
Secretary-General to report on the status of the Standards implementation projects in the Secretariat and across the
United Nations system;
6. Welcomes the progress made in the implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards by the additional eight entities audited for the year ended 31 December 2012, and in this regard requests
the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to facilitate the dissemination of lessons learned and best practices from this implementation to other
entities where the implementation of the Standards remains under way;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, as the Chair of the Chief Executives Board, to invite the heads of the
entities to continue to address underlying challenges related to the implementation of the International Public Sector
Accounting Standards, including those relating to inventory;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to enhance the risk assessment and risk management tools, in
particular those related to the early warning mechanism, the transitional arrangements related to data,
implementation of the Umoja enterprise resource planning project, financial statements that are compliant with the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards, accounting for inventory and opening balances for assets and
liabilities, and to continue to report on the results achieved in these specific areas of risk;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the Chief Executives Board, to
monitor continuously the latest International Public Sector Accounting Standards and training best practices and to
promote them within the United Nations system entities;
10. Expresses serious concern about weaknesses identified by the Board of Auditors in relation to asset
management in all entities after the adoption of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards, and in this
regard calls for corrective measures in order to appropriately address this recurring issue and thus enhance the
quality of data for financial statements that are compliant with the Standards to support the effective decisionmaking process;
_______________
45

A/68/351.
A/68/161.
47
A/68/508.
48
A/67/344.
46

766

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Urges the Secretary-General to ensure that accurate opening balances for assets and liabilities are
established in the preparation of financial statements that are compliant with the International Public Sector
Accounting Standards;
12. Reaffirms that the Umoja enterprise resource planning system will serve as the backbone for
implementation by the United Nations of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards, and urges increased
collaboration between the Standards and Umoja teams;
13. Expresses concern that the delays in the implementation of the Umoja enterprise resource planning
project pose a significant risk to the timely realization of the benefits of the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to take additional measures to identify further potential benefits that can
be quantified during the transition phase as well as after the full implementation of the International Public Sector
Accounting Standards and Umoja and to report thereon in the context of future progress reports;
15. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the General Assembly is kept
informed, on an annual basis, of the progress in implementing the International Public Sector Accounting Standards
by 2014, including milestones and deliverables, outstanding activities, utilization of resources and the effectiveness
of the activities undertaken by the local Standards implementation teams, as well as to ensure full realization of the
benefits associated with the implementation of the Standards;
16. Recalls paragraph 14 of section IV of its resolution 67/246, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to review the implications arising from the adoption of the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards for the workload of the Advisory Committee, the Fifth Committee and the General Assembly, as well as
the comments and observations of the Board of Auditors on this issue, and to report thereon in the context of future
progress reports;
17. Encourages the Secretary-General to take all measures necessary to ensure that the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards project is implemented on time and within the approved budget;
18. Concurs with the views expressed by the Board of Auditors in paragraph 27 of its report about the
potential for the International Public Sector Accounting Standards to enhance the role and profile of financial
management, and in this regard welcomes its intention to assist United Nations entities in making further
improvements in this area;
19. Notes with concern differences of opinion between the International Public Sector Accounting Standards
implementation team and the Board of Auditors on some terms and mechanisms of the Standards, including
inventory, required for full project implementation within the United Nations system, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to make additional efforts to come to an agreement as soon as possible on this issue and to report
thereon;
III
Construction of additional office facilities at the
Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa
Recalling its resolution 56/270 of 27 March 2002, section IV of its resolution 58/272 of 23 December 2003,
sections IX and X of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007, section I of its resolution 63/263 of 24 December
2008, its resolution 64/243, section III of its resolution 65/259, section VII of its resolution 66/247 and section II of
its resolution 67/246,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on progress in the construction of additional office
facilities at the Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa 49 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee,50
_______________
49
50

A/68/517.
A/68/643.

767

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on progress in the construction of additional office
facilities at the Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa;49
2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;50

3. Recalls paragraph 3 of section III of its resolution 65/259, and in this regard regrets the continued delay
in the renovation of conference facilities at the Commission, in particular Africa Hall and Conference Room 1;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of priority, to ensure that the renovation of conference
facilities at the Commission, in particular Africa Hall and Conference Room 1, is carried out and to report to the
General Assembly on the progress at the main part of its sixty-ninth session;
5. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts of the Government of Ethiopia, as host country, in facilitating
the construction of additional office facilities and the renovation of conference facilities at the Commission;
6. Re-emphasizes the importance of guidance, interaction and coordination between the Secretariat in
New York, on the one hand, and the Commission in Addis Ababa, on the other, with clear reporting lines;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full accountability for the delays, the lack of responsiveness of
management to the needs of the construction and renovation projects in Addis Ababa and other factors that have
contributed to delays in the implementation of the projects and to include information on measures taken to address
those issues in his next annual progress report;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the
Secretariat with ensuring effective oversight of the implementation of the construction and renovation of the
conference facilities and with submitting to the General Assembly information on key findings in the context of its
annual reports;
IV
Capital master plan
Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999, 55/238, 56/234 and 56/236 of 24 December 2001 and
56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its resolution 57/292 of 20 December 2002, its resolution 59/295 of 22 June
2005, section II of its resolution 60/248 of 23 December 2005, its resolutions 60/256 of 8 May 2006, 60/282 of
30 June 2006, 61/251 of 22 December 2006, 62/87 of 10 December 2007, 63/270 of 7 April 2009, 64/228 of
22 December 2009 and 65/269 of 4 April 2011, section III of its resolution 66/258 of 9 April 2012 and section V of
its resolution 67/246 and its decisions 58/566 of 8 April 2004, 65/543 of 24 December 2010 and 66/555 of
24 December 2011,
Having considered the eleventh annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
capital master plan,51 the report of the Secretary-General on the final expenditure for associated costs for the period
from 2008 to 2013,52 the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the year ended 31 December
2012,53 the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors
contained in its report on the capital master plan for the year ended 31 December 201254 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee,55
1. Takes note of the eleventh annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
capital master plan,51 the report of the Secretary-General on the final expenditure for associated costs for the period
from 2008 to 2013,52 the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the year ended 31 December

_______________
51

A/68/352.
A/68/352/Add.1.
53
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 5, Vol. V (A/68/5 (Vol. V)).
54
A/68/336.
55
A/68/551.
52

768

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

201253 and the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors contained in its report on the capital master plan for the year ended 31 December 2012;54

A.

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;55

3.

Accepts the report of the Board of Auditors;

4.

Approves the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report;

Eleventh annual progress report

5. Reaffirms paragraph 37 of its resolution 62/87, paragraph 2 of its resolution 64/228 and paragraph 5 of
section V of its resolution 67/246;
6. Also reaffirms paragraph 28 of its resolution 62/87, and decides that nothing in the present resolution
shall be interpreted as a change in the current scope of the capital master plan as decided by the General Assembly,
nor should the need for liquidity of the project be linked to the completion of the renovation of the buildings under
the current scope;
7. Recalls paragraph 50 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly, at the first part of its resumed sixty-eighth session, the information specified
therein;
8. Acknowledges the progress made towards the completion of the project, and expresses concern about the
continuing uncertainties regarding major aspects of the project, including but not limited to the issues of associated
costs, the cost overruns, the cash balance and the situation of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library Building and the
South Annex Building, which continue to pose risks to the successful completion of the project;
9. Approves the application of the balance of interest income and the working capital reserve funds, as well
as the future interest income, in the full amount of 159.4 million United States dollars to the remaining cash balance
for the corresponding remaining requirements of the project;
10. Decides that the provisions for the application of credits under regulations 3.2 (d), 5.3 and 5.4 of the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations56 shall be suspended in respect of the working capital reserve
and interest income earned on assessments received from Member States for the capital master plan;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the most up-to-date information on a cash flow bridging
mechanism to address possible cash flow challenges of the project during the time remaining until its completion;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to interact with the host city as required in this regard
with a view to determining available options for resolving the pending security concerns in relation to the Dag
Hammarskjöld Library Building and the South Annex Building, to assist the General Assembly in making a final
determination on the issue within the context of the capital master plan and to report thereon at the first part of the
resumed sixty-eighth session of the Assembly;
13. Reaffirms paragraphs 21 and 22 of section V of its resolution 67/246;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the current conditions of maintenance of the art, crafts and
gifts donated to the United Nations in New York in the context of his next progress report;
15. Welcomes with appreciation the donations from Member States that contributed to the renovation of the
Conference Building and the Secretariat Building;
16. Reaffirms paragraphs 31 and 32 of section V of its resolution 67/246;
17. Notes that as at 30 June 2013 an amount of 2.7 million dollars in assessments remained unpaid to the
capital master plan for 2011 and prior periods, and urges the Member States concerned to arrange for the
disbursement of those contributions expeditiously;
_______________
56

ST/SGB/2013/4.

769

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Approves the extension of the approved commitment authority for 2013 into 2014;
19. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into additional commitments of up to 15 million dollars for
resources required for the capital master plan project through 2014;
B.

Associated costs

20. Recalls paragraph 44 of section V of its resolution 67/246, and requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly, at the first part of its resumed sixty-eighth session, the final expenditure for associated
costs for the period from 2008 to 2013, updates on the projected final cost to completion and the status of
contributions;
21. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to absorb the associated costs within the
budget approved for the capital master plan;
V
Strategic heritage plan of the United Nations Office at Geneva
Recalling part XI of its resolution 64/243 and section VII of its resolution 66/247,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General57 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,58
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;57

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,58
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Reiterates that all planned major capital projects and related resource requirements should be included in
the strategic capital review to allow for comprehensive analysis and planning by the Organization;
4.

Concurs with the need to address the health, safety, usability and access needs of the Palais des Nations;

5. Recalls its resolution 66/247, and reiterates that the Secretary-General must ensure that major capital
expenditure projects are not implemented simultaneously in order to prevent the need to finance and supervise them
at the same time;
6. Reiterates its request that the renovation phase of the strategic heritage plan not start before the General
Assembly has taken a decision on this matter and the capital master plan has been completed;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to reduce the planning phase as far as possible with an aim to start
construction work at the earliest opportunity;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General, through the Office of Central Support Services of the Department
of Management of the Secretariat, to take into account lessons learned and best practices from past construction and
renovation projects in implementing the strategic heritage plan, in particular to draw from experience and knowhow acquired from large capital projects, including the capital master plan;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure robust internal project control mechanisms in the
context of the scope, cost, schedule and quality of the strategic heritage plan;
10. Reaffirms the importance of ensuring effective governance and oversight with respect to the
implementation of the strategic heritage plan, and requests the Secretary-General to present options in this regard to
the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-ninth session;

_______________
57
58

770

A/68/372.
A/68/585.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Stresses the importance of oversight with respect to the development and implementation of the strategic
heritage plan, and requests the Advisory Committee to request the Board of Auditors to initiate oversight activities
and to report annually thereon to the General Assembly;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the impact of Umoja is taken into consideration in the
strategic heritage plan and that progress made thereon is reported to the General Assembly in the context of future
progress reports;
13. Encourages the Secretary-General to assess the potential for flexible workplace strategies in the context
of the strategic heritage plan, subject to a decision by the General Assembly on this matter;
14. Regrets that the parking requirements were not part of either the preliminary building survey or the
conceptual study;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to study all viable options to ensure sufficient parking spaces so as to
meet the existing and future needs of diplomatic missions and Secretariat staff within the projected overall budget of
the strategic heritage plan and to report thereon in the context of future progress reports;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on plans to reuse existing
furniture and to reduce new furniture requirements, where possible, in the context of his next report on the strategic
heritage plan;
17. Recalls paragraph 31 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly, at the main part of its seventieth session, revised overall cost estimates
of the strategic heritage plan taking into account, inter alia, a review of the contingency level, the overall level of
consultancy fees and the in-depth technical assessment to be undertaken;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annual progress reports on the implementation of the strategic
heritage plan;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General, through the Office of Central Support Services, to update Member
States regularly on the progress of this project;
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure that the work undertaken for the
biennium 2012–2013 and to be undertaken for the biennium 2014–2015 will not have to be redone as part of the
strategic heritage plan;
21. Requests that the term “associated costs” continue to be used in this regard;
22. Commends the Secretary-General for including associated cost projections in the total project
requirements on the basis of lessons learned from the capital master plan, and requests him to ensure that the
proposed requirements for associated costs are based on actual needs and to report thereon no later than at the main
part of the seventieth session of the General Assembly;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all associated costs related to the strategic heritage plan are
presented transparently in the project cost estimates throughout the project cycle of the strategic heritage plan and to
ensure that all such costs are fully justified and necessary for the timely completion of the project;
24. Also requests the Secretary-General to refine his proposal with regard to the core functions of the
strategic heritage plan project team and to report thereon at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
25. Further requests the Secretary-General to further explore the possibilities of alternative funding
mechanisms, inter alia through a donation policy, with the aim of reducing the overall assessment on Member
States;
26. Welcomes with appreciation the offer of support from the Government of Switzerland to the strategic
heritage plan, and acknowledges the efforts of the host country to make the plan possible;
27. Welcomes the donations by Member States to the renovation of the Palais des Nations, and requests the
Secretary-General to include all voluntary contributions in the total project budget;
771

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

28. Stresses that the strategic heritage plan should be implemented in compliance with the relevant
provisions of the agreements pertaining to the animals living on the land provided for the United Nations Office at
Geneva;
29. Authorizes the Secretary-General to negotiate with the host country on loan arrangements for both the
renovation and the construction portions of the strategic heritage plan, including the possibility of an interest-free
loan, and to report to the General Assembly in this regard in the context of his next report on the plan;
30. Approves implementation strategy (c), as proposed by the Secretary-General, for planning and design
purposes;
31. Recalls paragraphs 55 and 58 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to revert to the
establishment of the multi-year special account for the strategic heritage plan at the main part of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to explore options of using contracted external expertise to ensure the
most appropriate staffing levels to support the implementation of the project;
33. Affirms that the strategic heritage plan project team will be a time-limited and mission-specific
endeavour and that the team should therefore not be a permanent addition to the existing organizational structure;
34. Approves resource requirements for the strategic heritage plan for 2014 in the amount of 15,629,900
Swiss francs, or 16,645,200 dollars at preliminary 2014–2015 rates, in respect of which the General Assembly:
(a) Decides to approve general temporary assistance in the amount of 1,492,400 dollars under section 33,
Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2014–2015 to provide for the continuation of the two existing positions (one Engineering Project Manager (P-4) and
one Architecture Project Manager (P-4)) and the establishment, in 2014, of the following positions: one Project
Director (D-2), one Chief of Design and Construction (D-1), one Chief of Programme Management Support (D-1),
one Senior Design Project Manager (P-5), one Senior Programme and Cost Manager (P-5), one Administrative
Officer (Finance) (P-4), one Procurement Officer (P-4), one Contracts Management/Legal Officer (P-4), one
Mechanical and Engineering Coordinator (P-3) and one Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level));
(b) Decides to approve, under section 33, additional requirements in the amount of 15,152,800 dollars for
contractual services, travel and contingencies and escalation;
35. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments up to the amount of 1,294,200 dollars in
2015, at preliminary 2014–2015 rates;
VI
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and
other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General59 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,60
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;59

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,60
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Takes note of paragraphs 15, 23, 25, 31, 60, 70, 125, 165 and 166 of the report of the Advisory
Committee;61
_______________
59

A/68/327 and Add.1–8 and Add.8/Corr.1.
A/68/7/Add.10 and Corr.1 and Add.17 and 18 and Add.18/Corr.1.
61
A/68/7/Add.10 and Corr.1.
60

772

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Recalls paragraph 12 of the report of the Secretary-General,62 and urges the Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria to continue his efforts towards the successful
convening of the second Geneva conference on the Syrian Arab Republic, aimed at achieving the objective of the
mission as indicated in the report of the Secretary-General;
5. Takes note of paragraph 48 of the report of the Advisory Committee61 with regard to the Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, and decides to establish one Public Information Officer
position (P-4) in that Office, to be located in Sana’a;
6. Recalls paragraph 54 of the report of the Advisory Committee,61 requests the Secretary-General to
review the appropriate level of leadership arrangements for the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel, taking into account the importance of successful implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-eighth
session, and, pending the review, authorizes the Secretary-General to make the appointment of the Assistant
Secretary-General for a term of seven months;
7. Takes note of paragraph 60 of the report of the Advisory Committee,61 and decides to approve the
establishment of the following posts: one Chief of Staff (D-1), one Political Affairs Officer (P-3), one Human
Resources Assistant (Local level) and one Administrative Assistant (Local level) in Nairobi and one Administrative
Assistant (General Service (Other level)) in New York;
8. Also takes note of paragraph 100 of the report of the Advisory Committee,61 and reaffirms its position
that any consideration of accommodation for air travel, including exceptions to the standards of accommodation for
air travel, should be dealt with under paragraph 17 of section VI of its resolution 67/254 A of 12 April 2013;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the relocation of the office of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is carried out in the most cost-efficient manner and to report thereon in the context
of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
10. Recalls paragraph 134 of the report of the Advisory Committee,61 and decides not to abolish the Senior
Security Sector Reform Officer position (P-5) and the Police Officer position (P-3) in the Rule of Law and Security
Institutions Service of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau;
11. Also recalls paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee,63 and decides to establish a second
Public Information Officer position (P-3) in the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia;
12. Decides to establish one Principal Political Affairs Officer position (D-1) (Constitution Adviser) in the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya;
13. Also decides not to abolish one P-3 position, one National Professional Officer position and one General
Service (Local level) position in the United Nations Support Mission in Libya;
14. Takes note of paragraph 197 of the report of the Advisory Committee,61 and decides that the
commensurate reduction in resident auditor staffing in Kuwait will be reflected in the budget of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for 2014;
15. Decides not to approve the requirements of 500,000 dollars for quick-impact projects proposed for the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq;
16. Recalls paragraph 222 of the report of the Advisory Committee,61 and requests the Secretary-General to
undertake a comprehensive review of staffing requirements of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
including the organizational structure and the number and level of senior positions, for inclusion in the 2015 budget
submission;

_______________
62
63

A/68/327/Add.6.
A/68/7/Add.17.

773

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17. Recognizes the importance of promoting cooperation among United Nations missions in order to
increase their effectiveness and efficiency, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard,
without prejudice to the unique mandate and the approved budget for each mission;
18. Approves the budgets totalling 596,826,600 dollars for the 36 special political missions authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council, which are presented in the report of the Secretary-General;59
19. Also approves a charge totalling 596,826,600 dollars net against the provision for special political
missions requested in section 3, Political affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
VII
Administrative expenses of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund
Recalling section V of its resolution 66/247 and its resolution 67/240 of 24 December 2012,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board on the administrative expenses
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and amendments to the regulations of the Fund,64 the report of the
Secretary-General on the administrative and financial implications arising from the report of the Board65 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee,66
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board on the administrative expenses
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and amendments to the regulations of the Fund64 and the report of
the Secretary-General on the administrative and financial implications arising from the report of the Board;65
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,66
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.

Accepts the report of the Board of Auditors on the Fund for the year ended 31 December 2012;67

4. Approves the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report, and requests the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board to ensure that all the recommendations of the Board of Auditors are implemented
in full and in a timely manner;
5. Reaffirms that, in accordance with article 19 of the regulations of the Fund, the Secretary-General serves
as fiduciary for the investment of the assets of the Fund and has fiduciary responsibility for deciding upon the
investment of the assets of the Fund;
6. Approves the amendments to article 1 (n) (normal retirement age), article 29 (early retirement benefit)
and article 30 (deferred retirement benefit) of the regulations of the Fund, as contained in annex V to the report of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;
7. Recognizes the importance of establishing a full-time representative of the Secretary-General for the
investment of the assets of the Fund, and in this regard decides to defer approval of this matter to the first part of the
resumed sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, to prepare, in consultation with the Board, detailed terms
of reference for this post outlining, inter alia, key responsibilities, qualifications, appointment criteria, terms and
duration of service, level and reporting lines, to be reviewed by the Advisory Committee and presented to the
General Assembly at the first part of its resumed sixty-eighth session;
9. Requests the Board to continue to take all the measures necessary to address the difficulty of finding
suitable candidates;
_______________
64

A/68/303.
A/C.5/68/2.
66
A/68/7/Add.3.
67
A/68/303, annex VIII.
65

774

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Decides to establish 22 additional posts, as set out in the table below:
Organizational unit

Number
of posts

Title of post

Category/level

Administration
Programme of work
Risk Management and Legal Service

Chief of Service

1

D-1

Team Assistant

1

General Service
(Other level)

Accountant

1

P-3

Administrative Assistant to the
Representative of the Secretary-General

1

General Service
(Other level)

Director, Private Markets

1

D-1

North American equities portfolio

Investment Officer

2

P-3

Global emerging markets

Investment Officer

1

P-3

Fixed income group

Investment Officer, Foreign Exchange and
Cash Management

1

P-4

Investment Officer, Emerging Market Debts

1

P-4

Real assets

Investment Officer, Real Assets

1

P-3

Alternative assets

Investment Officer, Hedge Funds

1

P-4

Investment Assistant

1

General Service
(Principal level)

Trade Execution Officer

1

P-3

Trade Execution Assistant

1

General Service
(Principal level)

External management group

External Manager

1

P-4

Risk and Compliance Section

Compliance Officer

1

P-3

Financial Services Section
Investments
Executive direction and management
Programme of work
Investments Section

Trade execution team

Operations Section

Chief Operating Officer

1

D-1

Accountant

1

P-4

Finance Officer

1

P-3

Senior Accounting Assistant

1

General Service
(Principal level)

Data Security Administrator

1

P-3

Programme support
Information Systems Section

Total

22

11. Recognizes the importance of the use of in-house expertise, and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to take all measures to ensure that the costs for non-discretionary advisory fees are reduced;
12. Takes note of paragraphs 33 and 34 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard decides
to maintain the current structure of the Fund;
13. Recalls paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard requests the Board, in
consultation with the Office of Human Resources Management of the Secretariat, to complete its review of the
policies governing the recruitment, promotion and retention of the staff of the Fund and to report to the General
Assembly, no later than at the main part of its seventieth session, on the outcome of the review and any measures
proposed;
775

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

14. Welcomes the progress made by the Fund in the implementation of the Integrated Pension
Administration System, and looks forward to further updates on its implementation in the context of future reports;
15. Recalls paragraph 51 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard requests the Board to
establish a mechanism for tracking all withdrawal settlements paid to participants who separate with less than five
years of contributory service and to provide this information to the General Assembly in the context of future reports
of the Board;
16. Stresses the need to avoid any action that would compromise the fiduciary responsibilities and long-term
sustainability of the Fund;
17. Welcomes the alignment of reporting on the operations and on the investments of the Fund following the
implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards;
18. Approves the revised estimate of 185,730,600 dollars for the biennium 2012–2013 for the administration
of the Fund;
19. Also approves expenses, chargeable directly to the Fund, totalling 156,341,800 dollars net for the
biennium 2014–2015;
20. Further approves the amount of 21,324,700 dollars as the United Nations share of the cost of the
administrative expenses of the Fund for the biennium 2014–2015, of which 13,370,600 dollars would represent the
share of the regular budget and the balance of 7,954,100 dollars would represent the share of the funds and
programmes;
21. Approves the reduction of 561,400 dollars in the United Nations share of the cost of the administrative
expenses of the central secretariat of the Fund under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, of
the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
22. Authorizes the Board to supplement the voluntary contributions to the Emergency Fund for the
biennium 2014–2015 by an amount not to exceed 200,000 dollars;
VIII
Strengthening the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General68 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,69
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;68

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;69
IX
Request for a subvention to the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research resulting from the recommendations
of the Board of Trustees of the Institute on the programme of work
of the Institute for 2014–2015

Having considered the note by the Secretary-General70 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,71
1.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;70

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;71

_______________
68

A/68/506.
A/68/7/Add.8.
70
A/68/80.
71
A/68/7/Add.1.
69

776

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Approves the request for a subvention to the Institute of 577,800 dollars (before recosting) for the
biennium 2014–2015 from the regular budget of the United Nations, for which the provision has already been
included under section 4, Disarmament, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
X
International Trade Centre
Having considered the programme budget proposals for the International Trade Centre for the biennium
2014–201572 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,73
1.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;73

2. Decides to approve resources in the amount of 39,913,900 dollars (the United Nations share equivalent
to 36,960,271 Swiss francs at the exchange rate of 0.926 Swiss francs to 1 dollar) proposed for the biennium
2014–2015 under section 13, International Trade Centre, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2014–2015;
XI
Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by
the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 2013
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General74 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,75
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;74

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;75
XII
Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by
the Human Rights Council at its twenty-second, twenty-third
and twenty-fourth sessions

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General76 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,77
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;76

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,77
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Approves an additional appropriation in the amount of 4,741,900 dollars (net), including 1,159,200
dollars under section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management,
3,579,900 dollars under section 24, Human rights, and 2,800 dollars under section 29F, Administration, Geneva, of
the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015, to be charged to the contingency fund, and also
approves an amount of 61,400 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by an equivalent amount
under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2014–2015;
4. Also approves the establishment, as from 1 January 2014, of two posts (P-3) under section 24, Human
rights, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;

_______________
72

A/68/6 (Sect. 13) and Add.1.
A/68/7/Add.6.
74
A/68/380.
75
A/68/7/Add.2.
76
A/68/634.
77
A/68/7/Add.15.
73

777

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

XIII
Revised estimates resulting from the entry into force of
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates relating to the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015 resulting from the entry into force of the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 78 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee,79
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;78

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;79
XIV
Revised estimates relating to the high-level political forum
on sustainable development

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates resulting from the decisions
contained in General Assembly resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013, entitled “Format and organizational aspects of the
high-level political forum on sustainable development”,80 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,81
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;80

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;81

3. Decides to appropriate resources in the amount of 754,600 dollars under section 9, Economic and social
affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015, representing a charge against the
contingency fund;
XV
Implementation of recommendations related to strengthening information
and systems security across the Secretariat
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on progress on the implementation of
recommendations related to strengthening information and systems security across the Secretariat82 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee,83
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;82

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;83
XVI
Administrative and financial implications of the decisions
and recommendations contained in the report of the
International Civil Service Commission for 2013

Having considered the statement submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly84 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,85
_______________
78

A/68/385.
A/68/7/Add.5.
80
A/68/365 and Add.1.
81
A/68/7/Add.14.
82
A/68/552.
83
A/68/7/Add.11.
84
A/C.5/68/3.
85
A/68/7/Add.4.
79

778

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Recalls its resolution 68/253 of 27 December 2013;

2.

Takes note of the statement submitted by the Secretary-General;84

3.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;85
XVII
Gross jointly financed budget of the Joint Inspection Unit

Approves the gross budget for the Joint Inspection Unit for the biennium 2014–2015 in the amount of
14,026,200 dollars;
XVIII
Gross jointly financed budget of the International Civil Service Commission
Approves the gross budget for the International Civil Service Commission for the biennium 2014–2015 in the
amount of 19,145,500 dollars;
XIX
Gross jointly financed budget of the United Nations System
Chief Executives Board for Coordination
Notes the gross budget for the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for the
biennium 2014–2015 in the amount of 5,857,500 dollars;
XX
Gross jointly financed budget of the Department
of Safety and Security
Approves the gross jointly financed budget of the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat for the
biennium 2014–2015 in the amount of 275,551,200 dollars, broken down as follows:
(a)

Field Security Operations: 245,057,500 dollars;

(b)

Security and Safety Services at the United Nations Office at Vienna: 30,493,700 dollars;
XXI
Effect of changes in rates of exchange and inflation

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the revised estimates resulting from the effect of
changes in rates of exchange and inflation86 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,87
Takes note of the revised estimates arising from recosting owing to changes in the rates of exchange and
inflation;
XXII
Contingency fund
Notes that a balance of 22,338,043 dollars remains in the contingency fund.88

_______________
86

A/68/659.
A/68/7/Add.24.
88
See A/C.5/68/SR.25 and 26.
87

779

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTIONS 68/248 A to C
A/RES/68/248AtoC

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/689, para. 43)

68/248. Programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
A
BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE BIENNIUM 2014–2015
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the biennium 2014–2015:
1. Appropriations totalling 5,530,349,800 United States dollars are hereby approved for the following
purposes:
Amount
(United States dollars)

Section

Part I. Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
1.

Overall policymaking, direction and coordination

117 599 800

2.

General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management

673 012 400
Subtotal

790 612 200

Part II. Political affairs
3.

Political affairs

1 197 957 200

4.

Disarmament

24 729 600

5.

Peacekeeping operations

113 454 400

6.

Peaceful uses of outer space

8 160 600
Subtotal

1 344 301 800

Part III. International justice and law
7.

International Court of Justice

52 344 800

8.

Legal affairs

47 809 200
Subtotal

100 154 000

Part IV. International cooperation for development
9.

Economic and social affairs

163 049 600

10.

Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States

11 579 100

11.

United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development

17 000 300

12.

Trade and development

147 132 500

13.

International Trade Centre

39 913 900

14.

Environment

34 963 500

15.

Human settlements

23 260 700

16.

International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice

43 883 000

17.

UN-Women

15 328 500
Subtotal

780

496 111 100

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Amount
(United States dollars)

Section

Part V. Regional cooperation for development
18.

Economic and social development in Africa

151 633 600

19.

Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific

103 764 400

20.

Economic development in Europe

71 706 300

21.

Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean

116 669 900

22.

Economic and social development in Western Asia

70 189 500

23.

Regular programme of technical cooperation

58 449 700
Subtotal

572 413 400

Part VI. Human rights and humanitarian affairs
24.

Human rights

174 785 600

25.

International protection, durable solutions and assistance to refugees

91 496 800

26.

Palestine refugees

55 227 500

27.

Humanitarian assistance

31 581 400
Subtotal

353 091 300

Part VII. Public information
28.

Public information

188 443 900
Subtotal

188 443 900

Part VIII. Common support services
29.

Management and support services

657 782 400
Subtotal

657 782 400

Part IX. Internal oversight
30.

Internal oversight

40 552 300
Subtotal

40 552 300

Part X. Jointly financed administrative activities and special expenses
31.

Jointly financed administrative activities

32.

Special expenses

11 357 800
143 660 200
Subtotal

155 018 000

Part XI. Capital expenditures
33.

Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance

75 268 700
Subtotal

75 268 700

Part XII. Safety and security
34.

Safety and security

241 370 100
Subtotal

241 370 100

Part XIII. Development Account
35.

Development Account

28 398 800
Subtotal

28 398 800

Part XIV. Staff assessment
36.

Staff assessment

486 831 800
Subtotal

486 831 800

Total

5 530 349 800

781

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. The Secretary-General shall be authorized to transfer credits between sections of the budget, with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
3. In addition to the appropriations approved under paragraph 1 above, an amount of 75,000 dollars is
appropriated for each year of the biennium 2014–2015 from the accumulated income of the Library Endowment
Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps and library equipment and for such other expenses of the Library
at the Palais des Nations in Geneva as are in accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment.
B
INCOME ESTIMATES FOR THE BIENNIUM 2014–2015
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the biennium 2014–2015:
1. Estimates of income other than assessments on Member States totalling 523,145,000 United States
dollars are approved as follows:
Amount
(United States dollars)

Income section

1.

Income from staff assessment

491 185 600

2.

General income

31 228 200

3.

Services to the public

731 200
Total

523 145 000

2. The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
3. Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, the sale of statistical
products, catering operations and related services, garage operations, television services and the sale of publications
not provided for under the budget appropriations shall be charged against the income derived from those activities.
C
FINANCING OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE YEAR 2014
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the year 2014:
1. Budget appropriations consisting of 2,765,174,900 United States dollars, being half of the appropriation
of 5,530,349,800 dollars approved for the biennium 2014–2015 by the General Assembly in paragraph 1 of
resolution A above, plus 169,511,300 dollars, being the net increase in revised appropriations for the biennium
2012–2013 approved by the Assembly in its resolutions 67/269 of 28 June 2013 and 68/245 A of 27 December
2013, shall be financed in accordance with regulations 3.1 and 3.2 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the
United Nations,89 as follows:
(a) 21,174,100 dollars, consisting of 15,979,700 dollars, being half of the estimated income other than staff
assessment income approved for the biennium 2014–2015 under resolution B above, plus 5,194,400 dollars, being
the increase in income other than staff assessment income for the biennium 2012–2013 approved by the Assembly
in its resolution 68/245 B of 27 December 2013;
(b) 40,069,800 dollars, consisting of the unencumbered balance for the biennium 2012–2013 of the Special
Account for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
_______________
89

782

ST/SGB/2013/4.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994, the Special Account for the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 and the Special Account for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,
and decides in this regard that the provision for the application of credits under regulations 3.2 (d), 5.3 and 5.4 of the
Financial Regulations and Rules shall be suspended;
(c) 26,648,200 dollars, consisting of a credit to the General Fund from the Special Account established by
the Assembly in resolution 3049 A (XXVII) of 19 December 1972;
(d) 23,141,000 dollars, consisting of a credit of the cancellation of prior-period obligations corresponding to
the biennium 2010–2011, and decides in this regard that regulations 3.2 (d), 5.3 and 5.4 shall be suspended;
(e) 2,823,653,100 dollars, being the assessment on Member States in accordance with Assembly resolution
67/238 of 24 December 2012 on the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations;
2. There shall be set off against the assessment on Member States, in accordance with the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in
the total amount of 271,692,300 dollars, consisting of:
(a) 245,592,800 dollars, being half of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the biennium
2014–2015 in paragraph 1 of resolution B above;
(b) 25,915,500 dollars, being the increase in income from staff assessment for the biennium 2012–2013
approved by the Assembly in its resolution 68/245 B;
(c) 184,000 dollars, being the increase in income from staff assessment for the biennium 2012–2013
approved by the Assembly in its resolution 67/269.
RESOLUTION 68/249
A/RES/68/249

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/689, para. 43)

68/249. Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium 2014–2015
The General Assembly
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and subject to the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations90
and the provisions of paragraph 3 below, to enter into commitments in the biennium 2014–2015 to meet unforeseen
and extraordinary expenses arising either during or subsequent to the biennium, provided that the concurrence of the
Advisory Committee shall not be necessary for:
(a) Such commitments not exceeding a total of 8 million United States dollars in any one year of the
biennium 2014–2015 as the Secretary-General certifies relate to the maintenance of peace and security;
(b) Such commitments as the President of the International Court of Justice certifies relate to expenses
occasioned by:
(i) The designation of ad hoc judges (Statute of the International Court of Justice, Article 31), not exceeding
a total of 200,000 dollars;
(ii) The calling of witnesses and the appointment of experts (Statute, Article 50) and the appointment of
assessors (Statute, Article 30), not exceeding a total of 50,000 dollars;

_______________
90

ST/SGB/2013/4.

783

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(iii) The maintenance in office for the completion of cases of judges who have not been re-elected (Statute,
Article 13, paragraph 3), not exceeding a total of 40,000 dollars;
(iv) The payment of pensions and travel and removal expenses of retiring judges and travel and removal
expenses and installation grants of members of the Court (Statute, Article 32, paragraph 7), not exceeding a
total of 410,000 dollars;
(v) The work of the Court or its Chambers away from The Hague (Statute, Article 22), not exceeding a total
of 25,000 dollars;
(c) Such commitments not exceeding a total of 1 million dollars in the biennium 2014–2015 as the
Secretary-General certifies are required for security measures pursuant to section XI, paragraph 6, of General
Assembly resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004;
2. Resolves that the Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory Committee and to the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth and seventieth sessions all commitments made under the provisions of the present resolution,
together with the circumstances relating thereto, and shall submit supplementary estimates to the Assembly in
respect of such commitments;
3. Decides that, for the biennium 2014–2015, if a decision of the Security Council results in the need for
the Secretary-General to enter into commitments relating to the maintenance of peace and security in an amount
exceeding 10 million dollars in respect of the decision, that matter shall be brought to the General Assembly, or, if
the Assembly is suspended or not in session, a resumed or special session of the Assembly shall be convened by the
Secretary-General to consider the matter.
RESOLUTION 68/250
A/RES/68/250

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/689, para. 43)

68/250. Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2014–2015
The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. The Working Capital Fund shall be established for the biennium 2014–2015 in the amount of
150 million United States dollars;
2. Member States shall make advances to the Working Capital Fund in accordance with the scale of
assessments adopted by the General Assembly for contributions of Member States to the budget for the year 2014;
3.

There shall be set off against this allocation of advances:

(a) Credits to Member States resulting from transfers made in 1959 and 1960 from the surplus account to
the Working Capital Fund in an adjusted amount of 1,025,092 dollars;
(b) Cash advances paid by Member States to the Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2012–2013 in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 66/250 of 24 December 2011;
4. Should the credits and advances paid by any Member State to the Working Capital Fund for the
biennium 2012–2013 exceed the amount of that Member State’s advance under the provisions of paragraph 2
above, the excess shall be set off against the amount of the contributions payable by the Member State in respect of
the biennium 2014–2015;
5.

The Secretary-General is authorized to advance from the Working Capital Fund:

(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending the receipt of contributions;
sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts from contributions are available for that purpose;
(b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments that may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, in particular resolution 68/249 of 27 December 2013
relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium 2014–2015; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the Working Capital Fund;
784

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(c) Such sums as may be necessary to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous self-liquidating
purchases and activities, which, together with net sums outstanding for the same purpose, do not exceed 200,000
dollars; advances in excess of 200,000 dollars may be made with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
(d) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee, such sums as may be required to finance
payments of advance insurance premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond the end of the biennium in
which payment is made; the Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget estimates of each biennium,
during the life of the related policies, to cover the charges applicable to each biennium;
(e) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending the accumulation of credits; such advances shall be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund;
6. Should the provision in paragraph 1 above prove inadequate to meet the purposes normally related to the
Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is authorized to utilize, in the biennium 2014–2015, cash from special
funds and accounts in his custody, under the conditions approved by the General Assembly in its resolution
1341 (XIII) of 13 December 1958, or the proceeds of loans authorized by the Assembly.
RESOLUTION 68/251
A/RES/68/251

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/673, para. 6)

68/251. Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December 1985, 41/213 of 19 December
1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December 1988, 51/211 A to E of 18 December 1996, 52/214 of 22 December 1997,
53/208 A to E of 18 December 1998, 54/248 of 23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December 2000, 56/242 of
24 December 2001, 56/254 D of 27 March 2002, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 56/287 of 27 June 2002, 57/283 A of
20 December 2002, 57/283 B of 15 April 2003, 58/250 of 23 December 2003, 59/265 of 23 December 2004,
60/236 A of 23 December 2005, 60/236 B of 8 May 2006, 61/236 of 22 December 2006, 62/225 of 22 December
2007, 63/248 of 24 December 2008, 63/284 of 30 June 2009, 64/230 of 22 December 2009, 65/245 of 24 December
2010, 66/233 of 24 December 2011 and 67/237 of 24 December 2012,
Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
ensure the equal treatment of the official languages of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences for 201391 and the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General,92
Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,93
Reaffirming the provisions relating to conference services in its resolutions on multilingualism, in particular
resolution 67/292 of 24 July 2013,
Reaffirming also the role of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly in administrative and budgetary
matters,
Recalling its resolution 14 (I) of 13 February 1946 and the role of the Advisory Committee as a subsidiary
body of the General Assembly,
_______________
91

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/68/32).
A/68/122 and A/68/123.
93
A/68/567.
92

785

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

I
Calendar of conferences and meetings
1.

Welcomes the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2013;91

2. Approves the draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 2014 and 2015, as
submitted by the Committee on Conferences,94 taking into account the observations of the Committee and subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make any adjustments to the calendar of conferences and
meetings for 2014 and 2015 that may become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session;
4. Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat has taken into account the arrangements referred to in General
Assembly resolutions 53/208 A, 54/248, 55/222, 56/242, 57/283 B, 58/250, 59/265, 60/236 A, 61/236, 62/225,
63/248, 64/230, 65/245, 66/233 and 67/237 concerning Orthodox Good Friday and the official holidays of Eid al-Fitr
and Eid al-Adha, and requests all intergovernmental bodies to observe those decisions when planning their
meetings;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any modification to the calendar of conferences and
meetings is implemented strictly in accordance with the mandate of the Committee on Conferences and other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
6. Invites Member States to include in new legislative mandates adequate information on the modalities for
the organization of conferences or meetings;
7. Recalls rule 153 of its rules of procedure, and, for resolutions involving expenditure, requests the
Secretary-General to include the modalities of conferences, taking into account the trends of similar meetings, with
a view to mobilizing conference services and documentation in the most efficient and cost-effective manner
possible;
8. Reaffirms the need to address the issue of duplications and redundancies in conference servicing, and
notes in this regard that the Economic and Social Council decided in its resolution 2013/13 of 22 July 2013 to
consider at a later date the necessity of reviewing its provisional biennial calendar of conferences and meetings in
the light of the ongoing intergovernmental consultations on the further strengthening of the Council;
II
A.

Utilization of conference-servicing resources

9. Reaffirms the practice that, in the use of conference rooms, priority must be given to meetings of
Member States;
10. Calls upon the Secretary-General and Member States to adhere to the guidelines and procedures
contained in the administrative instruction for the authorization of the use of United Nations premises for meetings,
conferences, special events and exhibits;95
11. Emphasizes that such meetings, conferences, special events and exhibits must be consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations;
12. Notes that the overall utilization factor at the four main duty stations in 2012 was 84 per cent, and that in
2011 it was 85 per cent, as in 2010, which is above the established benchmark of 80 per cent;
13. Welcomes the steps taken by those bodies that have adjusted their programmes of work in order to
achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources, and requests the Committee on Conferences to
intensify consultations with the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their conference-servicing
resources;
_______________
94
95

786

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/68/32), annex II.
ST/AI/416.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

14. Urges those intergovernmental bodies whose average utilization factor has for the past 10 years been
below the benchmark of 80 per cent to take that factor into account when planning their future sessions in order to
achieve that benchmark;
15. Recognizes that late starts and unplanned early endings seriously affect the utilization factor of the
bodies owing to the amount of time lost, and invites the secretariats and bureaux of bodies to pay adequate attention
to avoiding late starts and unplanned early endings;
16. Notes that the percentage of meetings held by the bodies entitled to meet “as required” that were
provided with interpretation services in New York in 2012 was 97 per cent, and that in 2011 it was 96 per cent, as
compared with 94 per cent in 2010, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to impress upon such bodies the
need to continue to improve the utilization of the conference services provided and to report on the provision of
conference services to those bodies through the Committee on Conferences;
17. Reiterates its request to intergovernmental bodies to review their meeting entitlements and to plan and
adjust their programmes of work on the basis of their actual utilization of conference-servicing resources in order to
improve their efficient use of conference services;
18. Recognizes the importance of meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States for the
smooth functioning of the sessions of intergovernmental bodies, requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far
as possible, all requests for conference services for the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member
States are met, and requests the Secretariat to inform the requesters as early as possible about the availability of
conference services, including interpretation, as well as about any changes that might occur before the holding of
meetings;
19. Notes that the percentage of meetings held by regional and other major groupings of Member States that
were provided with interpretation services at the four main duty stations was 95 per cent in 2012, as compared with
91 per cent in 2011, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to employ innovative means to address the
difficulties experienced by Member States owing to the lack of conference services for some meetings of regional
and other major groupings of Member States and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the Committee
on Conferences;
20. Once again urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the planning stage to take into account
the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their
programmes of work and to notify conference services, well in advance, of any cancellations so that unutilized
conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be reassigned to meetings of regional and other major
groupings of Member States;
21. Welcomes the efforts of all users of conference services to inform the Secretariat as early as possible of
any cancellation of service requests so as to allow for such services to be smoothly redeployed to other meetings;
22. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with several resolutions of the General Assembly, including
resolution 67/237, section II.A, paragraph 13, in conformity with the headquarters rule, all meetings of Nairobibased United Nations bodies were held in Nairobi in 2012, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to
the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session through the Committee on Conferences;
23. Notes with concern the recurring underutilization of the conference centre of the Economic Commission
for Africa, specifically given the ongoing renovation of its facilities, recognizes the continuing promotional efforts
and initiatives of the Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its sixty-ninth session through the Committee on Conferences;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore additional means to increase the utilization of the
conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa, including with its partners such as the African Union,
and to report thereon, including on the impact of the initiatives of the Commission, to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session;
25. Also requests the Secretary-General to encourage the heads of entities of the United Nations system to
use as a matter of priority, when applicable, the conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa to ensure
greater utilization of the conference facilities;
787

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

26. Recalls section II.A, paragraph 17, of its resolution 67/237, reiterates its request that the SecretaryGeneral formulate a competitive pricing structure and an appropriate marketing strategy for the conference centre of
the Economic Commission for Africa, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session;
27. Recognizes the proactive efforts of the Secretary-General to identify ways to enhance efficiency and
effectiveness in conference services;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to propose, at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, a
comprehensive review of conference servicing, highlighting any duplication or redundancy, with a view to
identifying innovative ideas, potential synergies and other cost-saving measures, without compromising the quality
of the services;
29. Reiterates its request to the Committee on Conferences that it consult those bodies that have consistently
utilized less than the applicable benchmark of their allocated resources for the past three years, with a view to
making appropriate recommendations in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources,
and urges the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their conference-servicing resources to work more
closely with the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat and to consider
changes to their programmes of work, as appropriate, including adjustments based on previous patterns of recurring
agenda items, with a view to making improvements in their utilization factors;
30. Requests the Chair of the Committee on Conferences to address a letter to the presiding officers of
intergovernmental bodies based at duty stations other than New York if their utilization factor falls below the
benchmark of 80 per cent;
B.

Impact of the capital master plan, strategy IV (phased approach), on meetings held at Headquarters
during its implementation

31. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the implementation of the capital master plan, including
the reassignment of conference-servicing staff to swing spaces, will not compromise the quality of conference
services provided to Member States in the six official languages and the equal treatment of the language services,
which should be provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to receiving the
maximum quality of services;
32. Requests all meeting requesters and organizers to liaise closely with the Department on all matters
relating to the scheduling of meetings to allow maximum predictability in coordinating activities at Headquarters
during the construction period;
33. Requests the Committee on Conferences to keep the matter under constant review, and requests the
Secretary-General to report regularly to the Committee on matters pertaining to the calendar of conferences and
meetings of the United Nations during the construction period;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide adequate information technology support for
conference services, within the existing resources of the Department, in order to ensure their seamless operation
throughout the implementation of the capital master plan;
35. Notes that, for the duration of the implementation of the capital master plan, a part of the conferenceservicing staff and information technology resources of the Department has been temporarily relocated to swing
spaces, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide adequate support, within the existing resources of
the Department, to ensure continued maintenance of the information technology facilities of the Department,
implementation of the global information technology initiative and delivery of high-quality conference services;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Member States on initiatives that affect the utilization of
conference services and conference facilities;
III
Integrated global management
37. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Secretary-General in the context of the integrated global
management initiative to establish and implement in the four main duty stations common performance indicators
and single information technology systems (such as gData, gMeets, gDoc and gText), and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
788

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

38. Reiterates with concern its request that the Secretary-General complete the internal reviews concerning
accountability mechanisms and the clear delineation of responsibility between the Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management and the Directors General of the United Nations Offices at
Geneva, Nairobi and Vienna for conference management policies, operations and resource utilization, requests the
Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, and in this regard recalls
section III, paragraph 15, of its resolution 66/233 and section III, paragraph 2, of its resolution 67/237;
39. Notes the initiatives undertaken in the context of integrated global management aimed at streamlining
procedures, achieving economies of scale and improving the quality of conference services, and in this regard
stresses the importance of ensuring the equal treatment of conference-servicing staff, as well as the principle of
equal grade for equal work at the four main duty stations;
40. Also notes that the effects of workload-sharing in the context of global document management remain
minimal, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek ways to promote workload-sharing among the four
main duty stations and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
41. Emphasizes that the major goals of the Department are to provide high-quality documents in a timely
manner in all official languages, in accordance with established regulations, as well as high-quality conference
services to Member States at all duty stations, and to achieve those aims as efficiently and cost-effectively as
possible, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
42. Notes that the pool of language professionals at duty stations is uneven in terms of language
combinations, and requests the Secretary-General to develop recruitment, subcontracting and outreach policies that
take full account of these imbalances and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are
provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving the maximum quality
of services, with full respect for the specificities of the six official languages and taking into account their respective
workloads;
44. Reiterates the need for the Secretary-General to ensure the compatibility of technologies used in all duty
stations and to ensure that they are user-friendly in all official languages;
45. Also reiterates that the satisfaction of Member States is a key performance indicator in conference
management and conference services;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that measures taken by the Department to seek the
evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to them, as a key performance
indicator of the Department, provide equal opportunities to Member States to present their evaluations in the six
official languages of the United Nations and are in full compliance with relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly, through the Committee on Conferences, on
progress made in this regard;
47. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore best practices and techniques in client
satisfaction evaluations and to report regularly to the General Assembly on the results achieved;
48. Welcomes the efforts made by the Department to seek the evaluation by Member States of the quality of
the conference services provided to them, taking into consideration comments and complaints raised by Member
States either in writing or during meetings, and requests the Secretary-General to intensify his exploration of
innovative ways to systematically capture and analyse feedback from Member States and Chairs and Secretaries of
committees on the quality of conference services and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the
Committee on Conferences;
49. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek evaluation by Member States of the quality of the
conference services provided to them, including through the language-specific informational meetings held once a
year, ahead of the substantive session of the Committee on Conferences, or any necessary meeting scheduled upon
the request of Member States, not to exceed two meetings per year, and to ensure that such measures provide equal
opportunities to Member States to present their evaluations in the six official languages of the United Nations and
that they are in full compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
789

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

50. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly and its Committee on Conferences
apprised of progress made in achieving integrated global management and to provide accurate and up-to-date
information on new initiatives falling under the purview of the Committee;
51. Reiterates its concern that the Secretary-General did not include in his report on the pattern of
conferences92 information about the financial savings achieved through the implementation of the integrated global
management projects, as requested in section III, paragraph 4, of its resolution 63/248, in section III, paragraph 12,
of its resolution 64/230, in section III, paragraph 14, of its resolution 65/245, in section III, paragraph 14, of its
resolution 66/233, and in section III, paragraph 15, of its resolution 67/237, and reiterates its request that the
Secretary-General redouble his efforts to include this information in his next report on the pattern of conferences;
52. Notes the Flextime pilot project initiated by the United Nations Office at Vienna, stresses that the rules
and regulations of the United Nations governing human resources issues should be applied uniformly during the
implementation of the pilot project, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session on the evaluation of the pilot project, including a recommendation on whether the project should
be continued at the United Nations Office at Vienna and further implemented at other duty stations;
53. Welcomes the proximity rule as an efficient approach, where feasible, to servicing meetings away from
duty stations, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts to realize further savings by
rigorously applying the proximity rule to applicable meetings without jeopardizing the quality of services and to
report thereon to the Committee on Conferences at its substantive session in 2014;
IV
Matters related to documentation and publications
54. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of the United Nations;
55. Reaffirms its decision in section IV of its resolution 64/230 that all reports adopted by the Working
Group on the Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council shall be issued as documents in all official
languages of the United Nations in a timely manner before their consideration by the Council, in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 36/117 A of 10 December 1981, 51/211 A to E, 52/214, 53/208 A to E and 59/265,
and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the support necessary to that effect and to report to the General
Assembly thereon at its sixty-ninth session;
56. Recalls section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222, and reiterates with concern its request that the
Secretary-General ensure strict respect for the rules concerning the simultaneous distribution of documents in all six
official languages as regards both the distribution of printed copies and the posting of parliamentary documentation
on the Official Document System and the United Nations website;
57. Stresses that matters related to conference management, including documentation, fall within the
purview of the Fifth Committee;
58. Reiterates the importance of the timely issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee;
59. Acknowledges that a multipronged approach is required to find a solution to the perennial difficulties
related to the late issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee;
60. Notes with concern the perennial difficulties related to the late issuance of documents for the Fifth
Committee, and urges the Secretary-General to ensure the timely presentation of these official documents to the
Committee and to find a lasting and sustainable solution to the problem so as to guarantee the quality of the
intergovernmental process;
61. Takes note of the work done by the interdepartmental task force on documentation chaired by the
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management in positively addressing the problem of issuance of
documents for the Fifth Committee;
62. Encourages the Chairs of the Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee to continue to promote
cooperation between the two bodies in the sphere of documentation;
790

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

63. Welcomes the continued efforts of the task force to shepherd the submission of documents by the author
departments of the Secretariat;
64. Notes that accurate, timely and consistent information provided by the Secretariat to the Fifth Committee
during its informal consultations facilitates the decision-making process in the Committee;
65. Notes with satisfaction that all documents submitted on time and within the word limit were processed
by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management within four weeks, and encourages the
Secretary-General to sustain that level of performance;
66. Reaffirms its decision in section III, paragraph 9, of its resolution 59/265 that the issuance of documents
in all six official languages on planning, budgetary and administrative matters requiring urgent consideration by the
General Assembly shall be accorded priority;
67. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General direct all departments of the Secretariat to include the
following elements in their reports:
(a)

A summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

68. Also reiterates its request that all documents submitted to legislative organs, including the Committee on
Conferences, by the Secretariat and intergovernmental and expert bodies for consideration and action have
conclusions and recommendations in bold print;
69. Notes with concern that only 60 per cent of the author departments reached the compliance rate of
90 per cent in the timely submission of their reports to the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General enforce the slotting system more rigorously
through a dedicated focus, such as the interdepartmental task force on documentation, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
70. Urges author departments to fully adhere to deadlines in meeting the goal of 90 per cent submission
compliance, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that documents submitted late do not adversely affect the
issuance of documents submitted on time and in compliance with set guidelines;
71. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on concrete
measures taken by author departments and the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to
improve the predictability of document delivery and ensure accountability for the meeting of deadlines in order to
ensure the timely issuance of documentation;
72. Reiterates its request in section IV, paragraph 17, of its resolution 67/237 that the Secretary-General
provide information on the waiver process for documents that are submitted over the word limit;
73. Welcomes the interactions between the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management
and the author departments on waiver management, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure continuous efforts
in this regard and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
74. Emphasizes the role of Member States and their intergovernmental bodies in determining the policies on
conference management;
75. Stresses that proposals to change such policies are to be approved by Member States in their relevant
intergovernmental bodies;
76. Notes that the Official Document System is the official digital repository of the United Nations;
77. Requests the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all important older United Nations
documents onto the United Nations website in all six official languages on a priority basis so that these archives will
also be available to Member States through that medium;
791

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

78. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on a
detailed time frame for the digitization of all important older United Nations documents, including parliamentary
documents, and on options for expediting this process within existing resources;
79. Recalls the pilot project undertaken by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at the United
Nations Office at Vienna to make a transition to digital recordings of meetings in the six official languages of the
Organization as a cost-saving measure;
80. Emphasizes that the further expansion of this measure would require consideration, including of its legal,
financial and human resources implications, by the General Assembly and full compliance with the relevant
resolutions of the Assembly, and requests that the Secretary-General report thereon and on the evaluation of the pilot
project referred to in paragraph 79 above to the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
81. Recalls paragraph 5 of its resolution 49/221 B of 23 December 1994, and stresses that the timely
issuance of verbatim records constitutes an important part of the services provided to Member States;
V
Matters related to translation and interpretation
82. Requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to ensure the highest quality of interpretation and
translation services in all six official languages;
83. Underlines that the translation of official documents of the Organization must be provided in all required
languages and in due time, in full compliance with the rules of procedure of the respective legislative bodies;
84. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General ensure that the terminology used in the translation and
interpretation services reflects the latest linguistic norms and terminology of the official languages in order to ensure
the highest quality, and in this regard welcomes the development, within existing resources, of a global terminology
portal that will be equally accessible to United Nations staff, Member States and civil society;
85. Reaffirms section V, paragraph 3, of its resolution 67/237, and reiterates its request that the SecretaryGeneral, when recruiting temporary assistance in the language services, including through the use of international or
local contracts, as appropriate, ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are provided with
equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of their services,
with full respect for the specificities of each of the six official languages and taking into account their respective
workloads;
86. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General consider further measures aimed at decreasing the
vacancy rates at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
87. Requests the Secretary-General to hold competitive examinations for the recruitment of language staff
sufficiently in advance in order to fill current and future vacancies in the language services in a timely manner and to
inform the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session of efforts in this regard;
88. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the quality of translation of documents into
the six official languages, giving particular significance to the accuracy of translation;
89. Reiterates paragraph 8 of the annex to resolution 2 (I) of 1 February 1946 on the rules of procedure
concerning languages, whereby all resolutions and other important documents shall be made available in the official
languages and, upon the request of any representative, any other document shall be made available in any or all of
the official languages;
90. Stresses the need to ensure the highest possible quality of contractual and in-house translation, and
requests the Secretary-General to report on measures to be taken in this regard;
91. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General provide, at all duty stations, adequate staff at the
appropriate level, with a view to ensuring appropriate quality control for external translation, with due consideration
of the principle of equal grade for equal work;
792

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

92. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
experience, lessons learned and best practices of the main duty stations in performing quality control of contractual
and in-house translations, including on requirements relating to the number and appropriate level of staff needed to
carry out this function;
93. Encourages the Secretary-General to establish globally standardized performance indicators and costing
models aimed at a more cost-effective strategy for the in-house processing of documents, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit such information to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
94. Notes with appreciation the measures taken by the Secretary-General, in accordance with its resolutions,
to address, among other things, the issue of the replacement of retiring staff in the language services, and requests
the Secretary-General to maintain and intensify those efforts, including the strengthening of cooperation with
institutions that train language specialists, in order to meet the needs in the six official languages of the United
Nations;
95. Notes the need for energetic measures to avoid a disruptive shortage of applicants and a high turnover
rate in the language career fields, particularly where rare language combinations are involved, and requests the
Secretary-General to use the appropriate means to improve the internship programme, including through
partnerships with organizations that promote the official languages of the United Nations;
96. Also notes, in this regard, that recent efforts have led to the signing of memorandums of understanding
and collaboration agreements with two universities in Africa and that a memorandum of understanding has been
signed with a Latin American institution;
97. Welcomes the existing memorandums of understanding between the Organization and 22 universities as
a way to strengthen the training of language professionals in order to improve the recruitment of qualified language
staff, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to assess the appropriate number of memorandums
of understanding in order to fulfil the needs of the Organization;
98. Requests the Secretary-General to make further concerted efforts to promote outreach programmes, such
as traineeships and internships, and to introduce innovative methods to increase awareness of the programmes,
including through partnerships with Member States, relevant international organizations and language institutions in
all regions, in particular to close the wide gap in Africa and Latin America, and to report to the General Assembly
thereon at its sixty-ninth session;
99. Notes that the “African project” has the aim of establishing postgraduate university programmes in
translation, conference interpreting and public service interpreting through centres of excellence on the African
continent, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the achievements of this project;
100. Requests the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, in cooperation with the
Office of Human Resources Management, to continue to increase its efforts to raise awareness among all Member
States about opportunities for employment and internships in the language services at the four main duty stations;
101. Notes with appreciation the positive experience with traineeships at Headquarters and at the United
Nations Office at Vienna in training young professionals in and attracting them to the translation and interpretation
services of the United Nations, while enhancing the pool of qualified language professionals in language
combinations that are critical for succession-planning purposes, and requests the Secretary-General to develop the
initiative further, to extend it to all duty stations and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session;
102. Notes that the lists of individuals and entities subject to sanctions, according to the sanctions committees
of the Security Council, have not yet been translated into all six official languages, reiterates its recommendation
that the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions of the Security Council look
further into the practices related to the issuance of these lists, including their translation, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report thereon at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
103. Requests the Secretary-General to refrain from making any change of a substantive nature to agreed
texts of both draft and adopted resolutions and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session,
including on measures to enhance the quality, efficiency and cost-effectiveness of editing services within existing
resources.
793

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/252
A/RES/68/252

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/690, para. 7)

68/252. Human resources management
The General Assembly,
Recalling Articles 8, 97, 100 and 101 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 49/222 A and B of 23 December 1994 and 20 July 1995, 51/226 of 3 April 1997,
52/219 of 22 December 1997, 52/252 of 8 September 1998, 53/221 of 7 April 1999, 55/258 of 14 June 2001, 57/305
of 15 April 2003, 58/285 of 8 April 2004, 58/296 of 18 June 2004, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/287 of 13 April
2005, 60/1 of 16 September 2005, 60/238 of 23 December 2005, 60/254 of 8 May 2006, 60/260 of 8 May 2006,
61/244 of 22 December 2006, 61/276, section VIII, of 29 June 2007, 62/238, section XXI, of 22 December 2007,
62/248 of 3 April 2008, 63/250 of 24 December 2008, 63/271 of 7 April 2009, 65/247 of 24 December 2010,
66/234 of 24 December 2011 and 67/255 of 12 April 2013, as well as its other relevant resolutions and decisions,
Having considered the relevant reports of the Secretary-General on human resources management submitted
to the General Assembly,96 the letter dated 22 October 2013 from the President of the General Assembly to the
Chair of the Fifth Committee transmitting the letter dated 18 October 2013 from the Secretary-General to the
President,97 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98
Having also considered the reports of the Joint Inspection Unit on the review of individual consultancies in the
United Nations system,99 on lump-sum payments in lieu of entitlements100 and on staff recruitment in United
Nations system organizations: a comparative analysis and benchmarking framework,101 as well as the notes by the
Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination thereon,102
1. Reaffirms that the staff of the United Nations is an invaluable asset of the Organization, and commends
its contribution to furthering the purposes and principles of the United Nations;
2.

Pays tribute to the memory of all staff members who have lost their lives in the service of the Organization;

3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,103 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
I
Human resources management reform
4. Affirms the distinct roles of the principal organs of the United Nations in personnel matters, reaffirms
that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities
for administrative and budgetary matters, and also reaffirms the role of the Committee in carrying out an
appropriately thorough analysis of human and financial resources and policies and approving them;
5. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to develop a refined performance management
framework for the Organization, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for
consideration at its sixty-ninth session a comprehensive performance management proposal, including all necessary
modalities and recommendations;
_______________
96

A/68/129, A/68/130, A/68/348, A/68/356, A/68/358, A/68/483 and A/68/495.
A/C.5/68/10.
98
A/68/523, A/68/580, A/68/601 and A/68/615.
99
A/68/67.
100
A/68/373.
101
A/67/888.
102
A/67/888/Add.1, A/68/67/Add.1 and A/68/373/Add.1.
103
A/68/523 and A/68/580.
97

794

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on progress in preparing the comprehensive performance
management proposal through an information briefing to be held no later than the end of the second part of the
resumed sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly;
7. Emphasizes that the overarching objective of the performance management proposal should be to
credibly and effectively measure performance, reward good performance and sanction underperformance and that it
should be easily understood by staff and management;
8. Stresses that the sanctioning of underperformance is crucial to ensure the efficient and effective execution
of mandates, and urges the Secretary-General to clarify and simplify policies and procedures related to
underperformance, bearing in mind the lessons learned from the jurisprudence of the administration of justice system;
9. Emphasizes the fundamental importance of human resources management reform in the United Nations
as a contribution to the enhancement of the efficiency and effectiveness of the United Nations and of the
international civil service, and reaffirms its commitment to the implementation of these reforms;
10. Reaffirms its support for the integrity and independence of the international civil service;
11. Urges the Secretary-General to ensure that the lessons learned from the implementation of previous
reforms are taken into consideration in the formulation of new proposals;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the ongoing human resources management reforms
and business transformation projects, to continue to ensure the equal treatment of candidates with equivalent
educational backgrounds during the recruitment process, taking fully into account the fact that Member States have
different education systems and that no education system shall be considered the standard to be applied by the
Organization;
II
Composition of the Secretariat
13. Recalls paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee,104 and requests the Secretary-General to
supplement the raw data presented in the composition report with additional analysis of demographic trends and
possible underlying reasons for those trends;
14. Also recalls paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and stresses the need for greater
efforts to improve the representation of women in the Secretariat, while complying with Article 101 of the Charter
of the United Nations;
15. Underlines the need for a comprehensive and robust workforce planning system as a key component of
human resources management, and expresses serious concern that the current staffing structure does not reflect an
existing effective workforce planning system;
16. Urges the Secretary-General to develop a workforce planning system as a matter of priority and to
present it to the General Assembly for consideration at its sixty-ninth session, and encourages the Secretary-General
to recommend future changes to the staffing structure in the light of the system that is adopted;
17. Recalls paragraph 7 of the report of the Advisory Committee, stresses the importance of the rejuvenation
of the Secretariat, and requests the Secretary-General to continuously monitor demographic trends and report
thereon in his reports on the composition of the Secretariat;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to develop and implement measures to accelerate the placement of
successful candidates from the young professionals programme roster, and to report on progress in this matter to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
19. Emphasizes the important role of the young professionals programme in improving the geographical
representation of underrepresented and unrepresented Member States, requests the Secretary-General to continue his
ongoing efforts in this regard, and notes that from some Member States no candidates have passed the examination
for the programme;
_______________
104

A/68/523.

795

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

III
Practice of the Secretary-General in disciplinary matters
and possible criminal behaviour
20. Commends the Secretary-General for eliminating the backlog of disciplinary cases, and urges him to
keep the management of disciplinary cases under close review, to intensify his efforts to complete such cases in a
timely manner and to take additional steps to ensure that backlogs of cases do not recur in the future;
21. Invites the Secretary-General to provide in future reports, as far as possible, additional information on
trends regarding the outcome of appeals relating to disciplinary measures;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to finalize swiftly the new administrative instruction on investigations
and the disciplinary process and to launch an informational campaign aimed at reminding staff members of their
responsibility to report allegations of wrongdoing or misconduct through the appropriate channels;
23. Stresses the importance of taking all measures necessary, as appropriate, to mitigate and recoup any
losses arising from relevant acts of misconduct of staff members, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly on efforts taken in this regard in his next report on human resources management;
IV
Amendments to the Staff Regulations and Rules
24. Approves the proposed amendments to the Staff Regulations,105 and notes the amendments to the Staff
Rules set out in the report of the Secretary-General;106
25. Recalls paragraph 24 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and encourages the Secretary-General to
continue to make every effort to ensure that his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse is enforced at
all times by all United Nations personnel;
V
Activities of the Ethics Office
26. Commends the Ethics Office on its exceptional ongoing efforts to foster a culture of ethics, integrity,
transparency and accountability in the Organization, and welcomes the efforts of the Office to increase awareness of
ethics-related issues through outreach, training and education;
27. Welcomes the reduced costs of implementing the voluntary financial disclosure initiative as a result of
the new contract arrangements for external review services, and in this regard looks forward to the outcome of the
review of the regulatory framework of the financial disclosure initiative;
28. Takes note of paragraph 31 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and recalls paragraph 40 of its
resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009;
29. Welcomes the initiation of work by the Office on an independent and comprehensive review of the
existing policy and practices for protection of staff against retaliation, and looks forward to reviewing at its sixtyninth session the report of the Secretary-General on the modalities and recommendations for enhancing that
policy;

_______________
105
106

796

A/68/129, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

VI
Secondment of active-duty military and police personnel
30. Takes note of the report of the Advisory Committee;107
31. Requests the Secretary-General to extend for a further three years the exceptional measures authorized in
paragraph 21 of its resolution 67/287 of 28 June 2013, and to intensify his engagement with Member States with a
view to identifying alternative solutions for addressing the conflicts between national legislation and the United
Nations staff regulations and rules regarding the secondment of active-duty military and police personnel;
32. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for consideration at the main part
of its seventieth session a report regarding developments on this issue and, if necessary, a new proposal;
VII
Placement of United Nations staff members who have been adversely
affected by natural disasters, malicious acts and critical incidents
33. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to address the particular needs of staff members of the
United Nations who have been adversely affected by natural disasters, malicious acts and other critical incidents;
34. Takes note of paragraph 1 of the report of the Advisory Committee;108
35. Also takes note of paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides that the scope of the
proposal under consideration or of any future proposals in this regard should not be expanded to include issues such
as workplace harassment, for which relevant procedures already exist;
VIII
Other matters
36. Decides to defer consideration of the proposal of the Secretary-General on mobility to the first part of
the resumed sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 68/253
A/RES/68/253

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/684, para. 7)

68/253. United Nations common system: report of the International Civil Service Commission
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/198 of 21 December 1989, 51/216 of 18 December 1996, 52/216 of 22 December
1997, 53/209 of 18 December 1998, 55/223 of 23 December 2000, 56/244 of 24 December 2001, 57/285 of
20 December 2002, 58/251 of 23 December 2003, 59/268 of 23 December 2004, 60/248 of 23 December 2005,
61/239 of 22 December 2006, 62/227 of 22 December 2007, 63/251 of 24 December 2008, 64/231 of 22 December
2009, 65/248 of 24 December 2010, 66/235 A of 24 December 2011, 66/235 B of 21 June 2012 and 67/257 of
12 April 2013 and its decisions 67/551 and 67/552 A of 24 December 2012,
Having considered the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 2013,109
Reaffirming its commitment to a single, unified United Nations common system as the cornerstone for the
regulation and coordination of the conditions of service of the common system,

_______________
107

A/68/615.
A/68/580.
109
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/68/30).
108

797

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note with great appreciation of the work of the International Civil Service Commission;

2.

Takes note of the report of the Commission for 2013;109

3. Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in approving conditions of service and entitlements for all
staff serving in the organizations of the United Nations common system, bearing in mind articles 10 and 11 of the
statute of the Commission;110
4. Recalls articles 10 and 11 of the statute of the Commission, and reaffirms the central role of the
Commission in regulating and coordinating conditions of service and entitlements for all staff serving in the
organizations of the United Nations common system;
I
Conditions of service applicable to both categories of staff
A.

Comprehensive review of the common system compensation package

1. Recalls paragraph 4 of its resolution 67/257, and requests the Commission to provide to the General
Assembly, at the first part of its resumed sixty-eighth session, a briefing on the progress made on the comprehensive
review of the common system compensation package;
2. Welcomes the comprehensive review, affirms the objectives set out in paragraph 31 of the report of the
Commission, and requests the Commission to review all remuneration elements holistically in order to achieve
those objectives and to safeguard the core values of the organizations of the United Nations common system;
3. Requests the Commission, in its proposals resulting from the ongoing comprehensive review, to ensure
the comparability of the total compensation package in the United Nations common system, including all monetary
and non-monetary elements, under the Noblemaire principle;
4. Also requests the Commission to ensure that the executive heads of organizations and staff federations of
the United Nations common system and Member States are duly apprised of the process and have an opportunity to
provide their feedback;
5. Further requests the Commission not to increase any of the allowances under its purview until the
comprehensive review decided in resolution 67/257 has been submitted to the General Assembly for its
consideration;
6. Expresses its deep concern about the long-term sustainability of the after-service health insurance
scheme within the United Nations system, and in this regard invites the Commission to review, in the context of its
annual report, the apportionment of health insurance premiums between the United Nations organizations and
participants in both United States and non-United States plans;
B.

Mandatory age of separation

1. Decides to defer its decision on the recommendation of the Commission to raise the mandatory age of
separation to 65 years without prejudice to its proposed time frame, and requests the Commission to undertake
further analysis, in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, on the impact of the adoption of this recommendation
on workforce and succession planning frameworks and all relevant human resources management policies,
including performance management and appraisal, rejuvenation, gender balance and equitable geographic
representation, across the United Nations common system and to report thereon at its sixty-ninth session;
2. Recalls paragraph 61 of the report of the Commission, in which it is indicated that raising the mandatory
age of separation for existing staff to 65 years would result in a marginal reduction in the actuarial deficit of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in the range of 0.13 per cent of pensionable remuneration;

_______________
110

798

Resolution 3357 (XXIX), annex.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

II
Conditions of service of staff in the Professional and higher categories
A.

Base/floor salary scale

Recalling its resolution 44/198, by which it established a floor net salary level for staff in the Professional and
higher categories by reference to the corresponding base net salary levels of officials in comparable positions
serving at the base city of the comparator civil service (the United States federal civil service),
Approves, with effect from 1 January 2014, as recommended by the Commission in paragraph 82 of its report,
the revised base/floor scale of gross and net salaries for staff in the Professional and higher categories, as contained
in annex III to the report;
B.

Evolution of the margin

Recalling section I.B of its resolution 51/216 and the standing mandate from the General Assembly, in which
the Commission is requested to continue its review of the relationship between the net remuneration of United
Nations staff in the Professional and higher categories in New York and that of the comparator civil service
employees in comparable positions in Washington, D.C. (referred to as “the margin”),
1. Reaffirms that the Noblemaire principle is the basis for the determination of the level of remuneration for
staff in Professional and higher categories in New York, the base city for the post adjustment system, and in other
duty stations;
2. Also reaffirms that the range of 110 to 120 for the margin between the net remuneration of officials in the
Professional and higher categories of the United Nations in New York and officials in comparable positions in the
comparator civil service should continue to apply, on the understanding that the margin would be maintained at a
level around the desirable midpoint of 115 over a period of time;
3. Notes that the margin between net remuneration of the United Nations staff in grades P-1 to D-2 in
New York and that of officials in comparable positions in the United States federal civil service in Washington,
D.C., for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2013 is 119.6 and that its five-year average
(2009–2013) stands at 115.7, which is above the desirable midpoint of 115;
4. Welcomes the initiative by the Commission to manage the margin actively, following the management
procedure approved by the General Assembly, and not to increase the post adjustment for New York in 2014 in view
of the elevated level of the margin;
5. Recalls that the five-year average of the net remuneration margin should be maintained around the
desirable midpoint of 115, and requests the Commission to submit to the General Assembly, no later than at the
main part of its sixty-ninth session, recommendations on the range of actions and time schedules that would bring
the margin back to its desirable midpoint;
C.

Children’s and secondary dependants’ allowances: review of the methodology

1. Takes note of the decision of the Commission to keep the methodology to determine children’s and
secondary dependants’ allowances under consideration within the framework of the broader review of the common
system compensation package;
2. Approves the recommendation of the Commission that the current levels of the children’s and secondary
dependants’ allowances be maintained;
D.

Education grant: special measures

Approves, with effect for the school year in progress on 1 January 2013, the recommendation of the
Commission as contained in paragraph 113 of its report;
E.

Post adjustment matters

Requests the Commission to review and submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session proposals
on synchronizing the post adjustment cycles at headquarters duty stations.
799

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/254
A/RES/68/254

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/670, para. 6)

68/254. Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001, its resolutions 57/307 of 15 April 2003, 59/266
of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005, 61/261 of 4 April 2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007, 63/253 of
24 December 2008, 64/233 of 22 December 2009, 65/251 of 24 December 2010, 66/237 of 24 December 2011 and
67/241 of 24 December 2012, as well as its decisions 63/531 of 11 December 2008 and 65/513 of 11 December 2010,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of justice at the United Nations111
and on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services,112 the report of the
Internal Justice Council on administration of justice at the United Nations113 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,114 as well as the letter dated 11 November 2013 from the
President of the General Assembly to the Chair of the Fifth Committee,115
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of justice at the United Nations111
and on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services;112
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,114 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
I
System of administration of justice
3. Reaffirms that the resolutions of the General Assembly are binding on the Secretary-General and on the
Organization;
4. Stresses that all elements of the system of administration of justice must work in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the legal and regulatory framework approved by the General Assembly, and
emphasizes that the decisions of the Assembly related to administrative and budgetary matters are subject to review
by the Assembly alone;
5. Reiterates that decisions taken by the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal shall conform with the
provisions of General Assembly resolutions on issues related to human resources management;
6. Acknowledges the evolving nature of the system of administration of justice and the need to carefully
monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains within the parameters set out by the General Assembly;
7.
justice;

Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in the system of administration of

8. Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the system of administration of
justice, regardless of their duty station;
9. Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of resolution 61/261, to establish a new, independent,
transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent
with the relevant rules of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to ensure respect for
the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability of managers and staff members alike;
_______________
111

A/68/346.
A/68/158.
113
A/68/306.
114
A/68/530.
115
A/C.5/68/11.
112

800

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Notes with appreciation the achievements produced since the inception of the system of administration
of justice, regarding both the disposal of the backlog and the addressing of new cases;
11. Recalls paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly for consideration at its sixty-ninth session a revised proposal for conducting an
interim independent assessment of the system of administration of justice, to be carried out in a cost-efficient
manner by independent experts, including experts familiar with internal labour dispute mechanisms;
12. Decides that the assessment requested in paragraph 11 above shall examine the system of administration
of justice in all its aspects, with particular attention to the formal system and its relation with the informal system,
including an analysis of whether the aims and objectives of the system set out in resolution 61/261 are being
achieved in an efficient and cost-effective manner;
13. Stresses the importance of good management practice to promote a positive and transparent work
environment in order to address the underlying factors that give rise to disputes in the workplace, and requests the
Secretary-General to report on efforts made in this regard to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-ninth
session;
14. Notes with concern that performance management is still highlighted as the single most important crosscutting issue in the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman
and Mediation Services, and encourages the further use of approaches that serve to systematically address
performance management issues at the highest levels;
15. Recognizes that sound performance management can greatly contribute to avoiding conflict in the
workplace, and requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to continue to develop and implement a
credible, fair and fully functioning performance appraisal system;
II
Informal system
16. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an efficient and effective option for
staff who seek redress of grievances and for managers to participate in;
17. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of the system of administration of
justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be made of the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary
litigation, without prejudice to the basic right of staff members to access the formal system of justice, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to recommend to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session additional
innovative measures to encourage recourse to informal resolution of disputes;
18. Recognizes the importance of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance as a filter in the system of
administration of justice, and encourages the Office to continue to advise staff on the merits of their cases, especially
when giving summary or preventive legal advice;
19. Welcomes the outreach activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services to encourage informal dispute resolution;
20. Also welcomes the recommendations to address systemic and cross-cutting issues contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services,
and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-ninth session on
progress made on the implementation of those recommendations;
21. Recalls paragraph 20 of resolution 66/237, welcomes the information provided informally by the Office
of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services on the financial and administrative implications
resulting from settlements reached through informal dispute resolution, and requests the Office to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on such implications;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that management responds to requests of the
Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services in a timely manner;
23. Requests that information on the number and nature of cases from non-staff personnel, as well as data on
the distribution of workload among conflict resolution, systemic issues and conflict competence, be clearly set out in
future reports of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services;
801

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General, contained in paragraph 67 (a) of resolution 62/228,
paragraph 21 of resolution 63/253, paragraphs 16 to 18 of resolution 65/251, paragraph 19 of resolution 66/237 and
paragraph 27 of resolution 67/241, to report to the General Assembly on the revised terms of reference for the Office
of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, regrets that the Secretary-General has not fulfilled those
requests, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the terms of reference and guidelines for the Office are
promulgated as soon as possible;
III
Formal system
25. Reaffirms that, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 67/241 and paragraph 28 of resolution
63/253, the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal shall not have any powers beyond those conferred under
their respective statutes;116
26. Also reaffirms that recourse to general principles of law and the Charter by the Tribunals is to take place
within the context of and consistent with their statutes and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, regulations,
rules and administrative issuances;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to track the data on the number of cases received by the
Management Evaluation Unit and the Dispute Tribunal in order to identify any emerging trends and to include his
observations on those statistics in future reports;
28. Reaffirms the need for fully equipped courtrooms and other administrative requirements for the
Tribunals, and welcomes the progress made by the Secretary-General in ensuring the provision of functional
courtrooms with adequate facilities, as a matter of urgency;
29. Requests the Internal Justice Council to report on the impact of the request contained in paragraph 33 of
resolution 67/241, taking into account the views of all relevant stakeholders;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to propose an amendment to the statute of the Appeals Tribunal, taking into
account the recommendation of the Internal Justice Council relating to qualifications of Appeals Tribunal judges;
31. Takes note of paragraph 42 of the report of the Advisory Committee, recognizes that the immunities of
the judges of the two Tribunals should be clearly specified, requests the Secretary-General to examine this issue
further and present to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session recommendations that would not result in a
change in the rank or conditions of service of the judges, and invites the Sixth Committee to consider them, without
prejudice to the role of the Fifth Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with the responsibility for
administrative and budgetary matters;
32. Recognizes the ongoing positive contribution of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance to the system of
administration of justice;
33. Decides that the funding of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance shall be supplemented by a voluntary
payroll deduction not exceeding 0.05 per cent of a staff member’s monthly net base salary and that this funding
mechanism shall be implemented on an experimental basis from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2015, and requests
the Secretary-General to report on its implementation;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to track, on a monthly basis, the opt-out rate and the amount of revenue
generated under the supplementary funding mechanism mentioned in paragraph 33 above, and authorizes him to
enter into commitments for the period from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2015, from this revenue, in an amount
not exceeding this revenue, to finance any additional resources for the Office of Staff Legal Assistance during the
experimental phase of the mechanism;
35. Reiterates that all staff members will continue to have access to the services of the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance during the experimental period;
36. Stresses the need to raise awareness among staff of the importance of financial contributions of the staff
to the Office of Staff Legal Assistance;
_______________
116

802

Resolution 63/253, annexes I and II.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

37. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include information on disputes involving non-staff
personnel in the context of both management evaluation and informal mediation in his respective reports, and
reiterates its request that he provide information on existing measures to institutionalize good management practice
that aim to avoid or mitigate disputes involving the different categories of non-staff personnel;
38. Stresses the need to ensure that all individuals acting as legal representatives, whether they are staff
members representing other staff members, staff members representing themselves or external counsel representing
staff members, are subject to the same standards of professional conduct applicable in the United Nations system,
and requests the Secretary-General to present the code of conduct for external legal representatives, including
appropriate sanctions for breaches thereof as safeguards against frivolous applications, to the General Assembly at
its sixty-ninth session;
IV
Other issues
39. Stresses that the Internal Justice Council can help to ensure independence, professionalism and
accountability in the system of administration of justice, and requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Council
with including the views of both the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal in its annual reports;
40. Recalls paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee, regrets that the Secretary-General has
deemed it necessary to submit the matter of the overpayment of four judges to the General Assembly, and decides
that the Secretary-General should investigate how this administrative error remained undetected for almost two
years and institute measures to ensure that such a situation does not occur again;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to recover the overpayment made to the four judges, and recognizes that
the salary of the judges should remain fixed at the equivalent of the D-2 level, step IV;
42. Recalls paragraph 30 of the report of the Advisory Committee and paragraph 8 of resolution 61/261, and
requests the Secretary-General to present to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session proposals with reference
to the accountability of all individuals where violations of the Organization’s rules and procedures have led to
financial loss;
43. Stresses the growing need for a modernized and upgraded search engine to facilitate streamlined access
to the jurisprudence and outcomes of past relevant cases;
44. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report to be submitted by the SecretaryGeneral, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with responsibilities
for administrative and budgetary matters.
RESOLUTION 68/255
A/RES/68/255

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/681, para. 7)

68/255. Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
The General Assembly,
I
Second performance report on the budget of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the biennium 2012–2013
Having considered the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget, for the biennium
2012–2013, of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
803

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994117 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,118
Recalling its resolution 49/251 of 20 July 1995 on the financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which were resolutions 66/238 of 24 December 2011
and 67/242 of 24 December 2012,
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the biennium 2012–2013117 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;118
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in section II.A of the report of the Advisory
Committee;
3. Resolves that, for the biennium 2012–2013, the amount of 182,163,600 United States dollars gross
(169,508,000 dollars net) approved in its resolution 67/242 for the financing of the Tribunal shall be adjusted by the
amount of 1,756,300 dollars gross (2,586,800 dollars net), for a total amount of 180,407,300 dollars gross
(166,921,200 dollars net);
II
Budget for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
for the biennium 2014–2015
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda for the biennium 2014–2015119 and on the revised estimates arising from the effects of changes in rates
of exchange and inflation,120
Having also considered the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,121
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda for the biennium 2014–2015119 and on the revised estimates arising from the effects of changes in rates
of exchange and inflation;120
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,121 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Decides that the recosting will be calculated in accordance with the formula agreed upon in its resolution
concerning the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;122
4. Emphasizes the importance of the continued efforts of the Secretary-General to implement the
completion strategy for the Tribunal in an efficient and timely manner;
5. Recalls paragraph 18 of the report of the Advisory Committee,118 and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that the Tribunal adheres to the revised travel policy pursuant to its resolution 67/254 of
12 April 2013 and to reflect any cost savings resulting from the revised travel policy in the context of the second
performance report;
6. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
_______________
117

A/68/579.
A/68/642.
119
A/68/494.
120
A/68/660.
121
A/68/642 and A/68/7/Add.24.
122
Resolution 68/246.
118

804

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 a total
amount of 93,595,700 dollars gross (87,188,400 dollars net) for the biennium 2014–2015, as detailed in the
annex to the present resolution;
7. Also decides that the total assessment for 2014 under the Special Account shall amount to 46,797,850
dollars, being half of the estimated appropriation approved for the biennium 2014–2015;
8. Further decides to apportion the amount of 23,398,925 dollars gross (21,797,100 dollars net) among
Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations
for 2014;
9. Decides to apportion the amount of 23,398,925 dollars gross (21,797,100 dollars net) among Member
States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations
for 2014;
10. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 8 and 9 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated staff assessment income of 3,203,650 dollars
approved for the Tribunal for 2014.
Annex
Financing for the biennium 2014–2015 of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
Gross

Net

(United States dollars)

Estimated appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015

95 283 500

88 879 600

Revised estimates: effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation

(1 687 800)

(1 691 200)

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions

–

–

Recommendations of the Fifth Committee

–

–

93 595 700

87 188 400

Requirements representing half of the estimated appropriation for the biennium
2014–2015

46 797 850

43 594 200

Decrease in the final appropriation for the biennium 2012–2013

(1 756 300)

(2 586 800)

Transfer of credit in accordance with paragraph 3 (c) (i) of resolution 68/245 A
on the second performance report for the programme budget for the biennium
2012–2013

1 756 300

2 586 800

46 797 850

43 594 200

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of
assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2014

23 398 925

21 797 100

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of
assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations
for 2014

23 398 925

21 797 100

Estimated initial appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015
Total assessment for 2014

Net contributions assessed on Member States for 2014
Of which:

805

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/256
A/RES/68/256

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/682, para. 7)

68/256. Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
The General Assembly,
I
Second performance report on the budget of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia for the biennium 2012–2013
Having considered the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget, for the biennium
2012–2013, of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991123 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,124
Recalling its resolution 47/235 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which were resolutions 66/239 of
24 December 2011 and 67/243 of 24 December 2012,
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for the biennium 2012–2013,123 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;124
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in section III.A of the report of the Advisory
Committee;
3. Resolves that, for the biennium 2012–2013, the amount of 283,067,700 United States dollars gross
(251,736,900 dollars net) approved in its resolution 67/243 for the financing of the Tribunal shall be adjusted by the
amount of 4,074,200 dollars gross (4,476,100 dollars net), for a total of 278,993,500 dollars gross (247,260,800
dollars net);
II
Budget for the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
for the biennium 2014–2015
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia for the biennium 2014–2015125 and on the revised estimates arising from the effects of changes
in rates of exchange and inflation,126
Having also considered the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,127
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia for the biennium 2014–2015125 and on the revised estimates arising from the effects of changes
in rates of exchange and inflation;126
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,127 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
_______________
123

A/68/582.
A/68/642.
125
A/68/386.
126
A/68/660.
127
A/68/642 and A/68/7/Add.24.
124

806

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Decides that the recosting will be calculated in accordance with the formula agreed upon in its resolution
concerning the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;128
4. Emphasizes the importance of the continued efforts of the Secretary-General to implement the
completion strategy for the Tribunal in an efficient and timely manner;
5. Recalls paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee,124 and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that the Tribunal adheres to the revised travel policy pursuant to resolution 67/254 of
12 April 2013 and to reflect any cost savings resulting from the revised travel policy in the context of the second
performance report;
6. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 a total amount of 201,688,200 dollars gross (179,998,600 dollars net) for the
biennium 2014–2015, as detailed in the annex to the present resolution;
7. Also decides that the financing of the appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015 under the Special
Account shall take into account the estimated income of 285,500 dollars for the biennium, which shall be set off
against the aggregate amount of the appropriation;
8. Further decides that the total assessment for 2014 under the Special Account shall amount to
100,701,350 dollars, being half of the estimated appropriation approved for the biennium 2014–2015, after taking
into account 142,750 dollars, which is half of the estimated income for the biennium of 285,500 dollars;
9. Decides to apportion the amount of 50,350,675 dollars gross (44,928,275 dollars net) among Member
States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2014;
10. Also decides to apportion the amount of 50,350,675 dollars gross (44,928,275 dollars net) among
Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations for 2014;
11. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 9 and 10
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated staff assessment income of 10,844,800
dollars approved for the Tribunal for 2014.
Annex
Financing for the biennium 2014–2015 of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Gross

Net

(United States dollars)

Estimated appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015

198 667 000

177 140 500

3 021 200

2 858 100

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions

–

–

Recommendations of the Fifth Committee

–

–

201 688 200

179 998 600

(285 500)

(285 500)

201 402 700

179 713 100

Revised estimates: effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation

Estimated initial appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015
Less: estimated income for the biennium 2014–2015
Estimated initial appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015,
net of estimated income

_______________
128

Resolution 68/246.

807

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Gross

Net

(United States dollars)

Total assessment for 2014
Requirements representing half of the estimated appropriation for the biennium
2014–2015

100 701 350

89 856 550

Decrease in the final appropriation for the biennium 2012–2013

(4 074 200)

(4 476 100)

Transfer of credit in accordance with paragraph 3 (c) (i) of resolution 68/245 A
on the second performance report for the programme budget for the biennium
2012–2013

4 074 200

4 476 100

100 701 350

89 856 550

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of
assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2014

50 350 675

44 928 275

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of
assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations
for 2014

50 350 675

44 928 275

Net contributions assessed on Member States for 2014
Of which:

RESOLUTION 68/257
A/RES/68/257

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/683, para. 7)

68/257. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
The General Assembly,
I
Second performance report on the budget of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2012–2013
Having considered the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2012–2013129 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,130
Recalling its resolutions 66/240 A of 24 December 2011 and 66/240 B of 21 June 2012, as well as its
resolutions 67/244 A of 24 December 2012 and 67/244 B of 12 April 2013,
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2012–2013;129
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in section IV.A of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;130
3. Resolves that, for the biennium 2012–2013, the amount of 53,676,500 United States dollars gross
(51,085,600 dollars net) approved in its resolution 67/244 A for the financing of the Mechanism shall be adjusted by
the amount of 34,677,800 dollars gross (33,006,900 dollars net), for a total amount of 18,998,700 dollars gross
(18,078,700 dollars net);
_______________
129
130

808

A/68/594.
A/68/642.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

II
Budget for the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2014–2015
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2014–2015 131 and on the revised estimates arising from
changes in rates of exchange and inflation,132
Having also considered the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,133
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2014–2015131 and on the revised estimates arising from the
effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation;132
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,133 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Decides that the recosting will be calculated in accordance with the formula agreed upon in its resolution
concerning the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;134
4. Recalls paragraph 50 of the report of the Advisory Committee,130 and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that the Mechanism adheres to the revised travel policy pursuant to its resolution 67/254
of 12 April 2013 and to reflect any cost savings resulting from the revised travel policy in the context of the second
performance report;
5. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals a total amount of 120,296,600 dollars gross (112,831,500 dollars net) for the biennium 2014–2015, as
detailed in the annex to the present resolution;
6. Also decides that the total assessment for 2014 under the Special Account amounting to 61,648,300
dollars gross shall consist of:
(a)

60,148,300 dollars, being half of the estimated appropriation approved for the biennium 2014–2015;

(b) 1,500,000 dollars, being the increase reflecting the deferred assessment decided by the General
Assembly in its resolution 67/244;
7. Further decides, for the year 2014, to apportion the amount of 30,824,150 dollars gross (28,957,875
dollars net) among Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to the regular budget of
the United Nations for 2014;
8. Decides to apportion the amount of 30,824,150 dollars gross (28,957,875 dollars net) among Member
States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations
for 2014;
9. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 7 and 8 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated staff assessment income in the amount of
3,732,550 dollars approved for the Mechanism for 2014.

_______________
131

A/68/491.
A/68/660.
133
A/68/642 and A/68/7/Add.24.
134
Resolution 68/246.
132

809

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex
Financing for the biennium 2014–2015 of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Gross

Net

(United States dollars)

Estimated appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015

120 282 100

112 863 000

14 500

(31 500)

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions

–

–

Recommendations of the Fifth Committee

–

–

120 296 600

112 831 500

Requirements representing half of the estimated appropriation for the biennium
2014–2015

60 148 300

56 415 750

Decrease in the final appropriation for the biennium 2012–2013

(34 677 800)

(33 006 900)

Transfer of credit in accordance with paragraph 3 (c) (i) of resolution 68/245 A on the
second performance report for the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

34 677 800

33 006 900

Increase reflecting the deferred assessment of $1.5 million as decided by the General
Assembly in resolution 67/244

1 500 000

1 500 000

61 648 300

57 915 750

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of
assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2014

30 824 150

28 957 875

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of
assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations for 2014

30 824 150

28 957 875

Revised estimates: effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation

Estimated initial appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015
Total assessment for 2014

Net contributions assessed on Member States for 2014
Of which:

RESOLUTION 68/258
A/RES/68/258

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/672, para. 6)

68/258. Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General135 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,136
Recalling Security Council resolution 2126 (2013) of 25 November 2013, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei until 31 May 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 67/270 of 28 June 2013 on the financing of the Force,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,136 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
_______________
135
136

810

A/68/519.
A/68/620.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Requests the Secretary-General to make full use of predefined modules and service packages, including
to expedite the deployment of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism to full operating capability;
3.

Takes note of paragraph 28 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

4.

Reaffirms paragraph 10 of its resolution 67/270;

Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014
5. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
the amount of 38,468,600 United States dollars for the maintenance of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, in addition to the amount of 307,058,200 dollars already
appropriated for the same period under the terms of its resolution 67/270;
Financing of the appropriation
6. Decides, taking into account the amount of 281,470,017 dollars already apportioned under the terms of
its resolution 67/270 for the period from 1 July 2013 to 31 May 2014, to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 35,262,883 dollars for the same period, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution
67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2013 and 2014, as set out in its
resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
7. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 6 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the amount of 86,350 dollars, representing the increase in the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Force for the period from 1 July 2013 to 31 May 2014;
8. Further decides to apportion among Member States the additional amount of 3,205,717 dollars for the
period from 1 to 30 June 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238, subject to a decision of the Security Council to
extend the mandate of the Force;
9. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 8 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund in the amount of 7,850 dollars, representing the increase in the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Force for the period from 1 to 30 June 2014;
10. Also decides to keep under review during its sixty-eighth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei”.
RESOLUTION 68/259
A/RES/68/259

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/680, para. 6)

68/259. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General137 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,138
Recalling Security Council resolution 2100 (2013) of 25 April 2013, by which the Council established the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, requested the Secretary-General to
subsume the United Nations Office in Mali into the Mission, with the Mission assuming responsibility for the
_______________
137
138

A/68/538.
A/68/653.

811

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

discharge of the mandated tasks of the Office, as from 25 April 2013, and decided that authority be transferred from
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali on 1 July 2013, at which point the latter would commence implementation of its
mandate as defined in paragraphs 16 and 17 of resolution 2100 (2013), for an initial period of 12 months,
Recalling also its resolution 67/286 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali as at 30 November 2013, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 127.7 million
United States dollars, representing some 32 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
64 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular
those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,138 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Takes note of paragraph 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General
to ensure that future budget proposals, derived from the standardized funding model, lead to the allocation of
adequate resources to the Mission for effective delivery of mandated activities, taking into account lessons learned
from the application of the model, and to report thereon;
10. Also takes note of paragraphs 45, 47, 50, 55, 57, 64, 66, 68 and 91 of the report of the Advisory
Committee;
11. Recalls paragraph 4 of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, in which it indicated that the purpose of
quick-impact projects is to establish and build confidence in individual missions, their mandates and the peace
process, thereby improving the environment for effective mandate implementation, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to reflect this in future results-based budgeting frameworks for the Mission;
12. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Secretary-General to enhance inter-mission cooperation,
and in this regard calls for continued cooperation between the Mission and the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire;
812

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Expenditure report for the period from 25 April to 30 June 2013
15. Takes note of the expenditure report for the Mission for the period from 25 April to 30 June 2013;139
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali the amount of 81,976,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the period
from 25 April to 30 June 2013;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 25 April to 30 June 2013
17. Decides, taking into account the amount of 75,321,180 dollars already apportioned under the terms of its
resolution 67/286 for the period from 25 April to 30 June 2013, to apportion among Member States the additional
amount of 6,655,220 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the same period, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2013, as set
out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
18. Also decides that there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for
in paragraph 17 above, the amount of 400 dollars, representing other income in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013;
19. Further decides to reduce by 728,000 dollars the amount of the estimated staff assessment income set
off against the apportionment among Member States for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
25 April to 30 June 2013 under the terms of its resolution 67/286, from the total amount of 769,300 dollars to
41,300 dollars, and to add the reduction of 728,000 dollars in the staff assessment income to the apportionment
among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17 above;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account the amount of 602 million dollars for the maintenance of
the Mission for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, inclusive of the amount of 366,774,500 dollars
previously authorized for the Mission for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2013 under the terms of its
resolution 67/286;
21. Also decides, taking into account the support account requirements in the total amount of 6,118,300
dollars (net requirement of 5,660,700 dollars) for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 and the amount of
3,845,200 dollars (net requirement of 3,602,500 dollars) already approved under the terms of its resolution 67/286
for the same period for the support account for peacekeeping operations, to approve the additional support account
requirements in the amount of 2,273,100 dollars (net requirement of 2,058,200 dollars) for the same period;
Financing of the appropriation
22. Decides, taking into account the amount of 330,097,050 dollars already apportioned under the terms of
its resolution 67/286 for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2013, to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 271,902,950 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2013 to
30 June 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
23. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 22 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,410,200 dollars, representing the balance of the estimated staff
assessment income of 6,071,700 dollars approved for the Mission;
_______________
139

A/68/538, sect. IV.

813

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
26. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
27. Decides to keep under review during its sixty-eighth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali”.
RESOLUTION 68/260
A/RES/68/260

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 27 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/671, para. 8)

68/260. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014140 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,141
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2108 (2013) of 27 June 2013,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the United Nations
Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 67/278 of 28 June 2013,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,141 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
2.

Takes note of paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

Revised budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014
3. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
the amount of 12,635,500 United States dollars for the maintenance of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, in addition to the amount of 50,736,200 dollars previously
appropriated for the same period under the terms of its resolution 67/278, inclusive of 48,019,000 dollars for the
maintenance of the Force, 2,277,400 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 439,800
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the additional appropriation
4. Decides, taking into account the amount of 50,736,200 dollars already apportioned under the terms of its
resolution 67/278 for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, to apportion among Member States the
_______________
140
141

814

A/68/505.
A/68/617.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

additional amount of 6,317,750 dollars for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2013, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2013,
as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
5. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 4 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the amount of 56,700 dollars, representing the additional staff
assessment income approved for the Force for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2013;
6. Further decides, taking into account the amount of 50,736,200 dollars already apportioned under the
terms of its resolution 67/278 for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, to apportion among Member States
the additional amount of 6,317,750 dollars for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2014, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its
resolution 67/238;
7. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 6 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund in the amount of 56,700 dollars, representing the additional staff assessment income approved for
the Force for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2014;
8. Also decides to keep under review during its sixty-eighth session, under the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item entitled “United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force”.

815

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/104.

Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts......................................................................................... 818

68/105.

Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission .............................................................. 819

68/106.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth session ............. 822

68/107.

Revision of the Guide to Enactment of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency and part four of the
Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law....................... 826
A.

Revision of the Guide to Enactment of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency ........................................ 826

B.

Part four of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law..................................................................................... 827

68/108.

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Guide on the Implementation of a Security Rights
Registry ............................................................................................................................................................... 827

68/109.

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration and Arbitration Rules (as revised in 2010, with new article 1, paragraph 4, as adopted in 2013)................ 829

68/110.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law.................................................................................................................................................. 830

68/111.

Reservations to treaties.......................................................................................................................................... 833

68/112.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-fifth session.................................................... 857

68/113.

Diplomatic protection ........................................................................................................................................... 860

68/114.

Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss in the case
of such harm......................................................................................................................................................... 861

68/115.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization ................................................................................................................................................... 862

68/116.

The rule of law at the national and international levels............................................................................................. 865

68/117.

The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction .......................................................................... 866

68/118.

The law of transboundary aquifers ......................................................................................................................... 867

68/119.

Measures to eliminate international terrorism.......................................................................................................... 873

68/120.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country.................................................................................. 878

68/121.

Observer status for the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law in the General Assembly.................. 880

68/122.

Observer status for the International Anti-Corruption Academy in the General Assembly ......................................... 880

68/123.

Observer status for the Pan African Intergovernmental Agency for Water and Sanitation for Africa in the
General Assembly ................................................................................................................................................ 880

68/124.

Observer status for the Global Green Growth Institute in the General Assembly....................................................... 881

817

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/104
A/RES/681/04

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/460, para. 9)1

68/104. Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001, the annex to which contains the text of the articles on
responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, and its resolutions 59/35 of 2 December 2004, 62/61 of
6 December 2007 and 65/19 of 6 December 2010 commending the articles to the attention of Governments,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts is of major importance in
relations between States,
Taking into account the comments and observations of Governments2 and the discussions held in the Sixth
Committee, at the fifty-sixth, fifty-ninth, sixty-second, sixty-fifth and sixty-eighth sessions of the General Assembly,
on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts,
Noting with appreciation the compilation of decisions of international courts, tribunals and other bodies
referring to the articles, prepared by the Secretary-General,3
1. Acknowledges that a growing number of decisions of international courts, tribunals and other bodies
refer to the articles on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts;
2. Continues to acknowledge the importance and usefulness of the articles, and commends them once
again to the attention of Governments, without prejudice to the question of their future adoption or other appropriate
action;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments to submit further written comments on any future
action regarding the articles;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to update the compilation of decisions of international courts,
tribunals and other bodies referring to the articles and to invite Governments to submit information on their practice
in this regard, and further requests the Secretary-General to submit this material well in advance of its seventy-first
session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Responsibility
of States for internationally wrongful acts” and to further examine, within the framework of a working group of the
Sixth Committee and with a view to taking a decision, the question of a convention on responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts or other appropriate action on the basis of the articles.

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Bureau.
2
See A/62/63 and Add.1, A/65/96 and Add.1 and A/68/69 and Add.1.
3
See A/62/62 and Corr.1 and Add.1, A/65/76 and A/68/72.

818

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/105
A/RES/68/105

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/461, para. 8)4

68/105. Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/281 of 29 March 2005, in which it endorsed the recommendation of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations that the Secretary-General make available to the United Nations membership
a comprehensive report on the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations,5
Recalling also that the Secretary-General, on 24 March 2005, transmitted to the President of the General
Assembly a report of his Adviser concerning sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel,6
Recalling further its resolution 59/300 of 22 June 2005, in which it endorsed the recommendation of the
Special Committee that a group of legal experts be established to provide advice on the best way to proceed so as to
ensure that the original intent of the Charter of the United Nations can be achieved, namely, that United Nations staff
and experts on mission would never be effectively exempt from the consequences of criminal acts committed at
their duty station, nor unjustly penalized, without due process,7
Recognizing the valuable contribution of United Nations officials and experts on mission towards the
fulfilment of the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Reaffirming the need to promote and ensure respect for the principles and rules of international law,
Reaffirming also that the present resolution is without prejudice to the privileges and immunities of United
Nations officials and experts on mission and the United Nations under international law,
Reaffirming further the obligation of United Nations officials and experts on mission to respect the national laws of
the host State, as well as the right of the host State to exercise, where applicable, its criminal jurisdiction, in accordance
with the relevant rules of international law and agreements governing operations of United Nations missions,
Deeply concerned by reports of criminal conduct, and conscious that such conduct, if not investigated and, as
appropriate, prosecuted, would create the negative impression that United Nations officials and experts on mission
operate with impunity,
Reaffirming the need to ensure that all United Nations officials and experts on mission function in a manner
that preserves the image, credibility, impartiality and integrity of the United Nations,
Emphasizing that crimes committed by such persons are unacceptable and have a detrimental effect on the
fulfilment of the mandate of the United Nations, in particular with respect to the relations between the United
Nations and the local population in the host country,
Conscious of the importance of protecting the rights of victims of criminal conduct, as well as of ensuring
adequate protection for witnesses, and recalling the adoption of its resolution 62/214 of 21 December 2007 on the
United Nations Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by
United Nations Staff and Related Personnel,
Emphasizing the need to enhance international cooperation to ensure the criminal accountability of United
Nations officials and experts on mission,
Recalling its resolution 61/29 of 4 December 2006, by which it established the Ad Hoc Committee on
criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission,
_______________
4

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
Bureau.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part one, chap. III, sect. D, para. 56.
6
See A/59/710.
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part two, chap. II, sect. N, para. 40 (a).

819

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Having considered at its previous sessions the report of the Group of Legal Experts established by the
Secretary-General pursuant to its resolution 59/3008 and the reports of the Ad Hoc Committee,9 as well as the note
by the Secretariat10 and the reports of the Secretary-General11 on criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission,
Recalling its resolutions 62/63 of 6 December 2007, 63/119 of 11 December 2008, 64/110 of 16 December
2009, 65/20 of 6 December 2010, 66/93 of 9 December 2011 and 67/88 of 14 December 2012,
Recalling also its decision that, bearing in mind its resolutions 62/63 and 63/119, the consideration of the
report of the Group of Legal Experts, in particular its legal aspects, taking into account the views of Member States
and the information contained in the note by the Secretariat, shall be continued during its seventieth session in the
framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee,
Convinced of the continuing need for the United Nations and its Member States to urgently take strong and
effective steps to ensure the criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission in the interest
of justice,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;12

2. Strongly urges States to take all appropriate measures to ensure that crimes by United Nations officials
and experts on mission do not go unpunished and that the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice, without
prejudice to the privileges and immunities of such persons and the United Nations under international law, and in
accordance with international human rights standards, including due process;
3. Strongly urges all States to consider establishing, to the extent that they have not yet done so, jurisdiction
over crimes, particularly those of a serious nature, as known in their existing national criminal laws, committed by
their nationals while serving as United Nations officials or experts on mission, at least where the conduct as defined
in the law of the State establishing jurisdiction also constitutes a crime under the laws of the host State, and, further,
urges States and appropriate international organizations to provide technical and other appropriate assistance in
developing such legal measures to States requesting such support;
4. Encourages all States to cooperate with each other and with the United Nations in the exchange of
information and in facilitating the conduct of investigations and, as appropriate, the prosecution of United Nations
officials and experts on mission who are alleged to have committed crimes of a serious nature, in accordance with
their national law and applicable United Nations rules and regulations, fully respecting due process rights, as well as
to consider strengthening the capacities of their national authorities to investigate and prosecute such crimes;
5.

Also encourages all States:

(a) To afford each other assistance in connection with criminal investigations or criminal or extradition
proceedings in respect of crimes of a serious nature committed by United Nations officials and experts on mission,
including assistance in obtaining evidence at their disposal, in accordance with their national law or any treaties or
other arrangements on extradition and mutual legal assistance that may exist between them;
(b) In accordance with their national law, to explore ways and means of facilitating the possible use of
information and material obtained from the United Nations for purposes of criminal proceedings initiated in their
territory for the prosecution of crimes of a serious nature committed by United Nations officials and experts on
mission, bearing in mind due process considerations;
(c) In accordance with their national law, to provide effective protection for victims of, witnesses to and
others who provide information in relation to crimes of a serious nature alleged to have been committed by United
Nations officials and experts on mission and to facilitate access of victims to victim assistance programmes, without
prejudice to the rights of the alleged offender, including those relating to due process;
_______________
8

A/60/980.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 54 (A/62/54); and ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 54 (A/63/54).
10
A/62/329.
11
A/63/260 and Add.1, A/64/183 and Add.1, A/65/185, A/66/174 and Add.1 and A/67/213.
12
A/68/173.
9

820

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(d) In accordance with their national law, to explore ways and means of responding adequately to requests
by host States for support and assistance in order to enhance their capacity to conduct effective investigations in
respect of crimes of a serious nature alleged to have been committed by United Nations officials and experts on
mission;
6. Requests the Secretariat to continue to ensure that requests to Member States seeking personnel to serve
as experts on mission make States aware of the expectation that persons who serve in that capacity should meet high
standards in their conduct and behaviour and be aware that certain conduct may amount to a crime for which they
may be held accountable;
7. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to take such other practical measures as are within his authority
to strengthen existing training on United Nations standards of conduct, including through predeployment and inmission induction training for United Nations officials and experts on mission;
8. Reiterates its decision that, bearing in mind its resolutions 62/63 and 63/119, the consideration of the
report of the Group of Legal Experts,8 in particular its legal aspects, taking into account the views of Member States
and also noting the inputs by the Secretariat, shall be continued during its seventieth session in the framework of a
working group of the Sixth Committee;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to bring credible allegations that reveal that a crime may have been
committed by United Nations officials or experts on mission to the attention of the States against whose nationals
such allegations are made and to request from those States an indication of the status of their efforts to investigate
and, as appropriate, prosecute crimes of a serious nature, as well as the types of appropriate assistance that States
may wish to receive from the Secretariat for the purposes of such investigations and prosecutions;
10. Urges States to provide to the Secretary-General at the appropriate time information on their handling of
the credible allegations brought to their attention by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 9 above;
11. Requests the United Nations, when its investigations into allegations suggest that crimes of a serious
nature may have been committed by United Nations officials or experts on mission, to consider any appropriate
measures that may facilitate the possible use of information and material for purposes of criminal proceedings
initiated by States, bearing in mind due process considerations;
12. Encourages the United Nations, when allegations against United Nations officials or experts on mission
are determined by a United Nations administrative investigation to be unfounded, to take appropriate measures, in
the interests of the Organization, to restore the credibility and the reputation of such officials and experts on mission;
13. Urges the United Nations to continue cooperating with States exercising jurisdiction in order to provide
them, within the framework of the relevant rules of international law and agreements governing activities of the
United Nations, with information and material for purposes of criminal proceedings initiated by States;
14. Emphasizes that the United Nations, in accordance with the applicable rules of the Organization, should
take no action that would retaliate against or intimidate United Nations officials and experts on mission who report
allegations concerning crimes of a serious nature committed by United Nations officials and experts on mission;
15. Takes note with appreciation of the information provided by Governments in response to its resolutions
62/63, 63/119, 64/110, 65/20, 66/93 and 67/88, and urges Governments to continue taking the measures necessary
for the implementation of those resolutions, including their provisions addressing the establishment of jurisdiction
over crimes, particularly those of a serious nature, as known in their existing national criminal laws, committed by
their nationals while serving as United Nations officials or experts on mission, as well as cooperation among States,
and to provide specific details thereon, in particular with respect to paragraph 3 of the present resolution, in the
information provided to the Secretary-General;
16. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session
on the implementation of the present resolution, in particular with respect to paragraphs 3, 5, 8 and 9 above, as well
as any practical problems in its implementation, on the basis of information received from Governments and the
Secretariat;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his report information on the number and types of credible
allegations and any actions taken by the United Nations, including referrals to appropriate authorities for prosecution
821

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

and the procedures therefor, and its Member States regarding crimes of a serious nature committed by United
Nations officials and experts on mission, including information on efforts made to ensure the completeness of
incident reporting;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission”.
RESOLUTION 68/106
A/RES/68/106

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/462, para. 14)13

68/106. Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its forty-sixth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of
the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of international trade law, in
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade, especially those affecting developing
countries, would contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of equality,
equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination of discrimination in international trade
and, thereby, to peace, stability and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission,14
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of international trade law without
adequate coordination with the Commission might lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in
keeping with the aim of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization of
international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of international trade law, to coordinate legal activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts,
including among organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency, consistency and
coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat,
to maintain close cooperation with other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;14

2. Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the Rules on Transparency in Treatybased Investor-State Arbitration,15 the Arbitration Rules (as revised in 2010, with new article 1, paragraph 4, as
adopted in 2013),16 the Guide on the Implementation of a Security Rights Registry,17 the Guide to Enactment and
_______________
13

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17).
15
Ibid., chap. III and annex I.
16
Ibid., chap. III and annex II.
17
Ibid., chap. IV.

822

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Interpretation of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency,18 part four of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency
Law, on the obligations of directors in the period approaching insolvency, 19 the guidance on procurement
regulations to be promulgated in accordance with article 4 of the Model Law on Public Procurement20 and the
glossary of procurement-related terms used in the Model Law on Public Procurement,20 as well as for the updating
of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency: The Judicial Perspective;21
3. Recognizes the opinion expressed by the Commission that the secretariat of the Commission should
fulfil the role of a repository of published information under the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based InvestorState Arbitration (“transparency repository”),22 invites the Secretary-General to consider performing, in accordance
with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, the role of the transparency repository through the secretariat of the
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly and the Commission in this
regard;
4. Takes note with interest of the decisions taken by the Commission as regards its future work and the
progress made by the Commission in its work in the areas of arbitration and conciliation, online dispute resolution,
electronic commerce, insolvency law, security interests, international trade law aimed at reducing the legal obstacles
faced by micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises throughout their life cycle and public-private partnerships,
and commends in particular the efforts undertaken by the Commission to improve the management of its resources
while maintaining and increasing its current levels of activity, including through the use of informal working
methods where appropriate, with due regard to the formal negotiation process;23
5. Notes with appreciation the projects of the Commission aimed at promoting the uniform and effective
application of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the New York
Convention), done at New York on 10 June 1958,24 including the preparation of a guide on the Convention, in
close cooperation with international experts, to be submitted to the Commission at a future session for its
consideration;25
6. Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body within the United Nations
system in the field of international trade law, aimed at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities
of international and regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting the rule of
law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard appeals to relevant international and
regional organizations to coordinate their legal activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of
efforts and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of
international trade law;
7. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the work of the Commission
concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the field of international trade law reform and development,
and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through its secretariat, its technical
cooperation and assistance programme, and in that respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships
with State and non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and facilitate the effective
implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities and for providing assistance with legislative drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the
attention of the Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
_______________
18

Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
Ibid., sect. B.
20
Ibid., chap. VI.
21
Ibid., chap. V, sect. C.
22
Ibid., para. 80.
23
Ibid., chaps. III–V, VII, VIII and XV.
24
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
25
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. III, sect. E.
19

823

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions enabled the technical cooperation
and assistance activities to take place, and appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where appropriate, for the financing of
special projects and otherwise to assist the secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and
assistance activities, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and other bodies responsible for
development assistance, such as the World Bank and regional development banks, as well as to Governments in
their bilateral aid programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the Commission
and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities with those of the Commission in the light of
the relevance and importance of the work and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law
at the national and international levels and for the implementation of the international development agenda,
including the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
8. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and methods of work of the Commission,
including transparent and inclusive deliberations, taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in
annex III to the report on the work of its forty-third session,26 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings of
the Commission and of its working groups, a reminder of those rules of procedure and methods of work with a view
to ensuring the high quality of the work of the Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, and
in this regard recalls its previous resolutions related to this matter;
9. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Regional Centre
for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of Korea, towards reaching out and providing technical assistance with
international trade law reforms to developing countries in the region, notes with satisfaction expressions of interest
from other States in hosting regional centres of the Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the
General Assembly informed of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in particular their
funding and budgetary situation;27
10. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions
and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund established to provide travel assistance to
developing countries that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral, in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and to increase expert representation from
developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and
capacities in those countries to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment for business, trade and
investment;
11. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the sessions of the Commission and
its working groups, to continue, in the competent Main Committee during the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, its consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are members of the
Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General;
12. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and effective use of modern private
law standards in international trade are essential for advancing good governance, sustained economic development
and the eradication of poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations should
be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the rule of law at the national and
international levels, including through the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of
Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
13. Notes the rule of law panel discussion held at the forty-sixth session of the Commission and the
comments transmitted by the Commission highlighting its role in promoting the rule of law and the peaceful
settlement of international disputes through its work in the areas of arbitration and conciliation, transparency in
_______________
26
27

824

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. XIII.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

investor-State dispute resolution and online dispute resolution and its work towards achieving universal accession
to, and the effective implementation and uniform interpretation and application of, the New York Convention;28
14. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of
24 September 2012, Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal frameworks for
generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development, economic growth and employment, generating
investment and facilitating entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the declaration, Member States
expressed their conviction that the rule of law and development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
15. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with resolutions of the General Assembly
on documentation-related matters,29 which, in particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate,
the length of documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the substance of the
documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the mandate and functions of the Commission in the
progressive development and codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect to
the documentation of the Commission;30
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission standards and the provision
of summary records of the meetings of the Commission, including committees of the whole established by the
Commission for the duration of its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts, and takes note of
the Commission’s decision to continue the trial use of digital recordings, in parallel with summary records where
applicable, with a view to assessing at its forty-seventh session, in 2014, the experience of using digital recordings
and, on the basis of that assessment, taking a decision regarding the possible replacement of summary records by
digital recordings;31
17. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011 regarding the rotation scheme of
meetings between Vienna and New York;
18. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the collection and dissemination of
case law on Commission texts in the six official languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the
resource-intensive nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and expand it, and in
this regard welcomes efforts by the Secretariat towards building partnerships with interested institutions, and
appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and
individuals to assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the availability and usefulness of
the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles and in securing the funding required for the
coordination and expansion of the system and the establishment, within the secretariat of the Commission, of a pillar
focused on the promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a uniform manner;
19. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the work of the Commission for
the global unification and harmonization of international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet
done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and encouraging the use of
other relevant texts;
20. Welcomes the continued work of the Secretariat on digests of case law related to Commission texts,
including their wide dissemination, as well as the continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through
the CLOUT system, in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools for the promotion
of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in particular by building local capacity of judges, arbitrators
and other legal practitioners to interpret those standards in the light of their international character and the need to
promote uniformity in their application and the observance of good faith in international trade.
_______________
28

Ibid., chap. XIV, sect. C.
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
30
Resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
31
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), para. 341.
29

825

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTIONS 68/107 A and B
A/RES/68/107AandB

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/462, para. 14)32

68/107. Revision of the Guide to Enactment of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency and part four of
the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law
A
REVISION OF THE GUIDE TO ENACTMENT OF THE MODEL LAW
ON CROSS-BORDER INSOLVENCY
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of
the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Recalling also its resolution 52/158 of 15 December 1997, in which it recommended the use of the Model
Law on Cross-Border Insolvency of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, contained in the
annex thereto,
Noting that legislation based upon the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency has been enacted in some
20 States,
Noting also the widespread increase in the incidence of cross-border insolvency proceedings and, accordingly,
the growing opportunities for use and application of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency in cross-border
insolvency proceedings and the development of international jurisprudence interpreting its provisions,
Noting further that courts frequently have reference to the Guide to Enactment of the Model Law on CrossBorder Insolvency33 for guidance on the background to the drafting and interpretation of its provisions,
Recognizing that some uncertainty with respect to the interpretation of certain provisions of the Model Law on
Cross-Border Insolvency has emerged in the jurisprudence arising from its application in practice,
Convinced of the desirability, in the interpretation of those provisions, of regard to the international origin of
the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency and the need to promote uniformity in its application,
Convinced also of the desirability of providing additional guidance through revision of the Guide to
Enactment of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency with respect to the interpretation and application of
selected aspects of the Model Law to facilitate uniform interpretation,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law for revising
the Guide to Enactment of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency;33
2. Requests the Secretary-General to publish, including electronically, the text of the Guide to Enactment
and Interpretation of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency, together with the text of the Model Law on
Cross-Border Insolvency,34 and to transmit it to Governments and interested bodies, so that it becomes widely
known and available;
3. Recommends that the Guide to Enactment and Interpretation of the Model Law on Cross-Border
Insolvency be given due consideration, as appropriate, by legislators, policymakers, judges, insolvency practitioners
and other individuals concerned with cross-border insolvency laws and proceedings;
_______________
32

The draft resolutions recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
Bureau.
33
A/CN.9/442, annex.
34
Resolution 52/158, annex.

826

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4. Also recommends that all States continue to consider implementation of the Model Law on Cross-Border
Insolvency, and invites States that have enacted legislation based upon the Model Law to advise the Commission
accordingly.
B
PART FOUR OF THE LEGISLATIVE GUIDE
ON INSOLVENCY LAW
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of
the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Recalling also its resolutions 59/40 of 2 December 2004, in which it recommended the use of the Legislative
Guide on Insolvency Law of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law,35 and 65/24 of 6 December
2010, in which it recommended the use of part three of the Guide, on the treatment of enterprise groups in insolvency,
Considering that effective insolvency regimes, in addition to providing a predictable legal process for addressing
the financial difficulties of troubled enterprises and the necessary framework for their efficient reorganization or orderly
liquidation, should also permit an examination to be made of the circumstances giving rise to insolvency and, in
particular, of the conduct of directors of such an enterprise in the period before insolvency proceedings commence,
Noting that the Legislative Guide, while addressing the obligations of directors of an enterprise once
insolvency proceedings commence, does not address the conduct of directors in the period approaching insolvency
and the obligations that might be applicable to directors in that period,
Considering that the provision of incentives for directors to take timely action to address the effects of
financial distress experienced by an enterprise may be key to its successful reorganization or liquidation and that
such incentives should be part of an effective insolvency regime,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law for developing
and adopting part four of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law, addressing the obligations of directors of an
enterprise in the period approaching the insolvency of that enterprise;36
2. Requests the Secretary-General to publish, including electronically, the text of part four of the Legislative
Guide and to transmit it to Governments and other interested bodies;
3. Recommends that all States utilize the Legislative Guide to assess the economic efficiency of their
insolvency law regimes and give favourable consideration to the Guide when revising or adopting legislation
relevant to insolvency, and invites States that have used the Guide to advise the Commission accordingly.
RESOLUTION 68/108
A/RES/68/108

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/462, para. 14)37

68/108. United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Guide on the Implementation of a Security
Rights Registry
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance to all States of efficient secured transactions regimes in promoting access to
affordable secured credit,
_______________
35

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.V.10.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. V, sect. B.
37
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Austria on behalf of the Bureau.
36

827

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recognizing also that access to affordable secured credit is likely to assist all countries, in particular
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, in their efforts to achieve economic growth,
sustainable development, the rule of law and financial inclusion,
Recalling its resolution 63/121 of 11 December 2008, in which it recommended that all States give favourable
consideration to the Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law38 when revising or adopting legislation relevant to secured transactions,
Recognizing that an efficient secured transactions regime with a publicly accessible security rights registry of
the kind recommended in the Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions is likely to increase access to affordable
secured credit,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Guide on the
Implementation of a Security Rights Registry39 is consistent with and usefully supplements the Legislative Guide on
Secured Transactions and that the two Guides, together, will provide comprehensive guidance to States with respect
to legal and practical issues that need to be addressed when implementing a modern secured transactions regime,
Noting that secured transactions law reform could not be effectively implemented without the establishment of
an efficient, publicly accessible security rights registry where information about the potential existence of a security
right in movable assets may be registered and that States urgently need guidance with respect to the establishment
and operation of such registries,
Taking into account that the harmonization of national security rights registries on the basis of the Guide on
the Implementation of a Security Rights Registry is likely to increase the availability of credit across national
borders and thus facilitate the development of international trade, which, if achieved on the basis of equality and
mutual benefit to all States, is an important element in promoting friendly relations among States,
Expressing its appreciation to intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations active in
the field of secured transactions law reform for their participation in and support for the development of the Guide
on the Implementation of a Security Rights Registry,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law for the
completion and adoption of the Guide on the Implementation of a Security Rights Registry;39
2. Requests the Secretary-General to publish the Guide on the Implementation of a Security Rights
Registry, including through electronic means, and to disseminate it broadly to Governments and other interested
bodies such as national and international financial institutions and chambers of commerce;
3. Recommends that all States give favourable consideration to the Guide on the Implementation of a
Security Rights Registry when revising relevant legislation, administrative regulations or guidelines and to the
Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions of the Commission38 when revising or adopting legislation relevant to
secured transactions, and invites States that have used the Guides to advise the Commission accordingly;
4. Also recommends that all States continue to consider becoming parties to the United Nations Convention
on the Assignment of Receivables in International Trade,40 the principles of which are reflected in the Legislative
Guide on Secured Transactions and the optional annex to which refers to the registration of data with regard to
assignments.

_______________
38

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.09.V.12.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. IV.
40
Resolution 56/81, annex.
39

828

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/109
A/RES/68/109

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/462, para. 14)41

68/109. United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based
Investor-State Arbitration and Arbitration Rules (as revised in 2010, with new article 1,
paragraph 4, as adopted in 2013)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of
the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Recognizing the value of arbitration as a method of settling disputes that may arise in the context of
international relations and the wide use of arbitration for the settlement of treaty-based investor-State disputes,
Recalling its resolutions 31/98 of 15 December 1976 and 65/22 of 6 December 2010, in which it
recommended the use of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law,42
Bearing in mind that the Arbitration Rules are widely used for the settlement of treaty-based investor-State
disputes,
Recognizing the need for provisions on transparency in the settlement of such treaty-based investor-State
disputes to take account of the public interest involved in such arbitrations,
Believing that rules on transparency in treaty-based investor-State arbitration would contribute significantly to
the establishment of a harmonized legal framework for a fair and efficient settlement of international investment
disputes, increase transparency and accountability and promote good governance,
Noting that the Commission, at its forty-sixth session, adopted the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based
Investor-State Arbitration43 and amended the Arbitration Rules as revised in 2010 to include, in a new article 1,
paragraph 4, a reference to the Rules on Transparency,44
Noting also that the Rules on Transparency are available for use in investor-State arbitrations initiated under
rules other than the Arbitration Rules or in ad hoc proceedings,
Noting further that the preparation of the Rules on Transparency was the subject of due deliberation in the
Commission and that they benefited from consultations with Governments and interested intergovernmental and
international non-governmental organizations,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law for having
prepared and adopted the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration43 and the Arbitration
Rules (as revised in 2010, with new article 1, paragraph 4, as adopted in 2013),44 as annexed to the report of the
Commission on the work of its forty-sixth session;45
2. Requests the Secretary-General to publish, including electronically, and disseminate broadly the text of
the Rules on Transparency, both together with the Arbitration Rules (as revised in 2010, with new article 1,
paragraph 4, as adopted in 2013) and as a stand-alone text, and to transmit them to Governments and organizations
interested in the field of dispute settlement;
_______________
41
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
Bureau.
42
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17), chap. V, sect. C; and ibid., Sixty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17), chap. III and annex I.
43
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. III and annex I.
44
Ibid., chap. III and annex II.
45
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17).

829

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3. Recommends the use of the Rules on Transparency in relation to the settlement of investment disputes
within the scope of their application as defined in article 1 of the Rules, and invites Member States that have chosen
to include the Rules in their treaties to inform the Commission accordingly;
4. Also recommends that, subject to any provision in relevant treaties that may require a higher degree of
transparency than that provided in the Rules on Transparency, the Rules be applied through appropriate mechanisms to
investor-State arbitration initiated pursuant to treaties providing for the protection of investors or investments concluded
before the date of coming into effect of the Rules, to the extent that such application is consistent with those treaties.
RESOLUTION 68/110
A/RES/68/110

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/463, para. 7)46

68/110. United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2099 (XX) of 20 December 1965, in which the General Assembly established the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law to contribute towards a better knowledge of international law as a means of strengthening
international peace and security and promoting friendly relations and cooperation among States,
Reaffirming that the Programme of Assistance is a core activity of the United Nations and that it has provided
the foundation for the efforts of the United Nations to promote a better knowledge of international law for nearly
half a century,
Recognizing the major contribution of the Programme of Assistance to the teaching and dissemination of
international law for the benefit of lawyers in all countries, legal systems and regions of the world for almost half a century,
Emphasizing the important contribution of the Programme of Assistance, in particular the United Nations
Regional Courses in International Law and the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, to the
furtherance of United Nations rule of law programmes and activities,
Reaffirming that the increasing demand for international law training and dissemination activities creates new
challenges for the Programme of Assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the Programme of Assistance effectively reaching its beneficiaries, including
with regard to languages, while bearing in mind limitations on available resources,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme
of Assistance47 and the views of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in the report,48
Noting with concern that the activities of the Programme of Assistance, in particular the organization of the
United Nations Regional Courses in International Law on a regular basis and the further development of the United
Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, cannot be sustained with the resources available under the current
or the proposed programme budget, notwithstanding its resolutions 64/113 of 16 December 2009, 65/25 of
6 December 2010, 66/97 of 9 December 2011 and 67/91 of 14 December 2012,
Noting with regret that the United Nations Regional Course in International Law for Asia-Pacific for 2013 was
cancelled owing to insufficient funds and that no United Nations Regional Course in International Law for Latin
America and the Caribbean has been held in almost a decade,
Considering that international law should occupy an appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at all
universities,
_______________
46

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Ghana on behalf of the Bureau.
A/68/521.
48
Ibid., paras. 73 and 75–79.
47

830

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Convinced that States, international and regional organizations, universities and institutions should be
encouraged to give further support to the Programme of Assistance and to increase their activities to promote the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those activities which are of
special benefit to persons from developing countries,
Reaffirming that in the conduct of the Programme of Assistance it would be desirable to use as far as possible
the resources and facilities made available by Member States, international and regional organizations, universities,
institutions and others,
Reaffirming also the hope that, in appointing highly qualified lecturers for the seminars to be held within the
framework of the fellowship programmes in international law, account would be taken of the need to secure the
representation of major legal systems and balance among various geographical regions,
1. Approves the guidelines and recommendations contained in section III of the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session,47 in particular those designed to strengthen and revitalize
the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law in response to the increasing demand for international law training and dissemination activities;
2.

Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out the activities specified in his report in 2014 and 2015;

3. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to award a minimum of one scholarship in 2014 and a minimum
of one scholarship in 2015 under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea;
4. Further authorizes the Secretary-General to continue and further develop the United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law as a major contribution to the teaching and dissemination of international
law around the world and to continue to finance this activity from provisions in the regular budget as well as, when
necessary, from voluntary financial contributions, which would be received as a result of the requests set out in
paragraphs 21 and 22 below;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the activities conducted under the Programme of
Assistance and, in particular, for the efforts to strengthen, expand and enhance the international law training and
dissemination activities within the framework of the Programme of Assistance in 2013;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to consider admitting, for participation in the various components of the
Programme of Assistance, candidates from countries willing to bear the entire cost of such participation;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General in accordance with General Assembly resolution 67/91, in
particular paragraph 7 thereof, to provide to the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015 the resources
necessary for the Programme of Assistance to ensure the continued effectiveness and further development of the
Programme, in particular the organization of United Nations Regional Courses in International Law on a regular
basis and the viability of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law;
8. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations legal publications prepared by the Office of Legal
Affairs of the Secretariat, and requests the Secretary-General to issue the publications referred to in his report49 in
various formats, including hard copy publications, which are essential for developing countries;
9. Notes with appreciation the issuance of the Summaries of Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders of
the International Court of Justice 2008–2012, volume XXX of the Reports of International Arbitral Awards and the
United Nations Juridical Yearbook 2012;
10. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General issue the next volume of the United Nations Legislative
Series containing materials on the responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts;
11. Once again welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Office of Legal Affairs to bring up to date the United
Nations legal publications, commends, in particular, the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs for its
desktop publishing initiative, which has greatly enhanced the timely issuance of its legal publications and has made
possible the preparation of legal training materials, and requests that the necessary materials be made available to
ensure the continuation of this successful initiative;
_______________
49

Ibid., paras. 42 and 43.

831

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

12. Encourages the Office of Legal Affairs to continue to maintain and expand its websites listed in the
annex to the report of the Secretary-General as an invaluable tool for the dissemination of international law
materials as well as for advanced legal research;
13. Encourages the use of interns and research assistants for the preparation of materials for the United
Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law;
14. Commends the Codification Division for the cost-saving measures undertaken with regard to the
International Law Fellowship Programme to maintain the number of fellowships available for this comprehensive
international law training programme;
15. Expresses its appreciation to the Hague Academy of International Law for the valuable contribution it
continues to make to the Programme of Assistance, which has enabled candidates under the International Law
Fellowship Programme to attend and participate in the Fellowship Programme in conjunction with courses at the
Academy;
16. Notes with appreciation the contributions of the Hague Academy to the teaching, study, dissemination and
wider appreciation of international law, and calls upon Member States and interested organizations to give favourable
consideration to the appeal of the Academy for a continuation of support and a possible increase in their financial
contributions, to enable the Academy to carry out its activities, particularly those relating to the summer courses, regional
courses and programmes of the Centre for Studies and Research in International Law and International Relations;
17. Welcomes the efforts of the Codification Division to revitalize and conduct United Nations Regional
Courses in International Law as an important training activity;
18. Expresses its appreciation to Ethiopia for hosting and to Thailand for agreeing to host the United
Nations Regional Courses in International Law in 2013 and to Ethiopia, Thailand and Uruguay for agreeing to host
the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law for Africa, for Asia-Pacific and, for the first time in
almost a decade, for Latin America and the Caribbean in 2014 and 2015, and also expresses its appreciation to Costa
Rica for its willingness to host this regional course in 2015;
19. Expresses its appreciation to the African Union for the valuable contribution it continues to make to the
United Nations Regional Course in International Law for Africa, which has enabled participants to attend and
participate in the Regional Course and the lectures at the African Union;
20. Once again encourages the Codification Division to cooperate with the African Institute of International
Law, dedicated to offering higher learning and research in international law needed for the development of Africa, in
the implementation of the relevant activities under the Programme of Assistance;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme of Assistance and periodically to
invite Member States, universities, philanthropic foundations and other interested national and international
institutions and organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the
Programme or otherwise to assist in its implementation and possible expansion;
22. Reiterates its request to Member States and interested organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions, inter alia, for the International Law Fellowship Programme and the United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law;
23. Urges, in particular, all Member States and interested organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions for the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law organized by the Codification
Division as an important complement to the International Law Fellowship Programme, thus alleviating the burden
on prospective host countries and making it possible to conduct the Regional Courses on a regular basis;
24. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made voluntary contributions to support the
Programme of Assistance;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the
implementation of the Programme of Assistance in 2014 and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee
on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law, to submit recommendations regarding the Programme in subsequent years;
26. Concludes that voluntary contributions have not proven to be an adequate method for funding activities
of the Programme of Assistance specified in the report of the Secretary-General and in General Assembly resolution
67/91, in particular the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law and the United Nations Audiovisual
832

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Library of International Law,50 and that, consequently, there is a need to provide more reliable funding for those
activities, taking into account the conclusion of the Advisory Committee at its forty-eighth session;51
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law”.
RESOLUTION 68/111
A/RES/68/111

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/464, para. 11)52

68/111. Reservations to treaties
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-third
session,53 which contains the Guide to Practice on Reservations to Treaties, including an annex on the reservations
dialogue,
Noting that the Commission recommended that the General Assembly take note of the Guide to Practice and
ensure its widest possible dissemination,54
Taking note of the recommendation of the Commission contained in paragraph 73 of its report,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of reservations to treaties is of major importance in the relations of States,
Recognizing the role that reservations to treaties may play in achieving a satisfactory balance between the
objectives of safeguarding the integrity of multilateral treaties and facilitating wide participation therein,
1. Welcomes the successful completion of the work of the International Law Commission on the subject of
reservations to treaties and its adoption of the Guide to Practice on Reservations to Treaties, including the guidelines
and a detailed commentary thereto;53
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for its continuing contribution to the codification and
progressive development of international law;
3. Takes note of the Guide to Practice, presented by the Commission, including the guidelines, the text of
which is annexed to the present resolution, and encourages its widest possible dissemination.
Annex
Text of the guidelines constituting the Guide to Practice on Reservations to Treaties
1.

Definitions

1.1

Definition of reservations

1. “Reservation” means a unilateral statement, however phrased or named, made by a State or an international
organization when signing, ratifying, formally confirming, accepting, approving or acceding to a treaty, or by a State
when making a notification of succession to a treaty, whereby the State or organization purports to exclude or to
modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty in their application to that State or to that international
organization.
_______________
50

See also paragraph 34 of resolution 67/78.
A/68/521, para. 78.
52
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Brazil on behalf of the Bureau.
53
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/66/10 and Add.1).
54
Ibid., A/66/10, para. 72.
51

833

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Paragraph 1 is to be interpreted as including reservations which purport to exclude or to modify the legal effect
of certain provisions of a treaty, or of the treaty as a whole with respect to certain specific aspects, in their
application to the State or to the international organization which formulates the reservation.
1.1.1

Statements purporting to limit the obligations of their author

A unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization at the time when that State or that
organization expresses its consent to be bound by a treaty, by which its author purports to limit the obligations
imposed on it by the treaty, constitutes a reservation.
1.1.2

Statements purporting to discharge an obligation by equivalent means

A unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization at the time when that State or that
organization expresses its consent to be bound by a treaty, by which that State or that organization purports to
discharge an obligation pursuant to the treaty in a manner different from, but considered by the author of the
statement to be equivalent to, that imposed by the treaty, constitutes a reservation.
1.1.3

Reservations relating to the territorial application of the treaty

A unilateral statement by which a State purports to exclude the application of some provisions of a treaty, or of
the treaty as a whole with respect to certain specific aspects, to a territory to which they would be applicable in the
absence of such a statement constitutes a reservation.
1.1.4

Reservations formulated when extending the territorial application of a treaty

A unilateral statement by which a State, when extending the application of a treaty to a territory, purports to
exclude or to modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty in relation to that territory constitutes a
reservation.
1.1.5

Reservations formulated jointly

The joint formulation of a reservation by several States or international organizations does not affect the
unilateral character of that reservation.
1.1.6

Reservations formulated by virtue of clauses expressly authorizing the exclusion or the modification
of certain provisions of a treaty

A unilateral statement made by a State or an international organization when that State or organization
expresses its consent to be bound by a treaty, in accordance with a clause expressly authorizing the parties or some
of them to exclude or to modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty with regard to the party that has
made the statement, constitutes a reservation expressly authorized by the treaty.
1.2

Definition of interpretative declarations

“Interpretative declaration” means a unilateral statement, however phrased or named, made by a State or an
international organization, whereby that State or that organization purports to specify or clarify the meaning or scope
of a treaty or of certain of its provisions.
1.2.1

Interpretative declarations formulated jointly

The joint formulation of an interpretative declaration by several States or international organizations does not
affect the unilateral character of that interpretative declaration.
1.3

Distinction between reservations and interpretative declarations

The character of a unilateral statement as a reservation or as an interpretative declaration is determined by the
legal effect that its author purports to produce.
834

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

1.3.1

Method of determining the distinction between reservations and interpretative declarations

To determine whether a unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization in respect of
a treaty is a reservation or an interpretative declaration, the statement should be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to its terms, with a view to identifying therefrom the intention of
its author, in the light of the treaty to which it refers.
1.3.2

Phrasing and name
The phrasing or name of a unilateral statement provides an indication of the purported legal effect.

1.3.3

Formulation of a unilateral statement when a reservation is prohibited

When a treaty prohibits reservations to all or certain of its provisions, a unilateral statement formulated in
respect of those provisions by a State or an international organization shall be presumed not to constitute a
reservation. Such a statement nevertheless constitutes a reservation if it purports to exclude or modify the legal
effect of certain provisions of the treaty, or of the treaty as a whole with respect to certain specific aspects, in their
application to its author.
1.4

Conditional interpretative declarations

1. A conditional interpretative declaration is a unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international
organization when signing, ratifying, formally confirming, accepting, approving or acceding to a treaty, or by a State
when making a notification of succession to a treaty, whereby the State or international organization subjects its
consent to be bound by the treaty to a specific interpretation of the treaty or of certain provisions thereof.
2.

Conditional interpretative declarations are subject to the rules applicable to reservations.

1.5

Unilateral statements other than reservations and interpretative declarations

Unilateral statements formulated in relation to a treaty which are neither reservations nor interpretative
declarations (including conditional interpretative declarations) are outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
1.5.1

Statements of non-recognition

A unilateral statement by which a State indicates that its participation in a treaty does not imply recognition of
an entity which it does not recognize is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice even if it purports to
exclude the application of the treaty between the declaring State and the non-recognized entity.
1.5.2

Statements concerning modalities of implementation of a treaty at the internal level

A unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization whereby that State or that
organization indicates the manner in which it intends to implement a treaty at the internal level, without affecting its
rights and obligations towards the other contracting States or contracting organizations, is outside the scope of the
present Guide to Practice.
1.5.3

Unilateral statements made under a clause providing for options

1. A unilateral statement made by a State or an international organization in accordance with a clause in a treaty
permitting the parties to accept an obligation that is not otherwise imposed by the treaty, or permitting them to
choose between two or more provisions of the treaty, is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
2. A restriction or condition contained in a statement by which a State or an international organization accepts, by
virtue of a clause in a treaty, an obligation that is not otherwise imposed by the treaty does not constitute a
reservation.

835

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

1.6

Unilateral statements in respect of bilateral treaties

1.6.1

“Reservations” to bilateral treaties

A unilateral statement, however phrased or named, formulated by a State or an international organization after
initialling or signature but prior to entry into force of a bilateral treaty, by which that State or that organization
purports to obtain from the other party a modification of the provisions of the treaty, does not constitute a reservation
within the meaning of the present Guide to Practice.
1.6.2

Interpretative declarations in respect of bilateral treaties

Guidelines 1.2 and 1.4 are applicable to interpretative declarations in respect of both multilateral and bilateral
treaties.
1.6.3

Legal effect of acceptance of an interpretative declaration made in respect of a bilateral treaty by the
other party

The interpretation resulting from an interpretative declaration made in respect of a bilateral treaty by a State or
an international organization party to the treaty and accepted by the other party constitutes an authentic
interpretation of that treaty.
1.7

Alternatives to reservations and interpretative declarations

1.7.1

Alternatives to reservations

In order to achieve results comparable to those effected by reservations, States or international organizations
may also have recourse to alternative procedures, such as:
•

the insertion in the treaty of a clause purporting to limit its scope or application;

•

the conclusion of an agreement, under a specific provision of a treaty, by which two or more States or
international organizations purport to exclude or modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the
treaty as between themselves.

1.7.2

Alternatives to interpretative declarations

In order to specify or clarify the meaning or scope of a treaty or certain of its provisions, States or international
organizations may also have recourse to procedures other than interpretative declarations, such as:

1.8

•

the insertion in the treaty of provisions purporting to interpret the treaty;

•

the conclusion of a supplementary agreement to the same end, simultaneously or subsequently to the
conclusion of the treaty.
Scope of definitions

The definitions of unilateral statements included in the present Part are without prejudice to the validity and
legal effects of such statements under the rules applicable to them.
2.

Procedure

2.1

Form and notification of reservations

2.1.1

Form of reservations
A reservation must be formulated in writing.

2.1.2

Statement of reasons for reservations
A reservation should, to the extent possible, indicate the reasons why it is being formulated.

836

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.1.3

Representation for the purpose of formulating a reservation at the international level

1. Subject to the usual practices followed in international organizations which are depositaries of treaties, a
person is considered as representing a State or an international organization for the purpose of formulating a
reservation if:
(a) that person produces appropriate full powers for the purposes of adopting or authenticating the text of
the treaty with regard to which the reservation is formulated or expressing the consent of the State or organization to
be bound by the treaty; or
(b) it appears from practice or from other circumstances that it was the intention of the States and
international organizations concerned to consider that person as representing the State or the international
organization for such purposes without having to produce full powers.
2. In virtue of their functions and without having to produce full powers, the following are considered as
representing their State for the purpose of formulating a reservation at the international level:
(a)

Heads of State, Heads of Government and Ministers for Foreign Affairs;

(b) representatives accredited by States to an international conference, for the purpose of formulating a
reservation to a treaty adopted at that conference;
(c) representatives accredited by States to an international organization or one of its organs, for the purpose
of formulating a reservation to a treaty adopted in that organization or organ;
(d) heads of permanent missions to an international organization, for the purpose of formulating a
reservation to a treaty between the accrediting States and that organization.
2.1.4

Absence of consequences at the international level of the violation of internal rules regarding the
formulation of reservations

1. The competent authority and the procedure to be followed at the internal level for formulating a reservation
are determined by the internal law of each State or the relevant rules of each international organization.
2. A State or an international organization may not invoke the fact that a reservation has been formulated in
violation of a provision of the internal law of that State or the rules of that organization regarding competence and
the procedure for formulating reservations for the purpose of invalidating the reservation.
2.1.5

Communication of reservations

1. A reservation must be communicated in writing to the contracting States and contracting organizations and
other States and international organizations entitled to become parties to the treaty.
2. A reservation to a treaty in force which is the constituent instrument of an international organization must also
be communicated to such organization.
2.1.6

Procedure for communication of reservations

1. Unless otherwise provided in the treaty or agreed by the contracting States and contracting organizations, the
communication of a reservation to a treaty shall be transmitted:
(i)

if there is no depositary, directly by the author of the reservation to the contracting States and contracting
organizations and other States and international organizations entitled to become parties to the treaty; or

(ii)

if there is a depositary, to the depositary, which shall notify the States and international organizations for
which it is intended as soon as possible.

2. The communication of a reservation shall be considered as having been made with regard to a State or an
international organization only upon receipt by that State or organization.
3. The communication of a reservation to a treaty by means other than a diplomatic note or depositary
notification, such as electronic mail or facsimile, must be confirmed within an appropriate period of time by such a
note or notification. In such case, the reservation is considered as having been formulated at the date of the initial
communication.
837

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.1.7

Functions of depositaries

1. The depositary shall examine whether a reservation to a treaty formulated by a State or an international
organization is in due and proper form and, if need be, bring the matter to the attention of the State or international
organization concerned.
2. In the event of any difference appearing between a State or an international organization and the depositary as
to the performance of the latter’s functions, the depositary shall bring the question to the attention of:
(a)

the signatory States and organizations and the contracting States and contracting organizations; or

(b)

where appropriate, the competent organ of the international organization concerned.

2.2

Confirmation of reservations

2.2.1

Formal confirmation of reservations formulated when signing a treaty

If formulated when signing a treaty subject to ratification, act of formal confirmation, acceptance or approval,
a reservation must be formally confirmed by the reserving State or international organization when expressing its
consent to be bound by the treaty. In such a case, the reservation shall be considered as having been formulated on
the date of its confirmation.
2.2.2

Instances of non-requirement of confirmation of reservations formulated when signing a treaty

A reservation formulated when signing a treaty does not require subsequent confirmation when a State or an
international organization expresses by signature its consent to be bound by the treaty.
2.2.3

Reservations formulated upon signature when a treaty expressly so provides

Where the treaty expressly provides that a State or an international organization may formulate a reservation
when signing the treaty, such a reservation does not require formal confirmation by the reserving State or
international organization when expressing its consent to be bound by the treaty.
2.2.4

Form of formal confirmation of reservations
The formal confirmation of a reservation must be made in writing.

2.3

Late formulation of reservations

A State or an international organization may not formulate a reservation to a treaty after expressing its consent
to be bound by the treaty, unless the treaty otherwise provides or none of the other contracting States and contracting
organizations opposes the late formulation of the reservation.
2.3.1

Acceptance of the late formulation of a reservation

Unless the treaty otherwise provides or the well-established practice followed by the depositary differs, the
late formulation of a reservation shall be deemed to have been accepted only if no contracting State or contracting
organization has opposed such formulation after the expiry of the twelve-month period following the date on which
notification was received.
2.3.2

Time period for formulating an objection to a reservation that is formulated late

An objection to a reservation that is formulated late must be made within twelve months of the acceptance, in
accordance with guideline 2.3.1, of the late formulation of the reservation.
2.3.3

Limits to the possibility of excluding or modifying the legal effect of a treaty by means other than
reservations

A contracting State or a contracting organization cannot exclude or modify the legal effect of provisions of the
treaty by:

838

(a)

the interpretation of an earlier reservation; or

(b)

a unilateral statement made subsequently under a clause providing for options.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.3.4

Widening of the scope of a reservation

The modification of an existing reservation for the purpose of widening its scope is subject to the rules
applicable to the late formulation of a reservation. If such a modification is opposed, the initial reservation remains
unchanged.
2.4

Procedure for interpretative declarations

2.4.1

Form of interpretative declarations
An interpretative declaration should preferably be formulated in writing.

2.4.2

Representation for the purpose of formulating interpretative declarations

An interpretative declaration must be formulated by a person who is considered as representing a State or an
international organization for the purpose of adopting or authenticating the text of a treaty or expressing the consent
of the State or international organization to be bound by a treaty.
2.4.3

Absence of consequences at the international level of the violation of internal rules regarding the
formulation of interpretative declarations

1. The competent authority and the procedure to be followed at the internal level for formulating an interpretative
declaration are determined by the internal law of each State or the relevant rules of each international organization.
2. A State or an international organization may not invoke the fact that an interpretative declaration has been
formulated in violation of a provision of the internal law of that State or the rules of that organization regarding
competence and the procedure for formulating interpretative declarations for the purpose of invalidating the
declaration.
2.4.4

Time at which an interpretative declaration may be formulated

Without prejudice to the provisions of guidelines 1.4 and 2.4.7, an interpretative declaration may be
formulated at any time.
2.4.5

Communication of interpretative declarations

The communication of written interpretative declarations should follow the procedure established in
guidelines 2.1.5, 2.1.6 and 2.1.7.
2.4.6

Non-requirement of confirmation of interpretative declarations formulated when signing a treaty

An interpretative declaration formulated when signing a treaty does not require subsequent confirmation when
a State or an international organization expresses its consent to be bound by the treaty.
2.4.7

Late formulation of an interpretative declaration

Where a treaty provides that an interpretative declaration may be formulated only at specified times, a State or
an international organization may not formulate an interpretative declaration concerning that treaty subsequently,
unless none of the other contracting States and contracting organizations objects to the late formulation of the
interpretative declaration.
2.4.8

Modification of an interpretative declaration
Unless the treaty otherwise provides, an interpretative declaration may be modified at any time.

2.5

Withdrawal and modification of reservations and interpretative declarations

2.5.1

Withdrawal of reservations

Unless the treaty otherwise provides, a reservation may be withdrawn at any time without the consent of a
State or of an international organization which has accepted the reservation being required for its withdrawal.
839

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.5.2

Form of withdrawal
The withdrawal of a reservation must be formulated in writing.

2.5.3

Periodic review of the usefulness of reservations

1. States or international organizations which have formulated one or more reservations to a treaty should
undertake a periodic review of such reservations and consider withdrawing those which no longer serve their
purpose.
2. In such a review, States and international organizations should devote special attention to the aim of preserving
the integrity of multilateral treaties and, where relevant, consider the usefulness of retaining the reservations, in
particular in relation to developments in their internal law since the reservations were formulated.
2.5.4

Representation for the purpose of withdrawing a reservation at the international level

1. Subject to the usual practices followed in international organizations which are depositaries of treaties, a
person is considered as representing a State or an international organization for the purpose of withdrawing a
reservation made on behalf of a State or an international organization if:
(a)

that person produces appropriate full powers for the purpose of that withdrawal; or

(b) it appears from practice or from other circumstances that it was the intention of the States and
international organizations concerned to consider that person as representing the State or the international
organization for such purpose without having to produce full powers.
2. In virtue of their functions and without having to produce full powers, the following are considered as
representing a State for the purpose of withdrawing a reservation at the international level on behalf of that State:
(a)

Heads of State, Heads of Government and Ministers for Foreign Affairs;

(b) representatives accredited by States to an international organization or one of its organs, for the purpose
of withdrawing a reservation to a treaty adopted in that organization or organ;
(c) heads of permanent missions to an international organization, for the purpose of withdrawing a
reservation to a treaty between the accrediting States and that organization.
2.5.5

Absence of consequences at the international level of the violation of internal rules regarding the
withdrawal of reservations

1. The competent authority and the procedure to be followed at the internal level for withdrawing a reservation
are determined by the internal law of each State or the relevant rules of each international organization.
2. A State or an international organization may not invoke the fact that a reservation has been withdrawn in
violation of a provision of the internal law of that State or the rules of that organization regarding competence and
the procedure for the withdrawal of reservations for the purpose of invalidating the withdrawal.
2.5.6

Communication of withdrawal of a reservation

The procedure for communicating the withdrawal of a reservation follows the rules applicable to the
communication of reservations contained in guidelines 2.1.5, 2.1.6 and 2.1.7.
2.5.7

Effects of withdrawal of a reservation

1. The withdrawal of a reservation entails the full application of the provisions to which the reservation relates in
the relations between the State or international organization which withdraws the reservation and all the other
parties, whether they had accepted the reservation or objected to it.
2. The withdrawal of a reservation entails the entry into force of the treaty in the relations between the State or
international organization which withdraws the reservation and a State or international organization which had
objected to the reservation and opposed the entry into force of the treaty between itself and the reserving State or
international organization by reason of that reservation.
840

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.5.8

Effective date of withdrawal of a reservation

Unless the treaty otherwise provides, or it is otherwise agreed, the withdrawal of a reservation becomes
operative in relation to a contracting State or a contracting organization only when notice of it has been received by
that State or that organization.
2.5.9

Cases in which the author of a reservation may set the effective date of withdrawal of the reservation

The withdrawal of a reservation becomes operative on the date set by the State or international organization
which withdraws the reservation, where:
(a) that date is later than the date on which the other contracting States or contracting organizations received
notification of it; or
(b) the withdrawal does not add to the rights of the withdrawing State or international organization, in
relation to the other contracting States or contracting organizations.
2.5.10 Partial withdrawal of reservations
1. The partial withdrawal of a reservation limits the legal effect of the reservation and achieves a more complete
application of the provisions of the treaty, or of the treaty as a whole, in the relations between the withdrawing State
or international organization and the other parties to the treaty.
2. The partial withdrawal of a reservation is subject to the same rules on form and procedure as a total
withdrawal and becomes operative under the same conditions.
2.5.11 Effect of a partial withdrawal of a reservation
1. The partial withdrawal of a reservation modifies the legal effect of the reservation to the extent provided by
the new formulation of the reservation. Any objection formulated to the reservation continues to have effect as long
as its author does not withdraw it, insofar as the objection does not apply exclusively to that part of the reservation
which has been withdrawn.
2. No new objection may be formulated to the reservation resulting from the partial withdrawal, unless that
partial withdrawal has a discriminatory effect.
2.5.12 Withdrawal of interpretative declarations
An interpretative declaration may be withdrawn at any time by an authority considered as representing the
State or international organization for that purpose, following the same procedure applicable to its formulation.
2.6

Formulation of objections

2.6.1

Definition of objections to reservations

“Objection” means a unilateral statement, however phrased or named, made by a State or an international
organization in response to a reservation formulated by another State or international organization, whereby the
former State or organization purports to preclude the reservation from having its intended effects or otherwise
opposes the reservation.
2.6.2

Right to formulate objections

A State or an international organization may formulate an objection to a reservation irrespective of the
permissibility of the reservation.
2.6.3

Author of an objection
An objection to a reservation may be formulated by:
(i)

any contracting State or contracting organization; and

(ii)

any State or international organization that is entitled to become a party to the treaty, in which case the
objection does not produce any legal effect until the State or international organization has expressed its
consent to be bound by the treaty.
841

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.6.4

Objections formulated jointly

The joint formulation of an objection by several States or international organizations does not affect the
unilateral character of that objection.
2.6.5

Form of objections
An objection must be formulated in writing.

2.6.6

Right to oppose the entry into force of the treaty vis-à-vis the author of the reservation

A State or an international organization that formulates an objection to a reservation may oppose the entry into
force of the treaty as between itself and the author of the reservation.
2.6.7

Expression of intention to preclude the entry into force of the treaty

When a State or an international organization formulating an objection to a reservation intends to preclude the
entry into force of the treaty as between itself and the reserving State or international organization, it shall definitely
express its intention before the treaty would otherwise enter into force between them.
2.6.8

Procedure for the formulation of objections
Guidelines 2.1.3, 2.1.4, 2.1.5, 2.1.6 and 2.1.7 are applicable mutatis mutandis to objections.

2.6.9

Statement of reasons for objections
An objection should, to the extent possible, indicate the reasons why it is being formulated.

2.6.10 Non-requirement of confirmation of an objection formulated prior to formal confirmation of a
reservation
An objection to a reservation formulated by a State or an international organization prior to confirmation of the
reservation in accordance with guideline 2.2.1 does not itself require confirmation.
2.6.11 Confirmation of an objection formulated prior to the expression of consent to be bound by a treaty
An objection formulated prior to the expression of consent to be bound by the treaty does not need to be
formally confirmed by the objecting State or international organization at the time it expresses its consent to be
bound if that State or that organization was a signatory to the treaty when it formulated the objection; it must be
confirmed if the State or international organization had not signed the treaty.
2.6.12 Time period for formulating objections
Unless the treaty otherwise provides, a State or an international organization may formulate an objection to a
reservation within a period of twelve months after it was notified of the reservation or by the date on which such
State or international organization expresses its consent to be bound by the treaty, whichever is later.
2.6.13 Objections formulated late
An objection to a reservation formulated after the end of the time period specified in guideline 2.6.12 does not
produce all the legal effects of an objection formulated within that time period.
2.7

Withdrawal and modification of objections to reservations

2.7.1

Withdrawal of objections to reservations
Unless the treaty otherwise provides, an objection to a reservation may be withdrawn at any time.

2.7.2

Form of withdrawal of objections to reservations
The withdrawal of an objection to a reservation must be formulated in writing.

842

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.7.3

Formulation and communication of the withdrawal of objections to reservations

Guidelines 2.5.4, 2.5.5 and 2.5.6 are applicable mutatis mutandis to the withdrawal of objections to
reservations.
2.7.4

Effect on reservation of withdrawal of an objection

A State or an international organization that withdraws an objection formulated to a reservation is presumed to
have accepted that reservation.
2.7.5

Effective date of withdrawal of an objection

Unless the treaty otherwise provides, or it is otherwise agreed, the withdrawal of an objection to a reservation
becomes operative only when notice of it has been received by the State or international organization which
formulated the reservation.
2.7.6

Cases in which the author of an objection may set the effective date of withdrawal of the objection

The withdrawal of an objection becomes operative on the date set by its author where that date is later than the
date on which the reserving State or international organization received notice of it.
2.7.7

Partial withdrawal of an objection

1. Unless the treaty otherwise provides, a State or an international organization may partially withdraw an
objection to a reservation.
2. The partial withdrawal of an objection is subject to the same rules on form and procedure as a total withdrawal
and becomes operative under the same conditions.
2.7.8

Effect of a partial withdrawal of an objection

The partial withdrawal modifies the legal effects of the objection on the treaty relations between the author of
the objection and the author of the reservation to the extent provided by the new formulation of the objection.
2.7.9

Widening of the scope of an objection to a reservation

1. A State or an international organization which has made an objection to a reservation may widen the scope of
that objection during the time period referred to in guideline 2.6.12.
2. Such a widening of the scope of the objection cannot have an effect on the existence of treaty relations
between the author of the reservation and the author of the objection.
2.8

Formulation of acceptances of reservations

2.8.1

Forms of acceptance of reservations

The acceptance of a reservation may arise from a unilateral statement to this effect or from silence of a
contracting State or contracting organization during the periods specified in guideline 2.6.12.
2.8.2

Tacit acceptance of reservations

Unless the treaty otherwise provides, a reservation is considered to have been accepted by a State or an
international organization if it shall have raised no objection to the reservation within the time period provided for in
guideline 2.6.12.
2.8.3

Express acceptance of reservations

A State or an international organization may, at any time, expressly accept a reservation formulated by another
State or international organization.
843

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.8.4

Form of express acceptance of reservations
The express acceptance of a reservation must be formulated in writing.

2.8.5

Procedure for formulating express acceptance of reservations
Guidelines 2.1.3, 2.1.4, 2.1.5, 2.1.6 and 2.1.7 apply mutatis mutandis to express acceptances.

2.8.6

Non-requirement of confirmation of an acceptance formulated prior to formal confirmation of a
reservation

An express acceptance of a reservation formulated by a State or an international organization prior to
confirmation of the reservation in accordance with guideline 2.2.1 does not itself require confirmation.
2.8.7

Unanimous acceptance of reservations

In the event of a reservation requiring unanimous acceptance by some or all States or international
organizations which are parties or entitled to become parties to the treaty, such acceptance, once obtained, is final.
2.8.8

Acceptance of a reservation to the constituent instrument of an international organization

When a treaty is a constituent instrument of an international organization and unless it otherwise provides, a
reservation requires the acceptance of the competent organ of that organization.
2.8.9

Organ competent to accept a reservation to a constituent instrument

Subject to the rules of the organization, competence to accept a reservation to a constituent instrument of an
international organization belongs to the organ competent:
•

to decide on the admission of a member to the organization; or

•

to amend the constituent instrument; or

•

to interpret this instrument.

2.8.10 Modalities of the acceptance of a reservation to a constituent instrument
1. Subject to the rules of the organization, the acceptance by the competent organ of the organization shall not be
tacit. However, the admission of the State or the international organization which is the author of the reservation is
tantamount to the acceptance of that reservation.
2. For the purposes of the acceptance of a reservation to the constituent instrument of an international
organization, the individual acceptance of the reservation by States or international organizations that are members
of the organization is not required.
2.8.11 Acceptance of a reservation to a constituent instrument that has not yet entered into force
In the case set forth in guideline 2.8.8 and where the constituent instrument has not yet entered into force, a
reservation is considered to have been accepted if no signatory State or signatory international organization has
raised an objection to that reservation within a period of twelve months after they were notified of that reservation.
Such a unanimous acceptance, once obtained, is final.
2.8.12 Reaction by a member of an international organization to a reservation to its constituent instrument
Guideline 2.8.10 does not preclude States or international organizations that are members of an international
organization from taking a position on the permissibility or appropriateness of a reservation to a constituent
instrument of the organization. Such an opinion is in itself devoid of legal effects.
2.8.13 Final nature of acceptance of a reservation
The acceptance of a reservation cannot be withdrawn or amended.
844

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2.9

Formulation of reactions to interpretative declarations

2.9.1

Approval of an interpretative declaration

“Approval” of an interpretative declaration means a unilateral statement made by a State or an international
organization in reaction to an interpretative declaration in respect of a treaty formulated by another State or another
international organization, whereby the former State or organization expresses agreement with the interpretation
formulated in that declaration.
2.9.2

Opposition to an interpretative declaration

“Opposition” to an interpretative declaration means a unilateral statement made by a State or an international
organization in reaction to an interpretative declaration in respect of a treaty formulated by another State or another
international organization, whereby the former State or organization disagrees with the interpretation formulated in
the interpretative declaration, including by formulating an alternative interpretation.
2.9.3

Recharacterization of an interpretative declaration

1. “Recharacterization” of an interpretative declaration means a unilateral statement made by a State or an
international organization in reaction to an interpretative declaration in respect of a treaty formulated by another
State or another international organization, whereby the former State or organization purports to treat the declaration
as a reservation.
2. A State or an international organization that intends to treat an interpretative declaration as a reservation should
take into account guidelines 1.3 to 1.3.3.
2.9.4

Right to formulate approval or opposition, or to recharacterize

An approval, opposition or recharacterization in respect of an interpretative declaration may be formulated at
any time by any contracting State or any contracting organization and by any State or any international organization
that is entitled to become a party to the treaty.
2.9.5

Form of approval, opposition and recharacterization

An approval, opposition or recharacterization in respect of an interpretative declaration should preferably be
formulated in writing.
2.9.6

Statement of reasons for approval, opposition and recharacterization

An approval, opposition or recharacterization in respect of an interpretative declaration should, to the extent
possible, indicate the reasons why it is being formulated.
2.9.7

Formulation and communication of approval, opposition or recharacterization

Guidelines 2.1.3, 2.1.4, 2.1.5, 2.1.6 and 2.1.7 are applicable mutatis mutandis to an approval, opposition or
recharacterization in respect of an interpretative declaration.
2.9.8
1.

Non-presumption of approval or opposition
An approval of, or an opposition to, an interpretative declaration shall not be presumed.

2. Notwithstanding guidelines 2.9.1 and 2.9.2, an approval of an interpretative declaration or an opposition
thereto may be inferred, in exceptional cases, from the conduct of the States or international organizations
concerned, taking into account all relevant circumstances.
2.9.9

Silence with respect to an interpretative declaration

An approval of an interpretative declaration shall not be inferred from the mere silence of a State or an
international organization.
845

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3.

Permissibility of reservations and interpretative declarations

3.1

Permissible reservations

A State or an international organization may, when signing, ratifying, formally confirming, accepting,
approving or acceding to a treaty, formulate a reservation unless:
(a)

the reservation is prohibited by the treaty;

(b) the treaty provides that only specified reservations, which do not include the reservation in question,
may be made; or
(c) in cases not falling under subparagraphs (a) and (b), the reservation is incompatible with the object and
purpose of the treaty.
3.1.1

Reservations prohibited by the treaty
A reservation is prohibited by the treaty if it contains a provision:

3.1.2

(a)

prohibiting all reservations;

(b)

prohibiting reservations to specified provisions to which the reservation in question relates; or

(c)

prohibiting certain categories of reservations including the reservation in question.

Definition of specified reservations

For the purposes of guideline 3.1, the expression “specified reservations” means reservations that are
expressly envisaged in the treaty to certain provisions of the treaty or to the treaty as a whole with respect to certain
specific aspects.
3.1.3

Permissibility of reservations not prohibited by the treaty

Where the treaty prohibits the formulation of certain reservations, a reservation which is not prohibited by the
treaty may be formulated by a State or an international organization only if it is not incompatible with the object and
purpose of the treaty.
3.1.4

Permissibility of specified reservations

Where the treaty envisages the formulation of specified reservations without defining their content, a
reservation may be formulated by a State or an international organization only if it is not incompatible with the
object and purpose of the treaty.
3.1.5

Incompatibility of a reservation with the object and purpose of the treaty

A reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty if it affects an essential element of the
treaty that is necessary to its general tenor, in such a way that the reservation impairs the raison d’être of the treaty.
3.1.5.1 Determination of the object and purpose of the treaty
The object and purpose of the treaty is to be determined in good faith, taking account of the terms of the treaty
in their context, in particular the title and the preamble of the treaty. Recourse may also be had to the preparatory
work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion and, where appropriate, the subsequent practice of the
parties.
3.1.5.2 Vague or general reservations
A reservation shall be worded in such a way as to allow its meaning to be understood, in order to assess in
particular its compatibility with the object and purpose of the treaty.
3.1.5.3 Reservations to a provision reflecting a customary rule
The fact that a treaty provision reflects a rule of customary international law does not in itself constitute an
obstacle to the formulation of a reservation to that provision.
846

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3.1.5.4 Reservations to provisions concerning rights from which no derogation is permissible under any
circumstances
A State or an international organization may not formulate a reservation to a treaty provision concerning rights
from which no derogation is permissible under any circumstances, unless the reservation in question is compatible
with the essential rights and obligations arising out of that treaty. In assessing that compatibility, account shall be
taken of the importance which the parties have conferred upon the rights at issue by making them non-derogable.
3.1.5.5 Reservations relating to internal law
A reservation by which a State or an international organization purports to exclude or to modify the legal
effect of certain provisions of a treaty or of the treaty as a whole in order to preserve the integrity of specific rules of
the internal law of that State or of specific rules of that organization in force at the time of the formulation of the
reservation may be formulated only insofar as it does not affect an essential element of the treaty nor its general
tenor.
3.1.5.6 Reservations to treaties containing numerous interdependent rights and obligations
To assess the compatibility of a reservation with the object and purpose of a treaty containing numerous
interdependent rights and obligations, account shall be taken of that interdependence as well as the importance that
the provision to which the reservation relates has within the general tenor of the treaty, and the extent of the impact
that the reservation has on the treaty.
3.1.5.7 Reservations to treaty provisions concerning dispute settlement or the monitoring of the
implementation of the treaty
A reservation to a treaty provision concerning dispute settlement or the monitoring of the implementation of
the treaty is not, in itself, incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty, unless:
(i)

the reservation purports to exclude or modify the legal effect of a provision of the treaty essential to its
raison d’être; or

(ii)

the reservation has the effect of excluding the reserving State or international organization from a dispute
settlement or treaty implementation monitoring mechanism with respect to a treaty provision that it has
previously accepted, if the very purpose of the treaty is to put such a mechanism into effect.

3.2

Assessment of the permissibility of reservations

The following may assess, within their respective competences, the permissibility of reservations to a treaty
formulated by a State or an international organization:

3.2.1

•

contracting States or contracting organizations;

•

dispute settlement bodies;

•

treaty monitoring bodies.
Competence of the treaty monitoring bodies to assess the permissibility of reservations

1. A treaty monitoring body may, for the purpose of discharging the functions entrusted to it, assess the
permissibility of reservations formulated by a State or an international organization.
2. The assessment made by such a body in the exercise of this competence has no greater legal effect than that of
the act which contains it.
3.2.2

Specification of the competence of treaty monitoring bodies to assess the permissibility of reservations

When providing bodies with the competence to monitor the application of treaties, States or international
organizations should specify, where appropriate, the nature and the limits of the competence of such bodies to assess
the permissibility of reservations.
847

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3.2.3

Consideration of the assessments of treaty monitoring bodies

States and international organizations that have formulated reservations to a treaty establishing a treaty
monitoring body shall give consideration to that body’s assessment of the permissibility of the reservations.
3.2.4

Bodies competent to assess the permissibility of reservations in the event of the establishment of a
treaty monitoring body

When a treaty establishes a treaty monitoring body, the competence of that body is without prejudice to the
competence of the contracting States or contracting organizations to assess the permissibility of reservations to that
treaty, or to that of dispute settlement bodies competent to interpret or apply the treaty.
3.2.5

Competence of dispute settlement bodies to assess the permissibility of reservations

When a dispute settlement body is competent to adopt decisions binding upon the parties to a dispute, and the
assessment of the permissibility of a reservation is necessary for the discharge of such competence by that body,
such assessment is, as an element of the decision, legally binding upon the parties.
3.3

Consequences of the non-permissibility of a reservation

3.3.1

Irrelevance of distinction among the grounds for non-permissibility

A reservation formulated notwithstanding a prohibition arising from the provisions of the treaty or
notwithstanding its incompatibility with the object and purpose of the treaty is impermissible, without there being
any need to distinguish between the consequences of these grounds for non-permissibility.
3.3.2

Non-permissibility of reservations and international responsibility

The formulation of an impermissible reservation produces its consequences pursuant to the law of treaties and
does not engage the international responsibility of the State or international organization which has formulated it.
3.3.3

Absence of effect of individual acceptance of a reservation on the permissibility of the reservation

Acceptance of an impermissible reservation by a contracting State or by a contracting organization shall not
affect the impermissibility of the reservation.
3.4

Permissibility of reactions to reservations

3.4.1

Permissibility of the acceptance of a reservation
Acceptance of a reservation is not subject to any condition of permissibility.

3.4.2

Permissibility of an objection to a reservation

An objection to a reservation by which a State or an international organization purports to exclude in its
relations with the author of the reservation the application of provisions of the treaty to which the reservation does
not relate is only permissible if:
1.

the provisions thus excluded have a sufficient link with the provisions to which the reservation relates; and

2. the objection would not defeat the object and purpose of the treaty in the relations between the author of
the reservation and the author of the objection.
3.5

Permissibility of an interpretative declaration

A State or an international organization may formulate an interpretative declaration unless the interpretative
declaration is prohibited by the treaty.
3.5.1

Permissibility of an interpretative declaration which is in fact a reservation

If a unilateral statement which appears to be an interpretative declaration is in fact a reservation, its
permissibility must be assessed in accordance with the provisions of guidelines 3.1 to 3.1.5.7.
848

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3.6

Permissibility of reactions to interpretative declarations

An approval of, opposition to, or recharacterization of, an interpretative declaration shall not be subject to any
conditions for permissibility.
4.

Legal effects of reservations and interpretative declarations

4.1

Establishment of a reservation with regard to another State or international organization

A reservation formulated by a State or an international organization is established with regard to a contracting
State or a contracting organization if it is permissible and was formulated in accordance with the required form and
procedures, and if that contracting State or contracting organization has accepted it.
4.1.1

Establishment of a reservation expressly authorized by a treaty

1. A reservation expressly authorized by a treaty does not require any subsequent acceptance by the other
contracting States and contracting organizations, unless the treaty so provides.
2. A reservation expressly authorized by a treaty is established with regard to the other contracting States and
contracting organizations if it was formulated in accordance with the required form and procedures.
4.1.2

Establishment of a reservation to a treaty which has to be applied in its entirety

When it appears, from the limited number of negotiating States and organizations and the object and
purpose of the treaty, that the application of the treaty in its entirety between all the parties is an essential
condition of the consent of each one to be bound by the treaty, a reservation to this treaty is established with
regard to the other contracting States and contracting organizations if it is permissible and was formulated in
accordance with the required form and procedures, and if all the contracting States and contracting organizations
have accepted it.
4.1.3

Establishment of a reservation to a constituent instrument of an international organization

When a treaty is a constituent instrument of an international organization, a reservation to this treaty is
established with regard to the other contracting States and contracting organizations if it is permissible and was
formulated in accordance with the required form and procedures, and if it has been accepted in conformity with
guidelines 2.8.8 to 2.8.11.
4.2

Effects of an established reservation

4.2.1

Status of the author of an established reservation

As soon as a reservation is established in accordance with guidelines 4.1 to 4.1.3, its author becomes a
contracting State or contracting organization to the treaty.
4.2.2

Effect of the establishment of a reservation on the entry into force of a treaty

1. When a treaty has not yet entered into force, the author of a reservation shall be included in the number of
contracting States and contracting organizations required for the treaty to enter into force once the reservation is
established.
2. The author of the reservation may however be included at a date prior to the establishment of the reservation
in the number of contracting States and contracting organizations required for the treaty to enter into force, if no
contracting State or contracting organization is opposed.
4.2.3

Effect of the establishment of a reservation on the status of the author as a party to the treaty

The establishment of a reservation constitutes its author a party to the treaty in relation to contracting
States and contracting organizations in respect of which the reservation is established if or when the treaty is
in force.
849

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4.2.4

Effect of an established reservation on treaty relations

1. A reservation established with regard to another party excludes or modifies for the reserving State or international
organization in its relations with that other party the legal effect of the provisions of the treaty to which the reservation
relates or of the treaty as a whole with respect to certain specific aspects, to the extent of the reservation.
2. To the extent that an established reservation excludes the legal effect of certain provisions of a treaty, the
author of that reservation has neither rights nor obligations under those provisions in its relations with the other
parties with regard to which the reservation is established. Those other parties shall likewise have neither rights nor
obligations under those provisions in their relations with the author of the reservation.
3. To the extent that an established reservation modifies the legal effect of certain provisions of a treaty, the author of
that reservation has rights and obligations under those provisions, as modified by the reservation, in its relations with
the other parties with regard to which the reservation is established. Those other parties shall have rights and obligations
under those provisions, as modified by the reservation, in their relations with the author of the reservation.
4.2.5

Non-reciprocal application of obligations to which a reservation relates

Insofar as the obligations under the provisions to which the reservation relates are not subject to reciprocal
application in view of the nature of the obligations or the object and purpose of the treaty, the content of the obligations
of the parties other than the author of the reservation remains unaffected. The content of the obligations of those parties
likewise remains unaffected when reciprocal application is not possible because of the content of the reservation.
4.2.6

Interpretation of reservations

A reservation is to be interpreted in good faith, taking into account the intention of its author as reflected
primarily in the text of the reservation, as well as the object and purpose of the treaty and the circumstances in which
the reservation was formulated.
4.3

Effect of an objection to a valid reservation

Unless the reservation has been established with regard to an objecting State or organization, the formulation
of an objection to a valid reservation precludes the reservation from having its intended effects as against that State
or international organization.
4.3.1

Effect of an objection on the entry into force of the treaty as between the author of the objection and
the author of a reservation

An objection by a contracting State or by a contracting organization to a valid reservation does not preclude
the entry into force of the treaty as between the objecting State or organization and the reserving State or
organization, except in the case mentioned in guideline 4.3.5.
4.3.2

Effect of an objection to a reservation that is formulated late

If a contracting State or a contracting organization to a treaty objects to a reservation whose late formulation
has been unanimously accepted in accordance with guideline 2.3.1, the treaty shall enter into or remain in force in
respect of the reserving State or international organization without the reservation being established.
4.3.3

Entry into force of the treaty between the author of a reservation and the author of an objection

The treaty enters into force between the author of a valid reservation and the objecting contracting State or
contracting organization as soon as the author of the reservation has become a contracting State or a contracting
organization in accordance with guideline 4.2.1 and the treaty has entered into force.
4.3.4

Non-entry into force of the treaty for the author of a reservation when unanimous acceptance is
required

If the establishment of a reservation requires the acceptance of the reservation by all the contracting States and
contracting organizations, any objection by a contracting State or by a contracting organization to a valid reservation
precludes the entry into force of the treaty for the reserving State or organization.
850

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4.3.5

Non-entry into force of the treaty as between the author of a reservation and the author of an
objection with maximum effect

An objection by a contracting State or a contracting organization to a valid reservation precludes the entry
into force of the treaty as between the objecting State or organization and the reserving State or organization, if
the objecting State or organization has definitely expressed an intention to that effect in accordance with
guideline 2.6.7.
4.3.6

Effect of an objection on treaty relations

1. When a State or an international organization objecting to a valid reservation has not opposed the entry into
force of the treaty between itself and the reserving State or organization, the provisions to which the reservation
relates do not apply as between the author of the reservation and the objecting State or organization, to the extent of
the reservation.
2. To the extent that a valid reservation purports to exclude the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty,
when a contracting State or a contracting organization has raised an objection to it but has not opposed the entry into
force of the treaty between itself and the author of the reservation, the objecting State or organization and the author
of the reservation are not bound, in their treaty relations, by the provisions to which the reservation relates.
3. To the extent that a valid reservation purports to modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty,
when a contracting State or a contracting organization has raised an objection to it but has not opposed the entry into
force of the treaty between itself and the author of the reservation, the objecting State or organization and the author
of the reservation are not bound, in their treaty relations, by the provisions of the treaty as intended to be modified
by the reservation.
4. All the provisions of the treaty other than those to which the reservation relates shall remain applicable as
between the reserving State or organization and the objecting State or organization.
4.3.7

Effect of an objection on provisions other than those to which the reservation relates

1. A provision of the treaty to which the reservation does not relate, but which has a sufficient link with the
provisions to which the reservation does relate, is not applicable in the treaty relations between the author of the
reservation and the author of an objection formulated in accordance with guideline 3.4.2.
2. The reserving State or international organization may, within a period of twelve months following the
notification of an objection which has the effect referred to in paragraph 1, oppose the entry into force of the treaty
between itself and the objecting State or organization. In the absence of such opposition, the treaty shall apply
between the author of the reservation and the author of the objection to the extent provided by the reservation and
the objection.
4.3.8

Right of the author of a valid reservation not to comply with the treaty without the benefit of its
reservation

The author of a valid reservation is not required to comply with the provisions of the treaty without the benefit
of its reservation.
4.4

Effect of a reservation on rights and obligations independent of the treaty

4.4.1

Absence of effect on rights and obligations under other treaties

A reservation, acceptance of a reservation or objection to a reservation neither modifies nor excludes any
rights and obligations of their authors under other treaties to which they are parties.
4.4.2

Absence of effect on rights and obligations under customary international law

A reservation to a treaty provision which reflects a rule of customary international law does not of itself affect
the rights and obligations under that rule, which shall continue to apply as such between the reserving State or
organization and other States or international organizations which are bound by that rule.
851

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4.4.3

Absence of effect on a peremptory norm of general international law (jus cogens)

1. A reservation to a treaty provision which reflects a peremptory norm of general international law (jus cogens)
does not affect the binding nature of that norm, which shall continue to apply as such between the reserving State or
organization and other States or international organizations.
2. A reservation cannot exclude or modify the legal effect of a treaty in a manner contrary to a peremptory norm
of general international law.
4.5

Consequences of an invalid reservation

4.5.1

Nullity of an invalid reservation

A reservation that does not meet the conditions of formal validity and permissibility set out in Parts 2 and 3 of
the Guide to Practice is null and void, and therefore devoid of any legal effect.
4.5.2

Reactions to a reservation considered invalid

1. The nullity of an invalid reservation does not depend on the objection or the acceptance by a contracting State
or a contracting organization.
2. Nevertheless, a State or an international organization which considers that a reservation is invalid should
formulate a reasoned objection as soon as possible.
4.5.3

Status of the author of an invalid reservation in relation to the treaty

1. The status of the author of an invalid reservation in relation to a treaty depends on the intention expressed by
the reserving State or international organization on whether it intends to be bound by the treaty without the benefit
of the reservation or whether it considers that it is not bound by the treaty.
2. Unless the author of the invalid reservation has expressed a contrary intention or such an intention is otherwise
established, it is considered a contracting State or a contracting organization without the benefit of the reservation.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, the author of the invalid reservation may express at any time its intention
not to be bound by the treaty without the benefit of the reservation.
4. If a treaty monitoring body expresses the view that a reservation is invalid and the reserving State or
international organization intends not to be bound by the treaty without the benefit of the reservation, it should
express its intention to that effect within a period of twelve months from the date at which the treaty monitoring
body made its assessment.
4.6

Absence of effect of a reservation on the relations between the other parties to the treaty
A reservation does not modify the provisions of the treaty for the other parties to the treaty inter se.

4.7

Effect of interpretative declarations

4.7.1

Clarification of the terms of the treaty by an interpretative declaration

1. An interpretative declaration does not modify treaty obligations. It may only specify or clarify the meaning or
scope which its author attributes to a treaty or to certain provisions thereof and may, as appropriate, constitute an
element to be taken into account in interpreting the treaty in accordance with the general rule of interpretation of
treaties.
2. In interpreting the treaty, account shall also be taken, as appropriate, of the approval of, or opposition to, the
interpretative declaration, by other contracting States or contracting organizations.
4.7.2

Effect of the modification or the withdrawal of an interpretative declaration

The modification or the withdrawal of an interpretative declaration may not produce the effects provided for in
guideline 4.7.1 to the extent that other contracting States or contracting organizations have relied upon the initial
declaration.
852

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4.7.3

Effect of an interpretative declaration approved by all the contracting States and contracting
organizations

An interpretative declaration that has been approved by all the contracting States and contracting organizations
may constitute an agreement regarding the interpretation of the treaty.
5.

Reservations, acceptances of reservations, objections to reservations, and interpretative declarations
in cases of succession of States

5.1

Reservations in cases of succession of States

5.1.1

Newly independent States

1. When a newly independent State establishes its status as a party or as a contracting State to a multilateral treaty
by a notification of succession, it shall be considered as maintaining any reservation to that treaty which was
applicable at the date of the succession of States in respect of the territory to which the succession of States relates
unless, when making the notification of succession, it expresses a contrary intention or formulates a reservation
which relates to the same subject matter as that reservation.
2. When making a notification of succession establishing its status as a party or as a contracting State to a
multilateral treaty, a newly independent State may formulate a reservation unless the reservation is one the
formulation of which would be excluded by the provisions of subparagraph (a), (b) or (c) of guideline 3.1.
3. When a newly independent State formulates a reservation in conformity with paragraph 2, the relevant rules
set out in Part 2 (Procedure) of the Guide to Practice apply in respect of that reservation.
4. For the purposes of this Part of the Guide to Practice, “newly independent State” means a successor State the
territory of which immediately before the date of the succession of States was a dependent territory for the
international relations of which the predecessor State was responsible.
5.1.2

Uniting or separation of States

1. Subject to the provisions of guideline 5.1.3, a successor State which is a party to a treaty as the result of a
uniting or separation of States shall be considered as maintaining any reservation to the treaty which was applicable
at the date of the succession of States in respect of the territory to which the succession of States relates, unless it
expresses its intention not to maintain one or more reservations of the predecessor State at the time of the
succession.
2. A successor State which is a party to a treaty as the result of a uniting or separation of States may neither
formulate a new reservation nor widen the scope of a reservation that is maintained.
3. When a successor State formed from a uniting or separation of States makes a notification whereby it
establishes its status as a contracting State to a treaty which, at the date of the succession of States, was not in force
for the predecessor State but to which the predecessor State was a contracting State, that State shall be considered as
maintaining any reservation to the treaty which was applicable at the date of the succession of States in respect of
the territory to which the succession of States relates, unless it expresses a contrary intention when making the
notification or formulates a reservation which relates to the same subject matter as that reservation. That successor
State may formulate a new reservation to the treaty.
4. A successor State may formulate a reservation in accordance with paragraph 3 only if the reservation is one
the formulation of which would not be excluded by the provisions of subparagraph (a), (b) or (c) of guideline 3.1.
The relevant rules set out in Part 2 (Procedure) of the Guide to Practice apply in respect of that reservation.
5.1.3

Irrelevance of certain reservations in cases involving a uniting of States

When, following a uniting of two or more States, a treaty in force at the date of the succession of States in
respect of any of them continues in force in respect of the successor State, such reservations as may have been
formulated by any such State which, at the date of the succession of States, was a contracting State in respect of
which the treaty was not in force shall not be maintained.
853

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

5.1.4

Maintenance of the territorial scope of reservations formulated by the predecessor State

Subject to the provisions of guideline 5.1.5, a reservation considered as being maintained in conformity with
guideline 5.1.1, paragraph 1, or guideline 5.1.2, paragraph 1 or 3, shall retain the territorial scope that it had at the
date of the succession of States, unless the successor State expresses a contrary intention.
5.1.5

Territorial scope of reservations in cases involving a uniting of States

1. When, following a uniting of two or more States, a treaty in force at the date of the succession of States in
respect of only one of the States forming the successor State becomes applicable to a part of the territory of that
State to which it did not apply previously, any reservation considered as being maintained by the successor State
shall apply to that territory unless:
(a) the successor State expresses a contrary intention when making the notification extending the territorial
scope of the treaty; or
(b) the nature or purpose of the reservation is such that the reservation cannot be extended beyond the
territory to which it was applicable at the date of the succession of States.
2. When, following a uniting of two or more States, a treaty in force at the date of the succession of States in
respect of two or more of the uniting States becomes applicable to a part of the territory of the successor State to
which it did not apply at the date of the succession of States, no reservation shall extend to that territory unless:
(a) an identical reservation has been formulated by each of those States in respect of which the treaty was in
force at the date of the succession of States;
(b) the successor State expresses a different intention when making the notification extending the territorial
scope of the treaty; or
(c) a contrary intention otherwise becomes apparent from the circumstances surrounding that State’s
succession to the treaty.
3. A notification purporting to extend the territorial scope of a reservation in accordance with paragraph 2 (b)
shall be without effect if such an extension would give rise to the application of contradictory reservations to the
same territory.
4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 apply mutatis mutandis to reservations considered as being maintained by
a successor State that is a contracting State, following a uniting of States, to a treaty which was not in force for any
of the uniting States at the date of the succession of States but to which one or more of those States were contracting
States at that date, when the treaty becomes applicable to a part of the territory of the successor State to which it did
not apply at the date of the succession of States.
5.1.6

Territorial scope of reservations of the successor State in cases of succession involving part of territory

When, as a result of a succession of States involving part of the territory of a State, a treaty to which the
successor State is a contracting State becomes applicable to that territory, any reservation to the treaty formulated
previously by that State shall also apply to that territory as from the date of the succession of States unless:
(a)

the successor State expresses a contrary intention; or

(b) it appears from the reservation that its scope was limited to the territory of the successor State that was
within its borders prior to the date of the succession of States, or to a part of this territory.
5.1.7

Timing of the effects of non-maintenance by a successor State of a reservation formulated by the
predecessor State

The non-maintenance, in conformity with guideline 5.1.1 or 5.1.2, by the successor State of a reservation
formulated by the predecessor State becomes operative in relation to another contracting State or a contracting
organization only when notice of it has been received by that State or organization.
854

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

5.1.8

Late formulation of a reservation by a successor State
A reservation shall be considered as late if it is formulated:
(a)

by a newly independent State after it has made a notification of succession to the treaty;

(b) by a successor State other than a newly independent State after it has made a notification establishing its
status as a contracting State to a treaty which, at the date of the succession of States, was not in force for the
predecessor State but in respect of which the predecessor State was a contracting State; or
(c) by a successor State other than a newly independent State in respect of a treaty which, following the
succession of States, continues in force for that State.
5.2

Objections to reservations in cases of succession of States

5.2.1

Maintenance by the successor State of objections formulated by the predecessor State

Subject to the provisions of guideline 5.2.2, a successor State shall be considered as maintaining any objection
formulated by the predecessor State to a reservation formulated by a contracting State or contracting organization,
unless it expresses a contrary intention at the time of the succession.
5.2.2

Irrelevance of certain objections in cases involving a uniting of States

1. When, following a uniting of two or more States, a treaty in force at the date of the succession of States in
respect of any of them continues in force in respect of the State so formed, such objections to a reservation as may
have been formulated by any of those States in respect of which the treaty was not in force on the date of the
succession of States shall not be maintained.
2. When, following a uniting of two or more States, the successor State is a contracting State to a treaty to which
it has maintained reservations in conformity with guideline 5.1.1 or 5.1.2, objections to a reservation made by
another contracting State or a contracting organization shall not be maintained if the reservation is identical or
equivalent to a reservation which the successor State itself has maintained.
5.2.3

Maintenance of objections to reservations of the predecessor State

When a reservation formulated by the predecessor State is considered as being maintained by the successor
State in conformity with guideline 5.1.1 or 5.1.2, any objection to that reservation formulated by another contracting
State or by a contracting organization shall be considered as being maintained in respect of the successor State.
5.2.4

Reservations of the predecessor State to which no objections have been made

When a reservation formulated by the predecessor State is considered as being maintained by the successor
State in conformity with guideline 5.1.1 or 5.1.2, a State or an international organization that had not formulated an
objection to the reservation in respect of the predecessor State may not object to it in respect of the successor State,
unless:
(a) the time period for formulating an objection has not yet expired at the date of the succession of States
and the objection is made within that time period; or
(b) the territorial extension of the reservation radically changes the conditions for the operation of the
reservation.
5.2.5

Right of a successor State to formulate objections to reservations

1. When making a notification of succession establishing its status as a contracting State, a newly independent
State may, in accordance with the relevant guidelines, formulate an objection to reservations formulated by a
contracting State or a contracting organization, even if the predecessor State made no such objection.
2. A successor State, other than a newly independent State, shall also have the right provided for in paragraph 1
when making a notification establishing its status as a contracting State to a treaty which, at the date of the
succession of States, was not in force for the predecessor State but in respect of which the predecessor State was a
contracting State.
855

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3. The right referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 is nonetheless excluded in the case of treaties falling under
guidelines 2.8.7 and 4.1.2.
5.2.6

Objections by a successor State other than a newly independent State in respect of which a treaty
continues in force

A successor State, other than a newly independent State, in respect of which a treaty continues in force
following a succession of States may not formulate an objection to a reservation to which the predecessor State had
not objected, unless the time period for formulating an objection has not yet expired at the date of the succession of
States and the objection is made within that time period.
5.3

Acceptances of reservations in cases of succession of States

5.3.1

Maintenance by a newly independent State of express acceptances formulated by the
predecessor State

When a newly independent State establishes its status as a contracting State to a treaty, it shall be considered as
maintaining any express acceptance by the predecessor State of a reservation formulated by a contracting State or by
a contracting organization, unless it expresses a contrary intention within twelve months of the date of the
notification of succession.
5.3.2

Maintenance by a successor State other than a newly independent State of express acceptances
formulated by the predecessor State

1. A successor State, other than a newly independent State, in respect of which a treaty continues in force
following a succession of States shall be considered as maintaining any express acceptance by the predecessor
State of a reservation formulated by a contracting State or by a contracting organization.
2. When making a notification of succession establishing its status as a contracting State to a treaty which, on the
date of the succession of States, was not in force for the predecessor State but to which the predecessor State was a
contracting State, a successor State other than a newly independent State shall be considered as maintaining any
express acceptance by the predecessor State of a reservation formulated by a contracting State or by a contracting
organization, unless it expresses a contrary intention within twelve months of the date of the notification of
succession.
5.3.3

Timing of the effects of non-maintenance by a successor State of an express acceptance formulated by
the predecessor State

The non-maintenance, in conformity with guideline 5.3.1 or guideline 5.3.2, paragraph 2, by the successor
State of the express acceptance by the predecessor State of a reservation formulated by a contracting State or a
contracting organization becomes operative in relation to a contracting State or a contracting organization only when
notice of it has been received by that State or that organization.
5.4

Legal effects of reservations, acceptances and objections in cases of succession of States

1. Reservations, acceptances and objections considered as being maintained pursuant to the guidelines contained
in this Part of the Guide to Practice shall continue to produce their legal effects in conformity with the provisions of
Part 4 of the Guide.
2. Part 4 of the Guide to Practice is also applicable, mutatis mutandis, to new reservations, acceptances and
objections formulated by a successor State in conformity with the provisions of the present Part of the Guide.
5.5

Interpretative declarations in cases of succession of States

1. A successor State should clarify its position concerning interpretative declarations formulated by the
predecessor State. In the absence of such clarification, a successor State shall be considered as maintaining the
interpretative declarations of the predecessor State.
2. Paragraph 1 is without prejudice to cases in which the successor State has demonstrated, by its conduct, its
intention to maintain or to reject an interpretative declaration formulated by the predecessor State.
856

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/112
A/RES/68/112

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/464, para. 11)55

68/112. Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-fifth session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-fifth session,56
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development and codification of international law
as a means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,57
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
that might be submitted to the International Law Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth
Committee and the Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development and
codification of international law,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which, given their new or renewed
interest for the international community, may be suitable for the progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Recalling also the role of Member States in submitting proposals for new topics for the consideration of the
International Law Commission, and noting in this regard the recommendation of the Commission that such
proposals be accompanied by a statement of reasons,
Reaffirming the importance for the successful work of the International Law Commission of the information
provided by Member States concerning their views and practice,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the special rapporteurs of the International Law Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, which in 2014 will commemorate its fiftieth
anniversary, and noting with appreciation the voluntary contributions made to the United Nations Trust Fund for the
International Law Seminar,
Acknowledging the importance of facilitating the timely publication of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission and of eliminating the backlog,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that conditions are provided for concentrated attention to
each of the main topics dealt with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,
Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on the report of the International
Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the
Commission as a body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between the two bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and question time in the Sixth Committee,
as envisaged in General Assembly resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the
work of the Assembly,
1.

Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-fifth session;56

2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the work accomplished at its sixtyfifth session;
_______________
55

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Brazil on behalf of the Bureau.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10).
57
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
56

857

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3. Recommends that the International Law Commission continue its work on the topics in its current
programme, taking into account the comments and observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or
expressed orally in debates in the Sixth Committee;
4. Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of having
their views on the various aspects of the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all the specific
issues identified in chapter III of its report, regarding:
(a)

Immunity of State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction;

(b)

Formation and evidence of customary international law;

(c)

Provisional application of treaties;

(d)

Protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts;

5. Also draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of
having their comments and observations by 1 January 2014 on the draft articles and commentaries on the topic
“Expulsion of aliens” adopted on first reading by the Commission at its sixty-fourth session;58
6. Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to include the topics “Protection of the
environment in relation to armed conflicts” and “Protection of the atmosphere” in its programme of work,59 and
encourages the Commission to continue the examination of the topics that are in its long-term programme of work;
7. Invites the International Law Commission to continue to give priority to the topics “Immunity of
State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction” and “The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut
judicare)”;
8. Takes note of paragraphs 169 and 170 of the report of the International Law Commission, and notes in
particular the inclusion of the topic “Crimes against humanity” in the long-term programme of work of the
Commission;60
9. Also takes note of paragraph 181 of the report of the International Law Commission, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify concrete options for support for the work of special rapporteurs,
additional to those provided under General Assembly resolution 56/272 of 27 March 2002;
10. Welcomes the efforts of the International Law Commission to improve its methods of work,61 and
encourages the Commission to continue this practice;
11. Decides to revert to the consideration of the recommendation contained in paragraph 388 of the report of
the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-third session62 during the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly;
12. Invites the International Law Commission to continue to take measures to enhance its efficiency and
productivity and to consider making proposals to Member States to that end;
13. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to take cost-saving measures at its future
sessions, without prejudice to the efficiency and effectiveness of its work;
14. Takes note of paragraph 192 of the report of the International Law Commission, and decides that the
next session of the Commission shall be held at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 5 May to 6 June and
from 7 July to 8 August 2014;
15. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the International Law Commission
and the Sixth Committee at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, and in this context encourages, inter
_______________
58

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/67/10), para. 43.
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10), paras. 167 and 168.
60
The inclusion of the topic was guided by the criteria for selection of the topics adopted by the Commission in 1998 (Official Records of
the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (A/53/10 and Corr.1), para. 553).
61
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/66/10), paras. 370–388.
62
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/66/10).
59

858

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

alia, the continued practice of informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members of the Sixth
Committee and the members of the Commission attending the sixty-ninth session of the Assembly;
16. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the International Law Commission, to adhere
as far as possible to the structured work programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider presenting
concise and focused statements;
17. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of legal adviser during the first
week in which the report of the International Law Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International
Law Week) to enable high-level discussions on issues of international law;
18. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special attention to indicating in its
annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth
Committee or in written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the Commission in
its further work;
19. Takes note of paragraphs 193 to 198 of the report of the International Law Commission with regard to
cooperation and interaction with other bodies, and encourages the Commission to continue the implementation of
articles 16 (e), 25 and 26, of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission and other
bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of such cooperation;
20. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts concerned with international
law may assist Governments in considering whether to make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the
International Law Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
21. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the Codification Division of the
Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing assistance to the International Law Commission, including in
the preparation of memorandums and studies on topics on the agenda of the Commission;
22. Also reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the documentation and summary records of the
International Law Commission;63
23. Welcomes the institutionalization of the practice of the Secretariat to include the provisional summary
records on the website relating to the work of the International Law Commission;
24. Stresses the need to expedite the preparation of the summary records of the International Law
Commission, and welcomes the experimental measures taken to streamline the processing of summary records
during the sixty-fifth session of the Commission;64
25. Takes note of paragraph 188 of the report of the International Law Commission, stresses the unique
value of the Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure its timely
publication in all official languages;
26. Further takes note of paragraph 188 of the report of the International Law Commission, expresses its
appreciation to Governments that have made voluntary contributions to the trust fund on the backlog relating to the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and encourages further contributions to the trust fund;
27. Takes note of paragraph 189 of the report of the International Law Commission, expresses its
satisfaction with the remarkable progress achieved in the past few years in reducing the backlog of the Yearbook of
the International Law Commission in all six languages, and welcomes the efforts made by the Division of
Conference Management of the United Nations Office at Geneva, especially its Editing Section, in effectively
implementing relevant resolutions of the General Assembly calling for the reduction of the backlog;
28. Further takes note of paragraph 189 of the report of the International Law Commission, encourages the
Division of Conference Management to provide continuous necessary support to the Editing Section in advancing
the Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and requests that updates on progress made in this respect be
provided to the Commission on a regular basis;
_______________
63

See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the annual reports of the International Law
Commission to the General Assembly.
64
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10), para. 183.

859

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

29. Takes note of paragraphs 184 and 185 of the report of the International Law Commission, underlines the
importance of the publications of the Codification Division to the work of the Commission, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to publish the Work of the International Law Commission in all six official languages
at the beginning of each quinquennium, the Reports of International Arbitral Awards in English or French and the
Summaries of the Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders of the International Court of Justice in all six official
languages every five years;
30. Welcomes the continuous efforts of the Codification Division to maintain and improve the website
relating to the work of the International Law Commission;
31. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to be held in connection with the
sessions of the International Law Commission and that an increasing number of participants representing the
principal legal systems of the world, including in particular those from developing countries, will be given the
opportunity to attend the Seminar, as well as delegates to the Sixth Committee, and appeals to States to continue to
make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar;
32. Takes note with appreciation of paragraphs 216 to 218 of the report of the International Law
Commission and, in particular, the decision of the Commission to organize a commemoration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the International Law Seminar;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar with adequate services,
including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to continue to consider ways to improve the structure and
content of the Seminar;
34. Underlines the importance of the records and topical summary of the debate in the Sixth Committee for the
deliberations of the International Law Commission, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the Commission at the sixty-eighth session of
the General Assembly, together with such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their
oral statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following established practice;
35. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after the conclusion of the session of
the International Law Commission, chapter II of its report containing a summary of the work of that session,
chapter III containing the specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the
Commission and the draft articles adopted on either first or second reading by the Commission;
36. Also requests the Secretariat to make the complete report of the International Law Commission available
as soon as possible after the conclusion of the session of the Commission for the consideration of Member States
with due anticipation and no later than the prescribed time limit for reports in the General Assembly;
37. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to consider ways in which specific issues on
which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the Commission could be framed so as to help
Governments to have a better appreciation of the issues on which responses are required;
38. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law Commission at the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly commence on 27 October 2014.
RESOLUTION 68/113
A/RES/68/113

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/465, para. 9)65

68/113. Diplomatic protection
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/67 of 6 December 2007, the annex to which contains the text of the articles on
diplomatic protection, commending the articles to the attention of Governments,
_______________
65

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of South Africa on behalf of the
Bureau.

860

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling also that the International Law Commission decided to recommend to the General Assembly the
elaboration of a convention on the basis of the articles on diplomatic protection,66
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of diplomatic protection is of major importance in relations between States,
Taking into account the comments and observations of Governments67 and the discussions held in the Sixth
Committee, at the sixty-second, sixty-fifth and sixty-eighth sessions of the General Assembly, on diplomatic
protection,
1. Commends once again the articles on diplomatic protection68 to the attention of Governments, and
invites them to submit in writing to the Secretary-General any further comments, including comments concerning
the recommendation by the International Law Commission to elaborate a convention on the basis of the articles;66
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Diplomatic
protection” and, within the framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee, in the light of the written
comments of Governments, as well as views expressed in the debates held at the sixty-second, sixty-fifth and sixtyeighth sessions of the General Assembly, to continue to examine the question of a convention on diplomatic
protection, or any other appropriate action, on the basis of the above-mentioned articles and to also identify any
difference of opinion on the articles.
RESOLUTION 68/114
A/RES/68/114

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/466, para. 7)69

68/114. Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss
in the case of such harm
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/82 of 12 December 2001, 61/36 of 4 December 2006, the annex to which contains
the text of the principles on the allocation of loss in the case of transboundary harm arising out of hazardous
activities, and 62/68 of 6 December 2007, the annex to which contains the text of the articles on prevention of
transboundary harm from hazardous activities, as well as 65/28 of 6 December 2010,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the questions of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss
in the case of such harm are of major importance in relations between States,
Taking into account the views and comments expressed in the Sixth Committee at previous sessions and at the
current session of the General Assembly,70
1. Commends once again the articles on prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities, the
text of which is annexed to General Assembly resolution 62/68, to the attention of Governments, without prejudice
to any future action, as recommended by the International Law Commission regarding the articles;
_______________
66

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/61/10), para. 46.
See A/62/118 and Add.1, A/65/182 and Add.1 and A/68/115 and Add.1.
68
Resolution 62/67, annex.
69
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Chile on behalf of the Bureau.
70
See also the reports of the Secretary-General for comments and observations received from Governments (A/65/184 and Add.1,
A/68/94 and A/68/170).
67

861

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Also commends once again the principles on the allocation of loss in the case of transboundary harm
arising out of hazardous activities, the text of which is annexed to General Assembly resolution 61/36, to the
attention of Governments, without prejudice to any future action, as recommended by the Commission regarding
the principles;
3. Invites Governments to submit further comments on any future action, in particular on the form of the
respective articles and principles, bearing in mind the recommendations made by the Commission in that regard,
including in relation to the elaboration of a convention on the basis of the articles, as well as on any practice in
relation to the application of the articles and principles;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a compilation of decisions of international courts, tribunals
and other bodies referring to the articles and the principles;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Consideration
of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss in the case of such harm”.
RESOLUTION 68/115
A/RES/68/115

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/467, para. 9)71

68/115. Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of
the Role of the Organization
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, by which it established the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, and its relevant
resolutions adopted at subsequent sessions,
Recalling also its resolution 47/233 of 17 August 1993 on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly,
Recalling further its resolution 47/62 of 11 December 1992 on the question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council,
Taking note of the report of the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security Council,72
Recalling the elements relevant to the work of the Special Committee contained in its resolution 47/120 B of
20 September 1993,
Recalling also its resolution 51/241 of 31 July 1997 on the strengthening of the United Nations system and its
resolution 51/242 of 15 September 1997, entitled “Supplement to an Agenda for Peace”, by which it adopted the
texts on coordination and the question of sanctions imposed by the United Nations, which are annexed to that
resolution,
Concerned about the special economic problems confronting certain States arising from the carrying-out of
preventive or enforcement measures taken by the Security Council against other States, and taking into account the
obligation of Members of the United Nations under Article 49 of the Charter to join in affording mutual assistance
in carrying out the measures decided upon by the Council,
Recalling the right of third States confronted with special economic problems of that nature to consult the
Security Council with regard to a solution of those problems, in accordance with Article 50 of the Charter,
Recalling also that the International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, and
reaffirming its authority and independence,
_______________
71
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Bureau.
72
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/63/47).

862

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Mindful of the adoption of the revised working papers on the working methods of the Special Committee,73
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, entitled “Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs
and Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council”,74
Recalling paragraphs 106 to 110, 176 and 177 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,75
Mindful of the decision of the Special Committee in which it expressed its readiness to engage, as appropriate,
in the implementation of any decisions that might be taken at the high-level plenary meeting of the sixtieth session
of the General Assembly in September 2005 that concerned the Charter and any amendments thereto,76
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 50/51 of 11 December 1995, 51/208 of 17 December 1996, 52/162 of
15 December 1997, 53/107 of 8 December 1998, 54/107 of 9 December 1999, 55/157 of 12 December 2000, 56/87 of
12 December 2001, 57/25 of 19 November 2002, 58/80 of 9 December 2003 and 59/45 of 2 December 2004,
Recalling also its resolution 64/115 of 16 December 2009 and the document entitled “Introduction and
implementation of sanctions imposed by the United Nations” annexed thereto,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the work of its session held in 2013,77
Noting with appreciation the work done by the Special Committee to encourage States to focus on the need to
prevent and to settle peacefully their disputes which are likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;77
2.

Decides that the Special Committee shall hold its next session from 18 to 26 February 2014;

3. Requests the Special Committee, at its session in 2014, in accordance with paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 50/52 of 11 December 1995:
(a) To continue its consideration of all proposals concerning the question of the maintenance of international
peace and security in all its aspects in order to strengthen the role of the United Nations and, in this context, to
consider other proposals relating to the maintenance of international peace and security already submitted or which
may be submitted to the Special Committee at its session in 2014;
(b) To continue to consider, in an appropriate, substantive manner and framework, including the frequency
of its consideration, the question of the implementation of the provisions of the Charter related to assistance to third
States affected by the application of sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter based on all of the related reports of
the Secretary-General78 and the proposals submitted on the question;
(c)

To keep on its agenda the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States;

(d) To consider, as appropriate, any proposal referred to it by the General Assembly in the implementation
of the decisions of the high-level plenary meeting of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly in September
2005 that concern the Charter and any amendments thereto;
(e) To continue to consider, on a priority basis, ways and means of improving its working methods and
enhancing its efficiency and utilization of resources with a view to identifying widely acceptable measures for future
implementation;
_______________
73

Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/61/33), para. 72.
A/68/181.
75
Resolution 60/1.
76
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/60/33), para. 77.
77
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/68/33).
78
A/48/573-S/26705, A/49/356, A/50/60-S/1995/1, A/50/361, A/50/423, A/51/317, A/52/308, A/53/312, A/54/383 and Add.1, A/55/295
and Add.1, A/56/303, A/57/165 and Add.1, A/58/346, A/59/334, A/60/320, A/61/304, A/62/206 and Corr.1, A/63/224, A/64/225, A/65/217,
A/66/213, A/67/190 and A/68/226.
74

863

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4. Invites the Special Committee, at its session in 2014, to continue to identify new subjects for
consideration in its future work with a view to contributing to the revitalization of the work of the United Nations;
5. Notes the readiness of the Special Committee to provide, within its mandate, such assistance as may be
sought at the request of other subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly in relation to any issues before them;
6.
session;

Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth

7. Recognizes the important role of the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, in adjudicating disputes among States and the value of its work, as well as the importance of having
recourse to the Court in the peaceful settlement of disputes, takes note that, consistent with Article 96 of the Charter,
the Court’s advisory jurisdiction may be requested by the General Assembly, the Security Council or other
authorized organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, and requests the Secretary-General to
distribute, in due course, the advisory opinions requested by the principal organs of the United Nations as official
documents of the United Nations;
8. Commends the Secretary-General for the progress made in the preparation of studies for the Repertory of
Practice of United Nations Organs, including the increased use of the internship programme of the United Nations
and further expanded cooperation with academic institutions for this purpose, as well as the progress made towards
updating the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council;
9. Notes with appreciation the contributions made by Member States to the Trust Fund for the updating of
the Repertoire;
10. Reiterates its call for voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for the elimination of the backlog in the
Repertory so as to further support the Secretariat in carrying out the effective elimination of that backlog; voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund for the updating of the Repertoire; and the sponsoring, on a voluntary basis and with
no cost to the United Nations, of associate experts to assist in the updating of the two publications;
11. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue his efforts towards updating the two publications and
making them available electronically in all their respective language versions;
12. Notes with concern that the backlog in the preparation of volume III of the Repertory has not been
eliminated, and calls upon the Secretary-General to address that issue effectively and on a priority basis, while
commending the Secretary-General for progress made in reducing the backlog;
13. Reiterates the responsibility of the Secretary-General for the quality of the Repertory and the Repertoire,
and, with regard to the Repertoire, calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to follow the modalities outlined in
paragraphs 102 to 106 of his report of 18 September 1952;79
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its sixty-ninth session, a report on
both the Repertory and the Repertoire;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to brief the Special Committee at its next session on the information
referred to in paragraph 12 of his report on the implementation of the provisions of the Charter related to assistance
to third States affected by the application of sanctions;80
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its sixty-ninth session,
under the item entitled “Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”, a report on the implementation of the provisions of the Charter
related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”.
_______________
79
80

864

A/2170.
A/68/226.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/116
A/RES/68/116

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/468, para. 7)81

68/116. The rule of law at the national and international levels
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/97 of 14 December 2012,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, which are indispensable foundations of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, and reiterating
its determination to foster strict respect for them and to establish a just and lasting peace all over the world,
Reaffirming that human rights, the rule of law and democracy are interlinked and mutually reinforcing and that
they belong to the universal and indivisible core values and principles of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the need for universal adherence to and implementation of the rule of law at both the national
and international levels and its solemn commitment to an international order based on the rule of law and
international law, which, together with the principles of justice, is essential for peaceful coexistence and cooperation
among States,
Convinced that the advancement of the rule of law at the national and international levels is essential for the
realization of sustained economic growth, sustainable development, the eradication of poverty and hunger and the
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and acknowledging that collective security depends on
effective cooperation, in accordance with the Charter and international law, against transnational threats,
Reaffirming the duty of all States to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force in any
manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations and to settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered, in
accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter, and calling upon States that have not yet done so to consider accepting
the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in accordance with its Statute,
Convinced that the promotion of and respect for the rule of law at the national and international levels, as well
as justice and good governance, should guide the activities of the United Nations and its Member States,
Recalling paragraph 134 (e) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,82
1. Recalls the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, held during the high-level segment of its sixty-seventh session, and the declaration adopted at
that meeting;83
2. Takes note of the annual report of the Secretary-General on strengthening and coordinating United
Nations rule of law activities;84
3. Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in encouraging the progressive development of international
law and its codification, and reaffirms further that States shall abide by all their obligations under international law;
4. Also reaffirms the imperative of upholding and promoting the rule of law at the international level in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
5. Welcomes the dialogue initiated by the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group and the Rule of
Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General with Member States on the topic ‘‘Promoting the rule of
law at the international level’’, and calls for the continuation of this dialogue with a view to fostering the rule of law
at the international level;
_______________
81

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Mexico on behalf of the
Bureau.
82
Resolution 60/1.
83
Resolution 67/1.
84
A/68/213.

865

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

6. Stresses the importance of adherence to the rule of law at the national level and the need to strengthen
support to Member States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective international
obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity-building;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure greater coordination and coherence among the
United Nations entities and with donors and recipients, and reiterates its call for greater evaluation of the
effectiveness of such activities, including possible measures to improve the effectiveness of those capacity-building
activities;
8. Calls, in this context, for dialogue to be enhanced among all stakeholders with a view to placing national
perspectives at the centre of rule of law assistance in order to strengthen national ownership;
9. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to systematically address, as
appropriate, aspects of the rule of law in relevant activities, including the participation of women in rule of lawrelated activities, recognizing the importance of the rule of law to virtually all areas of United Nations engagement;
10. Expresses full support for the overall coordination and coherence role of the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group within the United Nations system within existing mandates, supported by the Rule of Law
Unit, under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in a timely manner, his next annual report on United Nations
rule of law activities, in accordance with paragraph 5 of its resolution 63/128 of 11 December 2008;
12. Recognizes the importance of restoring confidence in the rule of law as a key element of transitional
justice;
13. Encourages the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to accord high priority to rule of law
activities;
14. Invites the International Court of Justice, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
and the International Law Commission to continue to comment, in their respective reports to the General Assembly,
on their current roles in promoting the rule of law;
15. Invites the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group and the Rule of Law Unit to continue to
interact with Member States on a regular basis, in particular in informal briefings;
16. Stresses the need to provide the Rule of Law Unit with the necessary funding and staff in order to enable
it to carry out its tasks in an effective and sustainable manner, and urges the Secretary-General and Member States to
continue to support the functioning of the Unit;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “The rule of law
at the national and international levels”, and invites Member States to focus their comments in the upcoming Sixth
Committee debate on the subtopic “Sharing States’ national practices in strengthening the rule of law through access
to justice”.
RESOLUTION 68/117
A/RES/68/117

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/469, para. 9)85

68/117. The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, to
international law and to an international order based on the rule of law, which is essential for peaceful coexistence
and cooperation among States,
_______________
85

866

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Togo on behalf of the Bureau.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling its resolutions 64/117 of 16 December 2009, 65/33 of 6 December 2010, 66/103 of 9 December
2011 and 67/98 of 14 December 2012,
Taking into account the comments and observations of Governments and observers and the discussions held in
the Sixth Committee at the sixty-fourth to sixty-eighth sessions of the General Assembly on the scope and
application of universal jurisdiction,86
Recognizing the diversity of views expressed by States and the need for further consideration towards a better
understanding of the scope and application of universal jurisdiction,
Reiterating its commitment to fighting impunity, and noting the views expressed by States that the legitimacy
and credibility of the use of universal jurisdiction are best ensured by its responsible and judicious application
consistent with international law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General prepared on the basis of comments
and observations of Governments and relevant observers;87
2. Decides that the Sixth Committee shall continue its consideration of the scope and application of
universal jurisdiction, without prejudice to the consideration of this topic and related issues in other forums of the
United Nations, and for this purpose decides to establish, at its sixty-ninth session, a working group of the Sixth
Committee to continue to undertake a thorough discussion of the scope and application of universal jurisdiction;
3. Invites Member States and relevant observers, as appropriate, to submit, before 30 April 2014,
information and observations on the scope and application of universal jurisdiction, including, where appropriate,
information on the relevant applicable international treaties and their national legal rules and judicial practice, and
requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report
based on such information and observations;
4. Decides that the working group shall be open to all Member States and that relevant observers to the
General Assembly will be invited to participate in the work of the working group;
5. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “The scope
and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction”.
RESOLUTION 68/118
A/RES/68/118

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/470, para. 7)88

68/118.

The law of transboundary aquifers

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 63/124 of 11 December 2008 and 66/104 of 9 December 2011,
Noting the major importance of the subject of the law of transboundary aquifers in the relations of States and
the need for reasonable and proper management of transboundary aquifers, a vitally important natural resource,
through international cooperation for present and future generations,
Noting also that the provisions of the draft articles on the law of transboundary aquifers have been taken into
account in relevant instruments such as the Guarani Aquifer Agreement signed by Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and
Uruguay on 2 August 2010, and the Model Provisions on Transboundary Groundwaters adopted by the sixth
Meeting of the Parties to the Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and
International Lakes on 29 November 2012,
_______________
86

See A/C.6/64/SR.12, 13 and 25 and A/C.6/64/SR.1-28/Corrigendum; A/C.6/65/SR.10–12, 27 and 28; A/C.6/66/SR.12, 13, 17 and 29;
A/C.6/67/SR.12, 13, 24 and 25; and A/C.6/68/SR.12–14 and 23.
87
A/68/113; see also A/67/116, A/66/93 and Add.1 and A/65/181.
88
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Japan on behalf of the Bureau.

867

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting the comments of Governments and the discussion held in the Sixth Committee at the sixty-third, sixtysixth and sixty-eighth sessions of the General Assembly on this topic,
1. Commends to the attention of Governments the draft articles on the law of transboundary aquifers
annexed to the present resolution as guidance for bilateral or regional agreements and arrangements for the proper
management of transboundary aquifers;
2. Encourages the International Hydrological Programme of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to continue its contribution by offering further scientific and technical assistance to the
States concerned;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “The law of
transboundary aquifers”.
Annex
The law of transboundary aquifers
…
Conscious of the importance for humankind of life-supporting groundwater resources in all regions of the
world,
Bearing in mind Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations, which provides that the
General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 on permanent sovereignty over
natural resources,
Reaffirming the principles and recommendations adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development of 1992 in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development89 and Agenda 21,90
Taking into account increasing demands for freshwater and the need to protect groundwater resources,
Mindful of the particular problems posed by the vulnerability of aquifers to pollution,
Convinced of the need to ensure the development, utilization, conservation, management and protection of
groundwater resources in the context of the promotion of the optimal and sustainable development of water
resources for present and future generations,
Affirming the importance of international cooperation and good-neighbourliness in this field,
Emphasizing the need to take into account the special situation of developing countries,
Recognizing the necessity to promote international cooperation,
…
Part one
Introduction
Article 1
Scope
The present articles apply to:
(a)

Utilization of transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems;

_______________
89
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
90
Ibid., annex II.

868

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(b)

Other activities that have or are likely to have an impact upon such aquifers or aquifer systems; and

(c)

Measures for the protection, preservation and management of such aquifers or aquifer systems.

Article 2
Use of terms
For the purposes of the present articles:
(a) “aquifer” means a permeable water-bearing geological formation underlain by a less permeable layer
and the water contained in the saturated zone of the formation;
(b)

“aquifer system” means a series of two or more aquifers that are hydraulically connected;

(c) “transboundary aquifer” or “transboundary aquifer system” means, respectively, an aquifer or aquifer
system, parts of which are situated in different States;
(d)
situated;

“aquifer State” means a State in whose territory any part of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system is

(e) “utilization of transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems” includes extraction of water, heat and
minerals, and storage and disposal of any substance;
(f) “recharging aquifer” means an aquifer that receives a non-negligible amount of contemporary water
recharge;
(g) “recharge zone” means the zone which contributes water to an aquifer, consisting of the catchment area of
rainfall water and the area where such water flows to an aquifer by run-off on the ground and infiltration through soil;
(h) “discharge zone” means the zone where water originating from an aquifer flows to its outlets, such as a
watercourse, a lake, an oasis, a wetland or an ocean.
Part two
General principles
Article 3
Sovereignty of aquifer States
Each aquifer State has sovereignty over the portion of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system located
within its territory. It shall exercise its sovereignty in accordance with international law and the present articles.
Article 4
Equitable and reasonable utilization
Aquifer States shall utilize transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems according to the principle of equitable
and reasonable utilization, as follows:
(a) They shall utilize transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems in a manner that is consistent with the
equitable and reasonable accrual of benefits therefrom to the aquifer States concerned;
(b)

They shall aim at maximizing the long-term benefits derived from the use of water contained therein;

(c) They shall establish individually or jointly a comprehensive utilization plan, taking into account present
and future needs of, and alternative water sources for, the aquifer States; and
(d) They shall not utilize a recharging transboundary aquifer or aquifer system at a level that would prevent
continuance of its effective functioning.
Article 5
Factors relevant to equitable and reasonable utilization
1. Utilization of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in an equitable and reasonable manner within the
meaning of article 4 requires taking into account all relevant factors, including:
(a)

The population dependent on the aquifer or aquifer system in each aquifer State;
869

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(b)

The social, economic and other needs, present and future, of the aquifer States concerned;

(c)

The natural characteristics of the aquifer or aquifer system;

(d)

The contribution to the formation and recharge of the aquifer or aquifer system;

(e)

The existing and potential utilization of the aquifer or aquifer system;

(f) The actual and potential effects of the utilization of the aquifer or aquifer system in one aquifer State on
other aquifer States concerned;
(g)
system;

The availability of alternatives to a particular existing and planned utilization of the aquifer or aquifer

(h) The development, protection and conservation of the aquifer or aquifer system and the costs of measures
to be taken to that effect;
(i)

The role of the aquifer or aquifer system in the related ecosystem.

2. The weight to be given to each factor is to be determined by its importance with regard to a specific
transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in comparison with that of other relevant factors. In determining what is
equitable and reasonable utilization, all relevant factors are to be considered together and a conclusion reached on
the basis of all the factors. However, in weighing different kinds of utilization of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer
system, special regard shall be given to vital human needs.
Article 6
Obligation not to cause significant harm
1. Aquifer States shall, in utilizing transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems in their territories, take all
appropriate measures to prevent the causing of significant harm to other aquifer States or other States in whose
territory a discharge zone is located.
2. Aquifer States shall, in undertaking activities other than utilization of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer
system that have, or are likely to have, an impact upon that transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, take all
appropriate measures to prevent the causing of significant harm through that aquifer or aquifer system to other
aquifer States or other States in whose territory a discharge zone is located.
3. Where significant harm nevertheless is caused to another aquifer State or a State in whose territory a discharge
zone is located, the aquifer State whose activities cause such harm shall take, in consultation with the affected State,
all appropriate response measures to eliminate or mitigate such harm, having due regard for the provisions of
articles 4 and 5.
Article 7
General obligation to cooperate
1. Aquifer States shall cooperate on the basis of sovereign equality, territorial integrity, sustainable development,
mutual benefit and good faith in order to attain equitable and reasonable utilization and appropriate protection of
their transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems.
2.

For the purpose of paragraph 1, aquifer States should establish joint mechanisms of cooperation.

Article 8
Regular exchange of data and information
1. Pursuant to article 7, aquifer States shall, on a regular basis, exchange readily available data and information
on the condition of their transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems, in particular of a geological, hydrogeological,
hydrological, meteorological and ecological nature and related to the hydrochemistry of the aquifers or aquifer
systems, as well as related forecasts.
2. Where knowledge about the nature and extent of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system is inadequate,
aquifer States concerned shall employ their best efforts to collect and generate more complete data and information
870

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

relating to such aquifer or aquifer system, taking into account current practices and standards. They shall take such
action individually or jointly and, where appropriate, together with or through international organizations.
3. If an aquifer State is requested by another aquifer State to provide data and information relating to an aquifer
or aquifer system that are not readily available, it shall employ its best efforts to comply with the request. The
requested State may condition its compliance upon payment by the requesting State of the reasonable costs of
collecting and, where appropriate, processing such data or information.
4. Aquifer States shall, where appropriate, employ their best efforts to collect and process data and information in
a manner that facilitates their utilization by the other aquifer States to which such data and information are
communicated.
Article 9
Bilateral and regional agreements and arrangements
For the purpose of managing a particular transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, aquifer States are
encouraged to enter into bilateral or regional agreements or arrangements among themselves. Such agreements or
arrangements may be entered into with respect to an entire aquifer or aquifer system or any part thereof or a
particular project, programme or utilization except insofar as an agreement or arrangement adversely affects, to a
significant extent, the utilization by one or more other aquifer States of the water in that aquifer or aquifer system,
without their express consent.
Part three
Protection, preservation and management
Article 10
Protection and preservation of ecosystems
Aquifer States shall take all appropriate measures to protect and preserve ecosystems within, or dependent
upon, their transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems, including measures to ensure that the quality and quantity of
water retained in an aquifer or aquifer system, as well as that released through its discharge zones, are sufficient to
protect and preserve such ecosystems.
Article 11
Recharge and discharge zones
1. Aquifer States shall identify the recharge and discharge zones of transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems
that exist within their territory. They shall take appropriate measures to prevent and minimize detrimental impacts
on the recharge and discharge processes.
2. All States in whose territory a recharge or discharge zone is located, in whole or in part, and which are not
aquifer States with regard to that aquifer or aquifer system, shall cooperate with the aquifer States to protect the
aquifer or aquifer system and related ecosystems.
Article 12
Prevention, reduction and control of pollution
Aquifer States shall, individually and, where appropriate, jointly, prevent, reduce and control pollution of their
transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems, including through the recharge process, that may cause significant harm
to other aquifer States. Aquifer States shall take a precautionary approach in view of uncertainty about the nature
and extent of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and of its vulnerability to pollution.
Article 13
Monitoring
1. Aquifer States shall monitor their transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems. They shall, wherever possible,
carry out these monitoring activities jointly with other aquifer States concerned and, where appropriate, in
collaboration with competent international organizations. Where monitoring activities cannot be carried out jointly,
the aquifer States shall exchange the monitored data among themselves.
871

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Aquifer States shall use agreed or harmonized standards and methodology for monitoring their transboundary
aquifers or aquifer systems. They should identify key parameters that they will monitor based on an agreed
conceptual model of the aquifers or aquifer systems. These parameters should include parameters on the condition
of the aquifer or aquifer system as listed in article 8, paragraph 1, and also on the utilization of the aquifers or aquifer
systems.
Article 14
Management
Aquifer States shall establish and implement plans for the proper management of their transboundary aquifers
or aquifer systems. They shall, at the request of any of them, enter into consultations concerning the management of
a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system. A joint management mechanism shall be established, wherever
appropriate.
Article 15
Planned activities
1. When a State has reasonable grounds for believing that a particular planned activity in its territory may affect a
transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and thereby may have a significant adverse effect upon another State, it
shall, as far as practicable, assess the possible effects of such activity.
2. Before a State implements or permits the implementation of planned activities which may affect a
transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and thereby may have a significant adverse effect upon another State, it
shall provide that State with timely notification thereof. Such notification shall be accompanied by available
technical data and information, including any environmental impact assessment, in order to enable the notified State
to evaluate the possible effects of the planned activities.
3. If the notifying and the notified States disagree on the possible effect of the planned activities, they shall enter
into consultations and, if necessary, negotiations with a view to arriving at an equitable resolution of the situation.
They may utilize an independent fact-finding body to make an impartial assessment of the effect of the planned
activities.
Part four
Miscellaneous provisions
Article 16
Technical cooperation with developing States
States shall, directly or through competent international organizations, promote scientific, educational,
technical, legal and other cooperation with developing States for the protection and management of transboundary
aquifers or aquifer systems, including, inter alia:
(a)

Strengthening their capacity-building in scientific, technical and legal fields;

(b)

Facilitating their participation in relevant international programmes;

(c)

Supplying them with necessary equipment and facilities;

(d)

Enhancing their capacity to manufacture such equipment;

(e) Providing advice on and developing facilities for research, monitoring, educational and other
programmes;
(f) Providing advice on and developing facilities for minimizing the detrimental effects of major activities
affecting their transboundary aquifer or aquifer system;
(g)

Providing advice in the preparation of environmental impact assessments;

(h) Supporting the exchange of technical knowledge and experience among developing States with a view
to strengthening cooperation among them in managing the transboundary aquifer or aquifer system.
872

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Article 17
Emergency situations
1. For the purpose of the present article, “emergency” means a situation, resulting suddenly from natural causes
or from human conduct, that affects a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and poses an imminent threat of
causing serious harm to aquifer States or other States.
2.

The State within whose territory the emergency originates shall:

(a) Without delay and by the most expeditious means available, notify other potentially affected States and
competent international organizations of the emergency;
(b) In cooperation with potentially affected States and, where appropriate, competent international
organizations, immediately take all practicable measures necessitated by the circumstances to prevent, mitigate and
eliminate any harmful effect of the emergency.
3. Where an emergency poses a threat to vital human needs, aquifer States, notwithstanding articles 4 and 6, may
take measures that are strictly necessary to meet such needs.
4. States shall provide scientific, technical, logistical and other cooperation to other States experiencing an
emergency. Cooperation may include coordination of international emergency actions and communications, making
available emergency response personnel, emergency response equipment and supplies, scientific and technical
expertise and humanitarian assistance.
Article 18
Protection in time of armed conflict
Transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems and related installations, facilities and other works shall enjoy the
protection accorded by the principles and rules of international law applicable in international and non-international
armed conflict and shall not be used in violation of those principles and rules.
Article 19
Data and information vital to national defence or security
Nothing in the present articles obliges a State to provide data or information vital to its national defence or
security. Nevertheless, that State shall cooperate in good faith with other States with a view to providing as much
information as possible under the circumstances.
RESOLUTION 68/119
A/RES/68/119

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/471, para. 8)91

68/119. Measures to eliminate international terrorism
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming, in all its aspects, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted on 8 September
2006,92 which enhances the overall framework for the efforts of the international community to effectively counter
the scourge of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and recalling the first, second and third biennial reviews
of the Strategy, on 4 and 5 September 2008, 8 September 2010, and 28 and 29 June 2012, respectively, and the
debates that were held on those occasions,93
_______________
91

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Bureau.
92
Resolution 60/288.
93
See A/62/PV.117–120, A/64/PV.116 and 117 and A/66/PV.118–120.

873

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling its resolutions 62/272 of 5 September 2008, 64/297 of 8 September 2010 and 66/282 of 29 June 2012,
Recalling also its resolution 66/10 of 18 November 2011,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations,94
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,95
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome,96 and reaffirming, in particular, the section on terrorism,
Recalling further the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994, and the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration
on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to Assembly resolution 51/210 of
17 December 1996,
Recalling all General Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate international terrorism and Security
Council resolutions on threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts,
Convinced of the importance of the consideration of measures to eliminate international terrorism by the
General Assembly as the universal organ having competence to do so,
Deeply disturbed by the persistence of terrorist acts, which have been carried out worldwide,
Reaffirming its strong condemnation of the heinous acts of terrorism that have caused enormous loss of human
life, destruction and damage, including those which prompted the adoption of General Assembly resolution 56/1 of
12 September 2001, as well as Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) of 12 September 2001, 1373 (2001) of
28 September 2001 and 1377 (2001) of 12 November 2001, and those that have occurred since,
Reaffirming also its strong condemnation of the atrocious and deliberate attacks that have occurred against
United Nations offices in various parts of the world,
Affirming that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with all their
obligations under international law and must adopt such measures in accordance with international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Stressing the need to strengthen further international cooperation among States and among international
organizations and agencies, regional and subregional organizations and arrangements and the United Nations in
order to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, in accordance with the principles of the Charter, international law and the relevant international
conventions,
Noting the role of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism in monitoring the implementation of that resolution, including the taking of the necessary
financial, legal and technical measures by States and the ratification or acceptance of the relevant international
conventions and protocols,
Mindful of the need to enhance the role of the United Nations and the relevant specialized agencies in
combating international terrorism and of the proposals of the Secretary-General to enhance the role of the
Organization in this respect,
Mindful also of the essential need to strengthen international, regional and subregional cooperation aimed at
enhancing the national capacity of States to prevent and effectively suppress international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations,
Reiterating its call upon States to review urgently the scope of the existing international legal provisions on the
prevention, repression and elimination of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, with the aim of ensuring that
there is a comprehensive legal framework covering all aspects of the matter,
_______________
94

Resolution 50/6.
Resolution 55/2.
96
Resolution 60/1.
95

874

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Emphasizing that tolerance and dialogue among civilizations and the enhancement of interfaith and
intercultural understanding are among the most important elements in promoting cooperation and success in
combating terrorism, and welcoming the various initiatives to this end,
Reaffirming that no terrorist act can be justified in any circumstances,
Recalling Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005, and bearing in mind that States
must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Noting recent developments and initiatives at the international, regional and subregional levels to prevent and
suppress international terrorism, including those of the African Union, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Bali Counter-Terrorism Process, the Central American Integration
System, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia, the Cooperation Council for the Arab States
of the Gulf, the Council of Europe, the East African Community, the Economic Community of West African States,
the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, the European Free Trade Association, the European Union, the Global
Counterterrorism Forum, the Group of Eight, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the International
Civil Aviation Organization, the International Maritime Organization, the League of Arab States, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of American States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Regional Forum of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the
Southern African Development Community and the World Customs Organization,
Noting also regional and subregional efforts to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed, including through the elaboration of and adherence to
regional conventions,
Recalling its decision in resolutions 54/110 of 9 December 1999, 55/158 of 12 December 2000, 56/88 of
12 December 2001, 57/27 of 19 November 2002, 58/81 of 9 December 2003, 59/46 of 2 December 2004, 60/43 of
8 December 2005, 61/40 of 4 December 2006, 62/71 of 6 December 2007, 63/129 of 11 December 2008, 64/118 of
16 December 2009, 65/34 of 6 December 2010, 66/105 of 9 December 2011 and 67/99 of 14 December 2012 that
the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 should address,
and keep on its agenda, the question of convening a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations
to formulate a joint organized response of the international community to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations,
Recalling also that, in the Final Document of the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, adopted in Tehran on 31 August 2012,97 the Heads of State or Government reiterated the
collective position of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on terrorism and reaffirmed its previous initiative
calling for an international summit conference under the auspices of the United Nations to formulate a joint
organized response of the international community to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,98 as well as other
relevant initiatives,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002, 58/187 of 22 December 2003, 59/191 of
20 December 2004, 60/158 of 16 December 2005, 61/171 of 19 December 2006, 62/159 of 18 December 2007,
63/185 of 18 December 2008, 64/168 of 18 December 2009, 65/221 of 21 December 2010 and 66/171 of
19 December 2011,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General99 and the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the work
of its sixteenth session,100
_______________
97

A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I, paras. 225 and 226.
A/53/667-S/1998/1071, annex I, para. 161.
99
A/68/180.
100
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 37 (A/68/37).
98

875

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

1. Strongly condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations as
criminal and unjustifiable, wherever and by whomsoever committed;
2. Calls upon all Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate international, regional and
subregional organizations to implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,92 as well as the
resolutions relating to the first, second and third biennial reviews of the Strategy, 101 in all its aspects at the
international, regional, subregional and national levels without delay, including by mobilizing resources and
expertise;
3. Recalls the pivotal role of the General Assembly in following up the implementation and the updating of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, looks forward to the fourth biennial review, in 2014, and in
this regard recalls its invitation to the Secretary-General to contribute to the future deliberations of the Assembly,
and requests the Secretary-General when doing so to provide information on relevant activities within the
Secretariat to ensure overall coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations
system;
4. Reiterates that criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror in the general public, a
group of persons or particular persons for political purposes are in any circumstances unjustifiable, whatever the
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or other nature that may be invoked
to justify them;
5. Reiterates its call upon all States to adopt further measures in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant provisions of international law, including international standards of human rights, to
prevent terrorism and to strengthen international cooperation in combating terrorism and, to that end, to consider, in
particular, the implementation of the measures set out in paragraphs 3 (a) to (f) of General Assembly resolution
51/210;
6. Also reiterates its call upon all States, with the aim of enhancing the efficient implementation of relevant
legal instruments, to intensify, as and where appropriate, the exchange of information on facts related to terrorism
and, in so doing, to avoid the dissemination of inaccurate or unverified information;
7. Reiterates its call upon States to refrain from financing, encouraging, providing training for or otherwise
supporting terrorist activities;
8. Expresses concern at the increase in incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking with demands for
ransom and/or political concessions by terrorist groups, and expresses the need to address this issue;
9. Urges States to ensure that their nationals or other persons and entities within their territory that wilfully
provide or collect funds for the benefit of persons or entities who commit, or attempt to commit, facilitate or
participate in the commission of terrorist acts are punished by penalties consistent with the grave nature of such acts;
10. Reminds States of their obligations under relevant international conventions and protocols and Security
Council resolutions, including Council resolution 1373 (2001), to ensure that perpetrators of terrorist acts are
brought to justice;
11. Reaffirms that international cooperation as well as actions by States to combat terrorism should be
conducted in conformity with the principles of the Charter, international law and relevant international conventions;
12. Recalls the adoption of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism,102 the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material,103 the Protocol of
2005 to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation104 and the
_______________
101

Resolutions 62/272, 64/297 and 66/282.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2445, No. 44004.
103
Adopted on 8 July 2005 by the Conference to Consider and Adopt Proposed Amendments to the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material (International Atomic Energy Agency, document GOV/INF/2005/10-GC(49)/INF/6, attachment).
104
Adopted on 14 October 2005 by the Diplomatic Conference on the Revision of the SUA Treaties (International Maritime Organization,
document LEG/CONF.15/21).
102

876

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Protocol of 2005 to the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located
on the Continental Shelf,105 and urges all States to consider, as a matter of priority, becoming parties to these
instruments;
13. Urges all States that have not yet done so to consider, as a matter of priority and in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and Council resolution 1566 (2004) of 8 October 2004, becoming parties
to the relevant conventions and protocols as referred to in paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 51/210, as
well as the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings,106 the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism,107 the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism and the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and calls
upon all States to enact, as appropriate, the national legislation necessary to implement the provisions of those
conventions and protocols, to ensure that the jurisdiction of their courts enables them to bring to trial the perpetrators
of terrorist acts and to cooperate with and provide support and assistance to other States and relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations to that end;
14. Urges States to cooperate with the Secretary-General and with one another, as well as with interested
intergovernmental organizations, with a view to ensuring, where appropriate within existing mandates, that technical
and other expert advice is provided to those States requiring and requesting assistance in becoming parties to and
implementing the conventions and protocols referred to in paragraph 13 above;
15. Notes with appreciation and satisfaction that, consistent with the call contained in paragraphs 12 and 13
of General Assembly resolution 67/99, a number of States became parties to the relevant conventions and protocols
referred to therein, thereby realizing the objective of wider acceptance and implementation of those conventions;
16. Reaffirms the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 49/60, and the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to
Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to Assembly resolution 51/210, and calls upon all States to
implement them;
17. Calls upon all States to cooperate to prevent and suppress terrorist acts;
18. Urges all States and the Secretary-General, in their efforts to prevent international terrorism, to make the
best use of the existing institutions of the United Nations;
19. Notes that the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is performing its duties within the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force in New York and that the Centre is supporting the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and encourages all Member States to collaborate with the
Centre and to contribute to the implementation of its activities within the Task Force;
20. Requests the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna
to continue its efforts to enhance, through its mandate, the capabilities of the United Nations in the prevention of
terrorism, and recognizes, in the context of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), its role in assisting States in becoming parties to and implementing the relevant
international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism, including the most recent among them, and in
strengthening international cooperation mechanisms in criminal matters related to terrorism, including through
national capacity-building;
21. Notes the continuing efforts by the Secretariat to prepare the fourth edition of the compendium of
international instruments related to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all official
languages;
22. Invites regional intergovernmental organizations to submit to the Secretary-General information on the
measures they have adopted at the regional level to eliminate international terrorism, as well as on intergovernmental
meetings held by those organizations;
_______________
105

Adopted on 14 October 2005 by the Diplomatic Conference on the Revision of the SUA Treaties (International Maritime Organization,
document LEG/CONF.15/22).
106
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2149, No. 37517.
107
Ibid., vol. 2178, No. 38349.

877

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

23. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of
17 December 1996 on the work of its sixteenth session;100
24. Decides, taking into account the recommendation of the Ad Hoc Committee that more time was
required to achieve substantive progress on the outstanding issues,108 to recommend that the Sixth Committee, at the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, establish a working group with a view to finalizing the process on the
draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism as well as discussions on the item included in its agenda
by Assembly resolution 54/110 concerning the question of convening a high-level conference under the auspices of
the United Nations;
25. Recognizes the efforts of Member States towards resolving any outstanding issues, and encourages all
Member States to redouble their efforts during the intersessional period;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Measures to
eliminate international terrorism”.
RESOLUTION 68/120
A/RES/68/120

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/474, para. 9)109

68/120. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,110
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations,111 the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations112 and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of
15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and advise the host country on, issues arising in connection
with the implementation of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding
the Headquarters of the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host
country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
contained in paragraph 71 of its report;110
2. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations and the
missions accredited to the United Nations and the observance of their privileges and immunities, which is an issue
of great importance, are in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, requests the host country to
continue to solve, through negotiations, problems that might arise and to take all measures necessary to prevent any
interference with the functioning of missions, and urges the host country to continue to take appropriate action, such
_______________
108

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 37 (A/68/37), para. 12.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire and
Cyprus.
110
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/68/26).
111
Resolution 22 A (I).
112
See resolution 169 (II).
109

878

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

as training of police, security, customs and border control officers, with a view to maintaining respect for diplomatic
privileges and immunities and if violations occur to ensure that such cases are properly investigated and remedied,
in accordance with applicable law;
3. Notes the problems experienced by some Permanent Missions to the United Nations in connection with
the implementation of the Parking Programme for Diplomatic Vehicles,113 and notes that the Committee shall
remain seized of the matter, with a view to continuing to maintain the proper implementation of the Parking
Programme in a manner that is fair, non-discriminatory, effective and therefore consistent with international law;
4. Requests the host country to consider removing the remaining travel restrictions imposed by it on staff of
certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities, and in this regard notes the longstanding positions of affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
5. Notes the concerns expressed by some delegations concerning the denial and delay of entry visas to
representatives of Member States;
6. Also notes that the Committee anticipates that the host country will continue to enhance its efforts to
ensure the issuance of entry visas to representatives of Member States pursuant to article IV, section 11, of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United
Nations,112 in a timely manner, to enable travel to New York on United Nations business and that the Committee
anticipates that the host country will continue to enhance efforts, including visa issuance, to facilitate the
participation of representatives of Member States in other United Nations meetings, as appropriate;
7. Further notes that a number of delegations have requested shortening the time frame applied by the host
country for issuance of entry visas to representatives of Member States since the time frame poses difficulties for the
full-fledged participation of Member States in United Nations meetings;
8. Notes with concern the difficulties that continue to be experienced by some Permanent Missions to the
United Nations in obtaining suitable banking services, and welcomes the continued efforts of the host country to
facilitate the opening of bank accounts for those Permanent Missions;
9. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and hopes that the issues raised at the
meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with
international law;
10. Affirms the importance of the Committee being in a position to fulfil its mandate and meet on short
notice to deal with urgent and important matters concerning the relations between the United Nations and the host
country, and in that connection requests the Secretariat and the Committee on Conferences to accord priority to
requests from the Committee on Relations with the Host Country for conference-servicing facilities for meetings of
that Committee that must be held while the General Assembly and its Main Committees are meeting, without
prejudice to the requirements of those bodies and on an “as available” basis;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United
Nations with the host country;
12. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution
2819 (XXVI);
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.

_______________
113

A/AC.154/355, annex.

879

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/121
A/RES/68/121

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/478, para. 7)114

68/121. Observer status for the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law in the
General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law,
1. Decides to invite the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law to participate in the
sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2.

Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/122

A/RES/68/122

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/479, para. 7)115

68/122. Observer status for the International Anti-Corruption Academy in the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the International Anti-Corruption Academy,
1. Decides to invite the International Anti-Corruption Academy to participate in the sessions and the work
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2.

Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/123

A/RES/68/123

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/480, para. 7)116

68/123. Observer status for the Pan African Intergovernmental Agency for Water and Sanitation for Africa
in the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the Pan African Intergovernmental Agency
for Water and Sanitation for Africa,
_______________
114

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
115
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Australia, Austria, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia,
Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Pakistan, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Yemen.
116
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Chile, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon, Ghana, Italy, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Sudan, Togo, Uganda and Zimbabwe.

880

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

1. Decides to invite the Pan African Intergovernmental Agency for Water and Sanitation for Africa to
participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2.

Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 68/124

A/RES/68/124

Adopted at the 68th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2013, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/481, para. 7)117

68/124. Observer status for the Global Green Growth Institute in the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the Global Green Growth Institute,
1. Decides to invite the Global Green Growth Institute to participate in the sessions and the work of the
General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2.

Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution.

_______________
117

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Cambodia, Cameroon, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, Guyana, Indonesia, Ireland, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Montenegro, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Samoa, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan and Viet Nam.

881

Annex I
Allocation of agenda itemsa
Plenary meetings
a

A.

1.

Opening of the session by the President of the General Assembly.

2.

Minute of silent prayer or meditation.

3.

Credentials of representatives to the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly:
(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

4.

Election of the President of the General Assembly.

6.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly.

7.

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and allocation of items: reports of the General Committee.

8.

General debate.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
9.

Report of the Economic and Social Council.

10. Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations on
HIV/AIDS.
11.

Sport for peace and development: building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic
ideal.

12. Global road safety crisis.
13. 2001–2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa.
14. Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields.
15. Culture of peace.
18. Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the 2002 International Conference on Financing
for Development and the 2008 Review Conference.
21. Globalization and interdependence:
(e)

International migration and development.

27. Social development:
(b)

B.

Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth,
ageing, disabled persons and the family.

Maintenance of international peace and security
29. Report of the Security Council.
30. Report of the Peacebuilding Commission.
31. Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies.

_______________
a

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.

883

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

32. The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
33. Prevention of armed conflict:
(a)

Prevention of armed conflict;

(b)

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution.

34. Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and
development.
35. The situation in the Middle East.
36. Question of Palestine.
37. The situation in Afghanistan.
38. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
39. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte.
40. Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba.
41. The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and
development.
42. Question of Cyprus.
43. Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
44. Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
45. The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti.
46. Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons and international peace and security.
47. Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and aggression against Kuwait.
C.

Development of Africa
63. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support:

D.

(a)

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support;

(b)

Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

Promotion of human rights
64. Report of the Human Rights Council.

E.

Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts
70. Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance:
(a)

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;

(b)

Assistance to the Palestinian people;

(c)

Special economic assistance to individual countries or regions;

(d)

Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.

71. Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of
sexual violence.
884

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

F.

Promotion of justice and international law
72. Report of the International Court of Justice.
73. Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda
and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
74. Report of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
75. Report of the International Criminal Court.
76. Oceans and the law of the sea:

G.

(a)

Oceans and the law of the sea;

(b)

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments.

Disarmament
88. Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
99. General and complete disarmament:
(aa) Nuclear disarmament.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
111. Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization.
112. Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund.
113. Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations.
114. Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs:
(a)

Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council;

(b)

Election of eighteen members of the Economic and Social Council.

115. Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections:
(a)

Election of seven members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination;

(b)

Election of two members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission;

(c)

Election of fourteen members of the Human Rights Council;

(d)

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme;

(e)

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme.

116. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(g)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences;

(h)

Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection Unit;

(i)

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

117. Admission of new Members to the United Nations.
885

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

118. Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit.
119. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
120. Follow-up to the commemoration of the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic
slave trade.
121. Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations.
122. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
123. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and
related matters.
124. Strengthening of the United Nations system.
125. United Nations reform: measures and proposals.
126. Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
127. Global health and foreign policy.
128. International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
129. International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
130. International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
135. Programme planning.

First Committee
5.
G.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Disarmament
89. Reduction of military budgets:
(a)

Reduction of military budgets;

(b)

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures.

90. Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace.
91. African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty.
92. Consolidation of the regime established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco).
93. Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security.
94. Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international
security.
95. Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East.
96. Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons.

886

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

97. Prevention of an arms race in outer space.
98. Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament.
99. General and complete disarmament:
(a)

Notification of nuclear tests;

(b)

Further measures in the field of disarmament for the prevention of an arms race on the seabed and
the ocean floor and in the subsoil thereof;

(c)

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities;

(d)

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;

(e)

Transparency in armaments;

(f)

National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and technology;

(g)

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus;

(h)

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty);

(i)

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes;

(j)

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction;

(k)

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat
or use of nuclear weapons;

(l)

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament
commitments;

(m) Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on
disarmament and arms control;
(n)

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation;

(o)

Relationship between disarmament and development;

(p)

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;

(q)

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction;

(r)

Reducing nuclear danger;

(s)

Decreasing the operational readiness of nuclear weapons systems;

(t)

Women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control;

(u)

Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices;

(v)

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction;

(w) Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations;
(x)

Regional disarmament;

(y)

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects;

(z)

United action towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons;

(aa) Nuclear disarmament;
(bb) Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;

887

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

(cc) Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels;
(dd) The Arms Trade Treaty;
(ee) Missiles;
(ff)

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.

100. Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General
Assembly:
(a)

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament;

(b)

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons;

(c)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific;

(d)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean;

(e)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa;

(f)

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa.

101. Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly
at its tenth special session:
(a)

Report of the Conference on Disarmament;

(b)

Report of the Disarmament Commission.

102. The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East.
103. Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
104. Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region.
105. Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
106. Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction.
107. Revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward multilateral disarmament
negotiations.
I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
122. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.

Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)
5.
B.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Maintenance of international peace and security
48. Assistance in mine action.
49. Effects of atomic radiation.
50. International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.

888

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

51. United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
52. Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories.
53. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.
54. Comprehensive review of special political missions.
55. Questions relating to information.
56. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations.
57. Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
58. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations.
59. Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
60. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
122. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.

Second Committee
5.
A.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
16. Information and communications technologies for development.
17. Macroeconomic policy questions:
(a)

International trade and development;

(b)

International financial system and development;

(c)

External debt sustainability and development;

(d)

Commodities.

18. Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the 2002 International Conference on Financing
for Development and the 2008 Review Conference.
19. Sustainable development:
(a)

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development;

(b)

Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;

(c)

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction;

(d)

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind;
889

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

(e)

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa;

(f)

Convention on Biological Diversity;

(g)

Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its first
universal session;

(h)

Harmony with Nature;

(i)

Sustainable mountain development;

(j)

The role of the international community in the prevention of the radiation threat in Central Asia.

20. Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)
and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).
21. Globalization and interdependence:
(a)

Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and
interdependence;

(b)

Science and technology for development;

(c)

Development cooperation with middle-income countries;

(d)

Culture and development.

22. Groups of countries in special situations:
(a)

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries;

(b)

Comprehensive 10-year Review Conference on the Implementation of the Almaty Programme of
Action.

23. Eradication of poverty and other development issues:
(a)

Implementation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017);

(b)

Women in development;

(c)

Human resources development.

24. Operational activities for development:
(a)

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system;

(b)

South-South cooperation.

25. Agriculture development, food security and nutrition.
26. Towards global partnerships.
174. United Nations University.
B.

Maintenance of international peace and security
61. Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
122. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.

890

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

Third Committee
5.
A.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
27. Social development:
(a)

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twentyfourth special session of the General Assembly;

(b)

Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth,
ageing, disabled persons and the family;

(c)

Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing;

(d)

United Nations Literacy Decade: education for all.

28. Advancement of women:

B.

(a)

Advancement of women;

(b)

Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women and of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly.

Maintenance of international peace and security
62. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions.

D.

Promotion of human rights
64. Report of the Human Rights Council.
65. Promotion and protection of the rights of children:
(a)

Promotion and protection of the rights of children;

(b)

Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children.

66. Rights of indigenous peoples:
(a)

Rights of indigenous peoples;

(b)

Second International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People.

67. Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance:
(a)

Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;

(b)

Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action.

68. Right of peoples to self-determination.
69. Promotion and protection of human rights:
(a)

Implementation of human rights instruments;

(b)

Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms;

(c)

Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives;

(d)

Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action.
891

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

H.

Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations
108. Crime prevention and criminal justice.
109. International drug control.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
122. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.

Fifth Committee
5.
I.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
116. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a)

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;

(b)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions;

(c)

Confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee;

(d)

Appointment of a member of the Board of Auditors;

(e)

Appointment of members of the International Civil Service Commission:

(f)

(i)

Appointment of members of the Commission;

(ii)

Designation of the Vice-Chair of the Commission;

Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee.

122. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
131. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors:
(a)

United Nations peacekeeping operations;

(b)

Capital master plan;

(c)

United Nations Development Programme;

(d)

United Nations Capital Development Fund;

(e)

United Nations Children’s Fund;

(f)

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East;

(g)

Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;

(h)

United Nations Population Fund;

(i)

United Nations Office for Project Services;

(j)

United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women).

132. Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
133. Programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013.
134. Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015.
892

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

135. Programme planning.
136. Improving the financial situation of the United Nations.
137. Pattern of conferences.
138. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations.
139. Human resources management.
140. Joint Inspection Unit.
141. United Nations common system.
142. Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
143. Administration of justice at the United Nations.
144. Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
145. Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991.
146. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
147. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
148. Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.
149. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.
150. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
151. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
152. Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
153. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor.
154. Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
155. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
156. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
157. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
158. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
159. Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East:
(a)

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force;

(b)

United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

160. Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
161. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
162. Financing of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
163. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.
164. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
165. Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009).
893

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

Sixth Committee
5.
F.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of justice and international law
77. Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
78. Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission.
79. Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth
session.
80. United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law.
81. Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-third and sixty-fifth sessions.
82. Diplomatic protection.
83. Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss in
the case of such harm.
84. Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization.
85. The rule of law at the national and international levels.
86. The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction.
87. The law of transboundary aquifers.

H.

Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations
110. Measures to eliminate international terrorism.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
122. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.
143. Administration of justice at the United Nations.
166. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country.
167. Observer status for the Cooperation Council of Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly.
168. Observer status for the International Conference of Asian Political Parties in the General Assembly.
169. Observer status for the International Chamber of Commerce in the General Assembly.
170. Observer status for the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law in the General
Assembly.
171. Observer status for the International Anti-Corruption Academy in the General Assembly.
172. Observer status for the Pan African Intergovernmental Agency for Water and Sanitation for Africa in the
General Assembly.
173. Observer status for the Global Green Growth Institute in the General Assembly.

894

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/1.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution
61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

14 and 118

2nd

20 September 2013

3

68/2.

Extension of the intergovernmental process of the General
Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system

125

2nd

20 September 2013

7

68/3.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development
Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for
persons with disabilities: the way forward, a disabilityinclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond

27 (b)

3rd

23 September 2013

8

68/4.

Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development

21 (e)

25th

3 October 2013

11

68/5.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations: requests under Article 19 of the Charter

138

32nd

9 October 2013

750

68/6.

Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts
made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals

14 and 118

32nd

9 October 2013

14

68/7.

Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade

120

35th

21 October 2013

17

68/8.

Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba

40

38th

29 October 2013

18

68/9.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal

11

44th

6 November 2013

20

68/10.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency

88

45th

6 November 2013

23

68/11.

The situation in Afghanistan

37

55th

20 November 2013

24

68/12.

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People

36

58th

26 November 2013

38

68/13.

Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat

36

58th

26 November 2013

40

68/14.

Special information programme on the question of Palestine of
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat

36

58th

26 November 2013

41

68/15.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine

36

58th

26 November 2013

43

68/16.

Jerusalem

35

58th

26 November 2013

49

68/17.

The Syrian Golan

35

58th

26 November 2013

50

68/18.

Graduation of countries from the least developed country
category

9

59th

4 December 2013

52

68/19.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors

131

59th

4 December 2013

750

68/20.

Programme planning

135

59th

4 December 2013

752

895

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

132 and 142

59th

4 December 2013

753

68/21.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services

68/22.

Credentials of representatives to the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly

3 (b)

60th

5 December 2013

53

68/23.

Objective information on military matters, including
transparency of military expenditures

89 (b)

60th

5 December 2013

157

68/24.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as
a Zone of Peace

90

60th

5 December 2013

159

68/25.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty

91

60th

5 December 2013

161

68/26.

Consolidation of the regime established by the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the
Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

92

60th

5 December 2013

162

68/27.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of
the Middle East

95

60th

5 December 2013

163

68/28.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons

96

60th

5 December 2013

165

68/29.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space

97

60th

5 December 2013

168

68/30.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction

99 (j)

60th

5 December 2013

170

68/31.

The Arms Trade Treaty

99 (dd)

60th

5 December 2013

172

68/32.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on nuclear disarmament

99 (aa)

60th

5 December 2013

173

68/33.

Women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control

99 (t)

60th

5 December 2013

175

68/34.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons and collecting them

99 (p)

60th

5 December 2013

176

68/35.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the
1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

99 (d)

60th

5 December 2013

178

68/36.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and
arms control

99 (m)

60th

5 December 2013

180

68/37.

Relationship between disarmament and development

99 (o)

60th

5 December 2013

181

68/38.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation

99 (n)

60th

5 December 2013

182

68/39.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments

99 (l)

60th

5 December 2013

185

68/40.

Reducing nuclear danger

99 (r)

60th

5 December 2013

189

68/41.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction

99 (q)

60th

5 December 2013

190

896

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/42.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons

99 (k)

60th

5 December 2013

192

68/43.

Transparency in armaments

99 (e)

60th

5 December 2013

194

68/44.

National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment
and dual-use goods and technology

99 (f)

60th

5 December 2013

197

68/45.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction

99 (v)

60th

5 December 2013

198

68/46.

Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations

99 (w)

60th

5 December 2013

201

68/47.

Nuclear disarmament

99 (aa)

60th

5 December 2013

203

68/48.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

99 (y)

60th

5 December 2013

208

68/49.

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(Bangkok Treaty)

99 (h)

60th

5 December 2013

211

68/50.

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space
activities

99 (c)

60th

5 December 2013

213

68/51.

United action towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons

99 (z)

60th

5 December 2013

214

68/52.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus

99 (g)

60th

5 December 2013

218

68/53.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes

99 (i)

60th

5 December 2013

220

68/54.

Regional disarmament

99 (x)

60th

5 December 2013

222

68/55.

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional
context

99 (bb)

60th

5 December 2013

223

68/56.

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional
levels

99 (cc)

60th

5 December 2013

224

68/57.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament

100 (a)

60th

5 December 2013

225

68/58.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons

100 (b)

60th

5 December 2013

227

68/59.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Asia and the Pacific

100 (c)

60th

5 December 2013

228

68/60.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean

100 (d)

60th

5 December 2013

229

68/61.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Africa

100 (e)

60th

5 December 2013

231

68/62.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa

100 (f)

60th

5 December 2013

233

68/63.

Report of the Disarmament Commission

101 (b)

60th

5 December 2013

237

68/64.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament

101 (a)

60th

5 December 2013

238

68/65.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East

102

60th

5 December 2013

240
897

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/66.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

103

60th

5 December 2013

242

68/67.

Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean
region

104

60th

5 December 2013

244

68/68.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

105

60th

5 December 2013

246

68/69.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction

106

60th

5 December 2013

248

68/70.

Oceans and the law of the sea

76 (a)

63rd

9 December 2013

53

68/71.

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement
for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling
Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments

76 (b)

63rd

9 December 2013

88

68/72.

Assistance in mine action

48

65th

11 December 2013

255

68/73.

Effects of atomic radiation

49

65th

11 December 2013

258

68/74.

Recommendations on national legislation relevant to the
peaceful exploration and use of outer space

50

65th

11 December 2013

260

68/75.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

50

65th

11 December 2013

262

68/76.

Assistance to Palestine refugees

51

65th

11 December 2013

266

68/77.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent
hostilities

51

65th

11 December 2013

267

68/78.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

51

65th

11 December 2013

269

68/79.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues

51

65th

11 December 2013

273

68/80.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and
Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories

52

65th

11 December 2013

275

68/81.

Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab territories

52

65th

11 December 2013

278

68/82.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan

52

65th

11 December 2013

279

68/83.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian
people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem

52

65th

11 December 2013

282

68/84.

The occupied Syrian Golan

52

65th

11 December 2013

286

68/85.

Comprehensive review of special political missions

54

65th

11 December 2013

288

898

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

A. Information in the service of humanity

55

65th

11 December 2013

289

B. United Nations public information policies and activities

55

65th

11 December 2013

290

68/87.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

56

65th

11 December 2013

301

68/88.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests of
the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories

57

65th

11 December 2013

302

68/89.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

58

65th

11 December 2013

304

68/90.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories

59

65th

11 December 2013

308

68/91.

Question of Western Sahara

60

65th

11 December 2013

309

68/92.

Question of New Caledonia

60

65th

11 December 2013

310

68/93.

Question of French Polynesia

60

65th

11 December 2013

313

68/94.

Question of Tokelau

60

65th

11 December 2013

314

68/95.

Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat,
Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and
the United States Virgin Islands
A. General

60

65th

11 December 2013

316

B. Individual Territories

60

65th

11 December 2013

320

68/96.

Dissemination of information on decolonization

60

65th

11 December 2013

329

68/97.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

60

65th

11 December 2013

331

68/98.

Global health and foreign policy

127

65th

11 December 2013

110

68/99.

Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of
efforts to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences
of the Chernobyl disaster

70 (d)

67th

13 December 2013

114

68/100.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

70 (b)

67th

13 December 2013

117

68/101.

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of United Nations personnel

70

67th

13 December 2013

121

68/102.

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations

70 (a)

67th

13 December 2013

127

68/103.

International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the
field of natural disasters, from relief to development

70 (a)

67th

13 December 2013

133

68/104.

Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts

77

68th

16 December 2013

818

68/86.

Title

Questions relating to information

899

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/105.

Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission

78

68th

16 December 2013

819

68/106.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth session

79

68th

16 December 2013

822

68/107.

Revision of the Guide to Enactment of the Model Law on
Cross-Border Insolvency and part four of the Legislative Guide
on Insolvency Law of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law
A. Revision of the Guide to Enactment of the Model Law on
Cross-Border Insolvency

79

68th

16 December 2013

826

B. Part four of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law

79

68th

16 December 2013

827

68/108.

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Guide
on the Implementation of a Security Rights Registry

79

68th

16 December 2013

827

68/109.

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Rules
on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration and
Arbitration Rules (as revised in 2010, with new article 1,
paragraph 4, as adopted in 2013)

79

68th

16 December 2013

829

68/110.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law

80

68th

16 December 2013

830

68/111.

Reservations to treaties

81

68th

16 December 2013

833

68/112.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of
its sixty-fifth session

81

68th

16 December 2013

857

68/113.

Diplomatic protection

82

68th

16 December 2013

860

68/114.

Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from
hazardous activities and allocation of loss in the case
of such harm

83

68th

16 December 2013

861

68/115.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization

84

68th

16 December 2013

862

68/116.

The rule of law at the national and international levels

85

68th

16 December 2013

865

68/117.

The scope and application of the principle of universal
jurisdiction

86

68th

16 December 2013

866

68/118.

The law of transboundary aquifers

87

68th

16 December 2013

867

68/119.

Measures to eliminate international terrorism

110

68th

16 December 2013

873

68/120.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country

166

68th

16 December 2013

878

68/121.

Observer status for the International Institute for the
Unification of Private Law in the General Assembly

170

68th

16 December 2013

880

68/122.

Observer status for the International Anti-Corruption Academy
in the General Assembly

171

68th

16 December 2013

880

900

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/123.

Observer status for the Pan African Intergovernmental Agency
for Water and Sanitation for Africa in the General Assembly

172

68th

16 December 2013

880

68/124.

Observer status for the Global Green Growth Institute in the
General Assembly

173

68th

16 December 2013

881

68/125.

Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace

15

69th

18 December 2013

139

68/126.

Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace

15

69th

18 December 2013

142

68/127.

A world against violence and violent extremism

15

69th

18 December 2013

144

68/128.

The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link
between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and armed
conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement
of conflicts

32

69th

18 December 2013

147

68/129.

Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda,
particularly orphans, widows and victims of sexual violence

71

69th

18 December 2013

152

68/130.

Policies and programmes involving youth

27 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

482

68/131.

Promoting social integration through social inclusion

27 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

485

68/132.

Literacy for life: shaping future agendas

27 (d)

70th

18 December 2013

488

68/133.

Cooperatives in social development

27 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

490

68/134.

Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing

27 (c)

70th

18 December 2013

491

68/135.

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for
Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of
the General Assembly

27 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

496

68/136.

Preparations for and observance of the twentieth anniversary of
the International Year of the Family

27 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

504

68/137.

Violence against women migrant workers

28 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

506

68/138.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women

28 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

512

68/139.

Improvement of the situation of women in rural areas

28 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

513

68/140.

Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly

28 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

517

68/141.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

62

70th

18 December 2013

522

68/142.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

62

70th

18 December 2013

527

68/143.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
in Africa

62

70th

18 December 2013

527

68/144.

Report of the Human Rights Council

64

70th

18 December 2013

532

901

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/145.

Strengthening collaboration on child protection within
the United Nations system

65 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

533

68/146.

The girl child

65 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

534

68/147.

Rights of the child

65 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

543

68/148.

Child, early and forced marriage

65 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

557

68/149.

Rights of indigenous peoples

66 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

558

68/150.

Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices that
contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

67 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

561

68/151.

Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action

67 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

566

68/152.

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination

68

70th

18 December 2013

571

68/153.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination

68

70th

18 December 2013

574

68/154.

The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination

68

70th

18 December 2013

575

68/155.

International Covenants on Human Rights

69 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

577

68/156.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment

69 (a)

70th

18 December 2013

577

68/157.

The human right to safe drinking water and sanitation

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

583

68/158.

The right to development

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

586

68/159.

Human rights and cultural diversity

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

593

68/160.

Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

596

68/161.

Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in
the membership of the human rights treaty bodies

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

598

68/162.

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

600

68/163.

The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

604

68/164.

Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing
periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

606

68/165.

Right to the truth

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

610

68/166.

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

613

68/167.

The right to privacy in the digital age

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

615

68/168.

Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all
human rights

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

617

902

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/169.

Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization,
discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against
persons, based on religion or belief

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

621

68/170.

Freedom of religion or belief

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

624

68/171.

National institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

628

68/172.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

632

68/173.

Follow-up to the International Year of Human Rights Learning

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

637

68/174.

Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in
Central Africa

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

638

68/175.

Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

640

68/176.

Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human
rights through the promotion of international cooperation and
the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

644

68/177.

The right to food

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

646

68/178.

Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

651

68/179.

Protection of migrants

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

657

68/180.

Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

663

68/181.

Promotion of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility
of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and
Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms: protecting women human rights
defenders

69 (b)

70th

18 December 2013

669

68/182.

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

69 (c)

70th

18 December 2013

674

68/183.

Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea

69 (c)

70th

18 December 2013

678

68/184.

Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran

69 (c)

70th

18 December 2013

682

68/185.

Follow-up to the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations for the
Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice

108

70th

18 December 2013

686

68/186.

Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice
responses to protect cultural property, especially with regard
to its trafficking

108

70th

18 December 2013

689

68/187.

Technical assistance for implementing the international
conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism

108

70th

18 December 2013

692

68/188.

The rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice in the
United Nations development agenda beyond 2015

108

70th

18 December 2013

694

903

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/189.

Model strategies and practical measures on the elimination of
violence against children in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice

108

70th

18 December 2013

697

68/190.

Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners

108

70th

18 December 2013

700

68/191.

Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls

108

70th

18 December 2013

703

68/192.

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking
in persons

108

70th

18 December 2013

706

68/193.

Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and
criminal justice programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity

108

70th

18 December 2013

711

68/194.

United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders

108

70th

18 December 2013

720

68/195.

Preventing and combating corrupt practices and the transfer of
proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset recovery and returning
such assets to legitimate owners, in particular to countries of
origin, in accordance with the United Nations Convention
against Corruption

108

70th

18 December 2013

722

68/196.

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative
Development

109

70th

18 December 2013

728

68/197.

International cooperation against the world drug problem

109

70th

18 December 2013

735

68/198.

Information and communications technologies for development

16

71st

20 December 2013

337

68/199.

International trade and development

17 (a)

71st

20 December 2013

342

68/200.

Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and
economic coercion against developing countries

17 (a)

71st

20 December 2013

346

68/201.

International financial system and development

17 (b)

71st

20 December 2013

347

68/202.

External debt sustainability and development

17 (c)

71st

20 December 2013

352

68/203.

Commodities

17 (d)

71st

20 December 2013

358

68/204.

Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing
for Development

18

71st

20 December 2013

362

68/205.

World Wildlife Day

19

71st

20 December 2013

369

68/206.

Oil slick on Lebanese shores

19

71st

20 December 2013

370

68/207.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in
Central America

19

71st

20 December 2013

372

68/208.

Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of
environmental effects related to waste originating from
chemical munitions dumped at sea

19

71st

20 December 2013

375

68/209.

Agricultural technology for development

19

71st

20 December 2013

377

68/210.

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development

19 (a)

71st

20 December 2013

381

904

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/211.

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction

19 (c)

71st

20 December 2013

385

68/212.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations
of humankind

19 (d)

71st

20 December 2013

389

68/213.

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa

19 (e)

71st

20 December 2013

392

68/214.

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and
its contribution to sustainable development

19 (f)

71st

20 December 2013

395

68/215.

Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its first universal session and the
implementation of section IV.C, entitled “Environmental pillar
in the context of sustainable development”, of the outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development

19 (g)

71st

20 December 2013

399

68/216.

Harmony with Nature

19 (h)

71st

20 December 2013

402

68/217.

Sustainable mountain development

19 (i)

71st

20 December 2013

404

68/218.

The role of the international community in averting the
radiation threat in Central Asia

19 (j)

71st

20 December 2013

407

68/219.

Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the
context of globalization and interdependence

21 (a)

71st

20 December 2013

408

68/220.

Science, technology and innovation for development

21 (b)

71st

20 December 2013

410

68/221.

International Year of Light and Light-based Technologies, 2015

21 (b)

71st

20 December 2013

414

68/222.

Development cooperation with middle-income countries

21 (c)

71st

20 December 2013

416

68/223.

Culture and sustainable development

21 (d)

71st

20 December 2013

418

68/224.

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries

22 (a)

71st

20 December 2013

423

68/225.

Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of
landlocked developing countries: outcome of the International
Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing
Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and
Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation

22 (b)

71st

20 December 2013

427

68/226.

Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2008–2017)

23 (a)

71st

20 December 2013

431

68/227.

Women in development

23 (b)

71st

20 December 2013

436

68/228.

Human resources development

23 (c)

71st

20 December 2013

444

68/229.

Operational activities for development of the United Nations
system

24 (a)

71st

20 December 2013

448

68/230.

South-South cooperation

24 (b)

71st

20 December 2013

449

68/231.

International Year of Pulses, 2016

25

71st

20 December 2013

452

68/232.

World Soil Day and International Year of Soils

25

71st

20 December 2013

453

905

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/233.

Agriculture development, food security and nutrition

25

71st

20 December 2013

454

68/234.

Towards global partnerships: a principle-based approach to
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
all relevant partners

26

71st

20 December 2013

461

68/235.

Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and
of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their
natural resources

61

71st

20 December 2013

465

68/236.

Amendments to the Charter of the United Nations University

174

71st

20 December 2013

468

68/237.

Proclamation of the International Decade for People of
African Descent

67 (b)

72nd

23 December 2013

153

68/238.

Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for
the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States

19 (b)

72nd

27 December 2013

469

68/239.

Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and
strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat)

20

72nd

27 December 2013

475

68/240.

Human Rights Committee

69 (a)

72nd

27 December 2013

744

68/241.

United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation
Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region

69 (b)

72nd

27 December 2013

745

68/242.

Situation of human rights in Myanmar

69 (c)

72nd

27 December 2013

746

68/243.

Developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international security

94

72nd

27 December 2013

250

68/244.

Managing after-service health insurance liabilities

133

72nd

27 December 2013

755

68/245.

Programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013
A. Final budget appropriations for the biennium 2012–2013

133

72nd

27 December 2013

756

B. Final income estimates for the biennium 2012–2013

133

72nd

27 December 2013

759

68/246.

Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2014–2015

134

72nd

27 December 2013

760

68/247.

Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2014–2015

134

72nd

27 December 2013

765

68/248.

Programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
A. Budget appropriations for the biennium 2014–2015

134

72nd

27 December 2013

780

B. Income estimates for the biennium 2014–2015

134

72nd

27 December 2013

782

C. Financing of appropriations for the year 2014

134

72nd

27 December 2013

782

68/249.

Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium
2014–2015

134

72nd

27 December 2013

783

68/250.

Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2014–2015

134

72nd

27 December 2013

784

68/251.

Pattern of conferences

137

72nd

27 December 2013

785

906

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/252.

Human resources management

139

72nd

27 December 2013

794

68/253.

United Nations common system: report of the International
Civil Service Commission

141

72nd

27 December 2013

797

68/254.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

143

72nd

27 December 2013

800

68/255.

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994

144

72nd

27 December 2013

803

68/256.

Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991

145

72nd

27 December 2013

806

68/257.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals

146

72nd

27 December 2013

808

68/258.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei

148

72nd

27 December 2013

810

68/259.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali

158

72nd

27 December 2013

811

68/260.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force

159 (a)

72nd

27 December 2013

814

907
