S/2021/1026

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 December 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 14 December 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8923rd meeting of the Security Council
convened on 9 December 2021 under the item entitled “Maintenance of international
peace and security: security in the context of terrorism and climate change”. The
interventions of the in-person participants will be published as an official record of
the Security Council (S/PV.8923).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for the
8923rd meeting, the following delegations submitted written statements, copies of
which are enclosed: Georgia, Indonesia and Jordan. These statements will be issued
as a document of the Council in accordance with the procedure set out in the letter
dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council ( S/2020/372),
which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and reference to the document will be
made in S/PV.8923.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

21-18915 (E)

291221

*2118915*

210122

S/2021/1026

Annex I
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Indonesia to the United Nations, Mohammad K. Koba
I would like to begin by thanking Niger for bringing a spotlight on this issue.
On this note, allow me to highlight the following points:
First, the linkage between climate change and security risks is highly context specific.
The recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report Climate Change
2021:the Physical Science Basis elaborated at length how the impact of climate
change is wide-ranging, but projecting varied challenges across regions and countries.
While climate change was never the only driver of conflict, we have been
observing cases in which it has multiplied existing risks and insecurities , which could
further escalate conflict, including radicalization and terrorism.
This linkage depends on many other factors, including resource availability and
the capacity to adapt, which varies from one conflict area to another.
Thus, the Council needs to devise its response accordingly through informed
analysis that takes into account local context and up -to-date climate information.
Second is to take concrete applicable actions.
While raising awareness through Council meetings is important, Indones ia
believes that the Council needs to take concrete applicable actions to respond to this
emerging threat.
This needs to be done in close coordination with other relevant United Nations
bodies in accordance with each one’s respective mandate.
The Council’s efforts need to go beyond injecting climate-related lexicons into
the outcome documents.
We need to start by addressing the needs of impacted local communities,
especially the increased risk of intercommunal tension and violence in resource scarce areas, which could breed radicalization.
Moreover, we need to enhance the capacity of affected countries to adapt to
climate change and to mitigate the impact of climate-related security risks by
strengthening the cooperation with local and national governmen ts and regional
organizations.
Third is to address the root cause of terrorism.
Addressing the root cause of terrorism should remain our upmost priority.
The economic and social challenges that might be presented from climate related challenges should be immediately addressed.
To this end, Indonesia emphasizes the importance of the sharing of experiences
and best practices in responding to climate vulnerabilities as a root cause of terrorism
from other countries.
To conclude, Indonesia remains committed to enhanced cooperation in tackling
the root causes of terrorism, including the vulnerabilities presented by climate -related
challenges.

2/5

21-18915

S/2021/1026

Annex II
[Original: Arabic]

Statement of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan at the Security
Council open debate on “Security in the context of terrorism and
climate change”
9 December 2021
Mr. President,
Allow me to congratulate you on the assumption by your country, Niger, of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current month. We are conf ident that your
wise leadership will help the Council to carry out its tasks relating to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The challenges before us today are many and it is in our countries’ common
interest to address them effectively. Joint coordinated action is required to have a
genuine and positive impact. As one of the world’s most water-deprived countries,
Jordan is well aware of the seriousness of climate change. It is also aware of the
seriousness of terrorism, as it has suffered from that scourge and been threatened by
terrorist movements, including the terrorist organization Da’esh.
In many countries, severe weather, droughts and floods can put people in desperate
situations that create conditions in which terrorism can flourish. It starts with worsening
social tensions, poverty, hunger and unemployment, which help terrorist organizations
spread their propaganda in communities, taking advantage of the challenges posed by
difficult changes and climatic conditions. Perhaps the most notable example is the
exploitation by Boko Haram of people’s suffering to reinforce their power in areas where
chronic drought has destroyed crops. In that connection, we refer to Security Council
resolution 2349 (2017), which recognizes the adverse effects of climate change and
ecological changes among other factors on the stability of the region, including through
water scarcity, drought, desertification, land degradation, and food insecurity.
In his 2009 report on climate change and its possible security implications, the
then Secretary-General outlined five channels through which climate change could
affect security: threatening food security; slowing development; migration and
competition for natural resources; implications for rights, security and sovereignty as
a result of the disappearance of territory; and international differences over shared or
undemarcated resources. There is no need to go into details of which we are all aware.
We know what the risks are. So should we not be asking: Are there measures we should
be taking? What, in fact, are the steps we must take to arrive at the desired result?
In his address to the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly, His
Highness King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein stated as follows: “Jordan has been calling
for regional networks of resiliency to pool our resources and respond quickly and
smoothly to needs as they arise. And we stand ready to utilise our country’s strategic
location – at the crossroads of Asia, Africa, and Europe – to facilitate the broadest
international response”. Let me reiterate here that Jordan stands ready to play its part
in addressing the common challenges facing our world today. That includes
combating terrorism and climate change, and strengthening international coordination
to develop an effective approach through which Governments, businesses and civil
society around the world can work to protect our planet and our common future.

21-18915

3/5

S/2021/1026

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the
United Nations, Kaha Imnadze
At the outset, let me thank Niger for the timely initiative of bringing this
important subject to the forefront of the agenda of the Security Council.
It is evident that the world is facing a growing threat from climate change that
undermines international peace and security at large. Unfortunately, climate change
hits countries in fragile or conflict-affected situations the hardest, leading to
competition over scarce natural resources, displacements and undermined societal
cohesion. On the other hand, exacerbated social vulnerabilities lead to radicalization
and create fertile ground that terrorist and extr emist groups can exploit.
These are two key global security concerns of our time, which require constant
attention from the side of the international community.
Bearing in mind the nexus between climate and security, we welcome the
increased focus of the Council on the climate change issues, and believe that
assessment of climate-related security risks and responses to them should be further
fed into the Council’s work, including as a part of United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities.
Climate change poses a serious challenge to Georgia as well. We fully share the
alarm presented by the Secretary-General’s report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change that declared a “code red for humanity”.
We believe that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and the Paris Agreement are the major international mechanisms to guide the global
efforts in addressing climate change. In this regard, Georgia, as a party to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement has been
committed to making its own contribution to international efforts in combating
climate change by prioritizing Goal 13 on climate action at the national level,
submitting its updated nationally determined contributions to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and joining a number of major
international initiatives announced at the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties
(COP26) held in Glasgow, such as the Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forests and
Land Use, the Global Methane Pledge, the High Ambition Coalition COP26 Leaders’
Statement and the Agriculture Innovation Mission for Climate.
While the impact of terrorism in Georgia remains to be assessed as very low,
considering the global security landscape, terrorism-related challenges still exist, as
no country is immune from this serious threat to international peace and security.
Therefore, the Government of Georgia has been actively working to detect the
continuously transforming landscape of terrorism and to develop efficient, coherent
and coordinated ways of responding to it.
At the national level, the Government of Georgia continues to take effective and
comprehensive counter-terrorism measures, including upgrading the legislative
framework, carrying out law enforcement measures and being active in domestic and
international coordination and cooperation, as well as prevention-oriented various
projects and programmes with the aim of reducing the threat.
Georgia has been actively involved in international efforts and will continue to
pursue the fight against terrorism in all its manifestations, alongside the international
community. Georgia has been an active member of the Global Coalition against Daesh
from the very beginning and has been significantly contributing to the maintenance

4/5

21-18915

S/2021/1026

of international peace and security through its participation in multinational
operations.
Georgia has a sound legal framework for international cooperation and has
mechanisms in place to conduct it. Georgia is a party to the 14 United Nations
anti-terrorism conventions and continues further enhancing the international legal
framework in the areas of law enforcement and security. Furthermore, Georgia
remains committed to enhancing cooperation with the United Nations, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, the European Union, the Council of Europe, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other regional international
organizations, including by being actively engaged in cooperation dialogue with them
and sharing experiences and best practices, as well as carrying out joint projects ,
training and measures in the fight against terrorism.
While speaking about the security environment in my country in terms of
terrorism, let me draw your special attention to the situation in the Russia -occupied
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia. These regions are beyond the Georgian
Government’s effective control, and remain outside national and international
monitoring. The grave security, human rights and humanitarian situation there creates
a fertile ground for all sorts of illicit activities, including activities related to
terrorism, and poses a serious threat to regional and international peace and security.
In conclusion, let me stress that Georgia stands ready to do our utmost towards
reducing the implications of the climate crisis for international peace and security,
and in the fight against terrorism.

21-18915

5/5
