A /70/PV.70

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

70th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 9 December 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 10
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Note by the Secretary-General (A/70/365)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.28)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Greece to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.28.
Mrs. Boura (Greece): On behalf of the sponsors,
I am pleased to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.28,
entitled “Return or restitution of cultural property to
the countries of origin”. We hope that today the General
Assembly will adopt this important draft resolution by
consensus, as in previous years.
I thank the Secretary-General and the DirectorGeneral of UNESCO for the comprehensive report
on the return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin (see A/70/365). The report outlines
the most significant developments which have taken
place during the past three years in the field of return
or restitution of cultural property to the countries of
provenance.
Three years after the General Assembly adopted
resolution 67/80, entitled “Return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin”, major
developments have occurred, which this draft resolution
seeks to reflect in a thorough and balanced way. The
issue of return of cultural property to the countries of

15-41191 (E)

origin has become particularly timely due to recent
international developments, including the rise in the
cross-border movement of cultural objects, the increase
of organized crime involving cultural property, moneylaundering through the antiquities market, and the
selling of stolen cultural objects in auctions.
Shocked and horrified, we are witnessing
unprecedented destruction and looting of monuments
of worship and cultural property in Iraq, Syria
and elsewhere. Centuries-old multi-ethnic and
multi-confessional communities are seeing their
cultural heritage threatened by extinction through
barbaric terrorist acts. The draft resolution under
consideration today expresses the deep concern about
the loss, destruction, theft, pillage, illicit removal
or misappropriation of cultural property from
archaeological and other sites, in particular in areas
undergoing armed conflict and occupation. It condemns
recent attacks on world cultural heritage sites and calls
for an immediate end to such acts, reminding the parties
to the 1954 Hague Convention and its two Protocols of
their obligations thereunder.
Furthermore, it recognizes the leading role of
UNESCO in the fight against the destruction of and
illicit trafficking in cultural property in areas of armed
conflict, including its specific mandate within the
context of Security Council resolution 2199 (2015),
which highlights the direct linkage connecting the
destruction and pillage of the cultural heritage in Iraq
and Syria with the financing of terrorism.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1541191*

A/70/PV.70

As highlighted in the draft resolution, awarenessraising and capacity-building are crucial to the success
of efforts undertaken in the context of the return or
restitution of cultural property to the countries of
origin. Interaction with the international art market
with a view to improving the practices in various areas
of expertise — such as the provenance, investigation,
ethics and procedures of restitution — have been
proven to be of paramount importance. In that respect,
the operational guidelines adopted in May by the
meeting of the States parties to the 1970 Convention
on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property is a very important tool with which to guide
and assist States in implementing the Convention.
The international community shares a common
responsibility to protect cultural heritage in peace and
war. Cultural heritage is not simply a testimony of a
nation’s past. It reflects its identity. It is the mirror
of a country’s history and the core of its existence. It
represents not only specific values and traditions, but
the unique way in which a nation perceives the world.
That is why cultural heritage must be protected against
any illicit act and restored to its historic environment,
where it can best inspire the collective conscience of
humankind. That is precisely the reason for which the
objectives of the draft resolution should leave no State
indifferent.
Ms. Pachoumi (Cyprus): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to express Cyprus’ appreciation for
today’s discussion. My country supports and sponsors
draft resolution A/70/L.28, proposed under agenda
item 10, to be adopted today. We wish to thank the main
sponsor of the draft resolution for organizing informals
in an open and transparent manner.
We welcome the updates to the draft resolution
that reflect important initiatives and developments
in the area of this agenda item. Such updates include
reference to the Doha Declaration (A/CONF.222/17,
p.12), adopted on 19 April during the thirteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice; the leading role of UNESCO in combating
trafficking in cultural property; and UNESCO’s
role on education and awareness-raising. They also
include reference to the International Guidelines for
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property
and Other Related Offences (resolution 69/196) and
the operational guidelines for the implementation
2/24

09/12/2015

of the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property. Of
equal importance are the updates related to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
and the recent unfortunate developments with regard to
the destruction and trafficking of cultural property in
the Middle East and the efforts to protect it.
Today, we are witnessing the international rise
of terrorism and violent extremism, which also target
cultural heritage. The deliberate destruction of and
illicit trafficking in cultural property in the Middle
East constitute a threat not only to the heritage and
tradition of cultural diversity of the region, but also
to the invaluable cultural heritage of humankind.
It reflects an effort to erase an important part of our
history, to tamper with our collective memory and to
eliminate the footprints of the human effort towards
cultural development and progress. In the light of
those developments, further increasing and improving
international cooperation in the area of countering the
destruction of and trafficking in cultural property and of
facilitating the return or restitution of cultural property
to the countries of origin is of paramount importance.
In that framework, draft resolution A/70/L.28 takes on
particular significance.
Cyprus has had its own unfortunate experience
with regard to the destruction, looting and illegal
smuggling of its cultural property as the result of
foreign occupation. My country is engaged in a constant
effort to repatriate its stolen cultural treasures, many of
which were illegally exported from the occupied part
of Cyprus, and their number is estimated at 60,000
objects. The issue of protecting cultural heritage is
a priority for my country. Having gained relevant
experience and expertise, Cyprus also contributes and
stands ready to further contribute to international and
regional efforts to promote and strengthen effective
international cooperation in that area.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy commends the Permanent
Mission of Greece and draft resolution A/70/L.28, on
the return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin, which will be adopted by consensus
and which we have co-sponsored.
During the negotiations, we made our contribution
to the advancement of the text, in keeping with Italy’s
commitment to countering the illegal destruction of and
looting, trade and international trafficking in cultural
15-41191

09/12/2015

property and cultural heritage in all their forms. In
close cooperation with the Permanent Mission of
Jordan and with the support of UNESCO, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL,
Italy is carrying out a project, entitled “Protecting
cultural heritage: an imperative for humanity”, that
will be launched with a dedicated exhibition to open on
14 December at United Nations Headquarters and will
encompass the three thematic debates to be held in the
General Assembly in the coming months.
In that respect, I wish to recall Italy’s commitment to
promoting and sustaining the important resolution 38 C/49,
adopted on 13 November 2015 by the UNESCO General
Conference, on the reinforcement of UNESCO’s action
for the protection of cultural heritage and the promotion
of cultural pluralism in the event of armed conflict. For
technical reasons, it was not possible to include — as
we would have wished — a reference to that landmark
decision in draft resolution A/70/L.28, but we believe
that UNESCO resolution 38 C/49 can be considered an
essential point of reference for the initiatives and all
forms of implementation of relevant legal instruments,
such as that we are about to adopt today, that the
international community will be undertaking in this
very crucial sector.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I should like to express my
thanks to the delegation of Greece for introducing the
important draft resolution A/70/L.28, entitled “Return
or restitution of cultural property to the countries of
origin”, and for its efforts to reach consensus on the
draft resolution. My delegation actively participated in
the informal consultations on the draft resolution and
joined the list of sponsors based on our belief in its
relevance to the dangerous reality facing our cultural
heritage, which has endured for thousands of years, and
as a means of defending our common values.
The threat facing the cultural heritage of the Middle
East, particularly in Syria, Iraq and occupied Palestine,
represents a horrifying example of the systematic attack
on the cultural heritage of humankind. My country,
Syria — the cradle of great civilizations and home to the
first alphabet, the Kingdom of Zenobia and countless
cultural and religious monuments, including castles
that date back to all the different ages and eras — is
witnessing not only the massacre of its people and the
destruction of its infrastructure and economy, but also
the destruction of its cultural and historical heritage.
We have all seen the viciousness of the Islamic State,

A/70/PV.70

which has destroyed our cultural heritage in Palmyra
and elsewhere, and the violent attacks by the terrorists
of Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front, who perpetrate terrible
atrocities and have attacked Syrian archaeologists,
such as Khaled Al-Asaad at Maaloula, as well as the
Umayyad Mosque in Aleppo and other archaeological
sites. That is the legacy of the destruction of the Buddha
statues in 2001 by the parents and grandparents of
Daesh. Yet all those crimes have met with a shameful
international silence that has never gone beyond words
of condemnation, without the genuine assistance that
could help Syria to survive the attacks and salvage its
heritage.
Syria has played a historic role as a crossroads
of civilization and exchange between the peoples of
the East and West long before there was such a thing
as the United Nations or even international law.
Unfortunately, today, when we do have the United
Nations and the provisions of international law, there
are people whose aim is to chart a new road — not the
Silk Road, but a road of assault and aggression. Such
people are seeking to destroy Syria and to illegally
market its cultural heritage. Whether deliberately or
not, their illicit transactions are supporting the terrorist
activities in Syria and Iraq and their aggression and
looting are supporting terrorist organizations. We can
only express our deep concern over the global failure
to combat such activities. The Turkish mafia makes it
possible to market those ill-gotten antiquities abroad
through international exhibits, European and American
websites and auctions in London and elsewhere, which
proves that not everyone is living up to and abiding by
international law.
We have frequently stressed the importance of
combatting the threats against cultural heritage in
Syria and Iraq. We must not only fight the illicit trade
in antiquities but also hold to account the Governments
that are directly engaged in acts of theft and looting or
fail to hold the perpetrators of such crimes accountable.
Foreign mercenaries from around the world are coming
to Syria and Iraq to rob and loot our heritage. I point
in particular to the Turkish regime, which is not being
held accountable in any way despite its involvement in
transactions with radical regimes in the region and its
assistance to criminals in entering Syria. The Turkish
mafia and regime are the main marketers of Syrian
antiquities, which they also trade in exchange for
ammunition and weaponry.

15-411913/24

A/70/PV.70

Unfortunately, the list of Turkey’s negative
and blatant interventions in my country’s internal
affairs goes on and on. Members have all heard the
allies of the Turkish regime — countries that call
themselves democratic and claim to be defending
human rights — claim to defend the rights of refugees
on Turkish territory and to protect their future? The
Turkish regime has used them as a card to blackmail
Europe. That became abundantly clear in the agreement
between the European Union and Turkey, whereby
Turkey received €3 billion. That is nothing more than
cheap trafficking in the lives of human beings. Syrian
factories have been stolen and the Turkish regime has
become the lead seller of Daesh oil through the Turkish
mafia, which enjoys the protection of the regime and
is controlled by the Turkish President’s son. These
facts have been exposed by the French magazine La
Croix, which reports that Daesh’s trade in 2015 reaped
$2.2 million a day thanks to its daily export of 90,000
barrels of oil. We have seen reports of the convoys that
transport Daesh oil to Turkey.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that it is
vital for Member States to abide by the draft resolution
that we are about to adopt, which affirms the need to
combat terrorism and the threat to the global heritage
and the importance of coordinating with the affected
nations and with UNESCO to combat those threats,
particularly those posed by terrorist attacks.
It is also important for Member States to make every
possible effort to return looted cultural artefacts to their
original home, Syria. We also support the content of the
draft resolution before us, which recalls the importance
of abiding by the relevant Security Council resolutions
allowing the seizure of all ISIS financing channels,
thereby rendering the group incapable of carrying
out its activities. The draft resolution will create the
momentum needed for the desired political resolution
in Syria to move forward.

09/12/2015

before us today, and we look forward to its adoption by
consensus.
The illicit trade in cultural property continues
to be a source of grave concern, not least in the
Mediterranean basin. Despite awareness-raising and
capacity-building efforts to address this challenge, as
the Director-General of UNESCO has highlighted in
her report (see A/70/365), threats to cultural heritage
have been increasing and have taken on new forms.
Removing artefacts from their natural and historical
context is a crime committed against humankind.
Cultural properties from past civilizations that have
survived thousands of years and been entrusted to our
care constitute the common history of humankind. We
believe that cultural assets reflect their true significance
when protected and preserved on their own soil.
Situations of conflict or instability further aggravate
the risk of the destruction of or illicit trafficking in
cultural heritage. The recent actions of the terrorist
organization Daesh have set an unfortunate example
of this. We deplore the inhumane attacks resulting in
the destruction of movable and immovable cultural
properties that constitute the common heritage of
humankind. We strongly condemn the brutal destruction
of archaeological sites, museums, places of worship and
other religious places, and books and manuscripts that
are irreplaceable treasures of humankind. We regard
these acts of Daesh as a crime against humanity.

There are social network websites indicating the
willingness of their owners to receive antiquities stolen
from Syria and Iraq along the Turkish border. Whoever
wishes may contact my Mission to obtain the addresses.

In the face of these unfortunate developments,
Turkey has reinforced all necessary measures to prevent
the illegal transfer of historical artefacts from their
countries of origin. Among other precautions, Turkey
regularly conducts import-control operations along its
southern and south-eastern borders in order to prevent
the smuggling of cultural property. Moreover in close
collaboration with UNESCO, INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization, all governorships, State-run
and private museums, and collectors are informed on
a daily basis of the risks of the illicit trafficking in
goods from neighbouring countries. In that context, we
meticulously implement Security Council resolution
2199 (2015), which Turkey co-sponsored.

Mr. Uğurluoğlu (Turkey): At the outset, allow me
to express our appreciation to the delegation of Greece
for its hard work during the consultations on draft
resolution see A/70/L.28, entitled “Return or restitution
of cultural property to the countries of origin”. Turkey
is pleased to once again co-sponsor the draft resolution

Against that background, we categorically deny
the unfounded allegations of the representative of the
Syrian regime, which lost its legitimacy long ago.
Today, we have unfortunately heard attempts from the
representative of that regime to divert the attention
of the international community from the enormous

4/24

15-41191

09/12/2015

destruction that the regime has wrought upon its own
people. What Turkey does on behalf of the Syrian
people is done before the eyes of the international
community and in close collaboration and cooperation
with the United Nations. Turkey will continue to stand
by the people of Syria.
International efforts to combat the illicit trade in
cultural property require the active involvement of all
Member States, cultural and education institutions,
museums and civil society. We commend the leading
role assumed by UNESCO in combating the illicit trade
in cultural property. We also underscore the necessity
to enhance and intensify cooperation at the national,
regional and international levels. Turkey supports all
efforts that contribute to international cooperation in
this field. With that understanding, most recently we
were pleased to host the fifth International Conference
of Experts on the Return of Cultural Property in
October 2015 in Nevşehir, Turkey.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 10.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.28, entitled “Return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the draft document, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/70/L.28: Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Belize, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Egypt, Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala,
India, Luxembourg, Mali, Micronesia, Nigeria, Poland,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkmenistan and
Ukraine. I would like also to announce that the
Dominican Republic is not a sponsor of A/70/L.28.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.28?
Draft resolution A/70/L.28 was adopted (resolution
70/76).

A/70/PV.70

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Argentina for a statement after adoption.
Mr. Marani (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina welcomes the adoption of resolution 70/76,
which seeks to preserve and safeguard the historic and
cultural heritage of States. In particular, we would like
to thank the delegation of Greece for conducting the
negotiations.
The cultural heritage of a State is a clear and
unequivocal testament to its identity. For that reason,
Argentina is firmly committed to the fight against the
illicit trafficking of cultural property, which can no
longer be considered loot but rather the fundamental
elements of the civilization and culture of peoples.
Argentina is a party to the UNESCO 1970 Convention
on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property. Having recently been elected by the UNESCO
General Conference to join the intergovernmental
committee that monitors the implementation of the
Convention, Argentina takes this opportunity to renew
its commitment to initiatives aimed at a better and more
effective application of its provisions.
Argentina’s geographical location on the American
continent makes it very sensitive to trafficking in
archaeological artefacts from the pre-Hispanic era.
Nevertheless, we wish to highlight the positive
cooperation we have enjoyed with brotherly countries
in the region to address the issue.
Illicit trafficking in cultural property is a serious
issue in the modern world. The methods used are
becoming increasingly sophisticated and linked to other
illicit activities. Moreover, modern technologies have
given rise to sophisticated smuggling networks and
illegal sales on the Internet. Fighting such developments
requires the development of common strategies to
facilitate identification and arrest. Likewise, the active
involvement of States in the work of UNESCO through
their implementation of relevant conventions should
be reflected in national laws that reflect international
commitments and is an effective way to mitigate the
pernicious effects of the smuggling of cultural goods
on the living memory of peoples and States.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 10?
It was so decided.

15-411915/24

A/70/PV.70

Agenda item 39 (continued)
The situation in Afghanistan
Draft resolution (A/70/L.23)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 39 at its 65th plenary
meeting, on 30 November.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.23, entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the draft document, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/70/L.23: Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, Jordan, Micronesia, Peru,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia and the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia.

09/12/2015

graduation of the Republic of Vanuatu from the least
developed country category”, on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
The Republic of Vanuatu was expected to graduate
in December 2017. However, in March Cyclone Pam,
a category-5 storm, hit the country with full force.
Vanuatu’s development progress suffered a heavy
setback. Sixty-four per cent of the economy and 60 per
cent of the population were affected by the storm. Given
the exceptional human, economic and development
losses that Vanuatu suffered, the draft resolution extends
the preparatory period by three years, thereby leading
to Vanuatu’s graduation from least developed country
(LDC) status in December 2020. That extension will
allow Vanuatu to rebuild and reconstruct its country
and economy so that graduation from LDC status will
not result in the disruption of its development plans,
programmes and projects.
I wish to thank all delegations that have
constructively engaged in the informal consultations
that have enabled us to reach agreement on the text,
and especially Mr. Jeffrey Salim Waheed, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Maldives, who facilitated
discussions on the draft.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.23?

In order to accurately reflect the agreement
reached, I wish to make two oral revisions to the draft.

Draft resolution A/70/L.23 was adopted (resolution
70/77).

In the first line of the final preambulatory
paragraph, we wish to add the words “to continue” after
“international community”. The paragraph would then
read:

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/70/L.16)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 9, jointly
with agenda item 15, at its 36th plenary meeting on
19 October.
I give the floor to the representative of South Africa
to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.16.
Mr. Marobe (South Africa): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.16, entitled
“Extension of the preparatory period preceding the

6/24

“Inviting the international community to
continue to generously support the rehabilitation
and disaster preparedness efforts undertaken by
the Government of Vanuatu in this context”.
Secondly, in the second line of paragraph 1, we
wish to replace the word “of” with the word “on”. The
paragraph would now read thus, “Expresses its deep
concern at the severe consequences for Vanuatu of
Cyclone Pam on 13 and 14 March 2015”.
The Group of 77 and China commends the draft
resolution to the General Assembly for adoption by
consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.16, entitled
“Extension of the preparatory period preceding the
graduation of the Republic of Vanuatu from the least

15-41191

09/12/2015

developed country category”, as orally revised. May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt the draft resolution, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/70/L.16, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 70/78).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Vanuatu.
Mr. Tevi (Vanuatu): The unanimous adoption of
resolution 70/78, on the extension of the preparatory
period preceding the graduation of the Republic of
Vanuatu from the least developed country category,
gives hope and encouragement to my country. It
also demonstrates the unwavering commitment of
the international community to truly ensuring that
graduating from the category of least developed country
should not result in the disruption of development plans
programmes and projects. Furthermore, the decision
reaffirms our trust, confidence and gratitude in the fact
that the international community stands with us and
renders to us whatever assistance may be necessary to
restore the damage caused by Cyclone Pam and move
ahead with the development process.
On behalf of the Government and people of Vanuatu,
allow me to take this opportunity to extend our sincere
appreciation to the international community for the
understanding shown and unanimous support extended
to us in the formulation and adoption of the resolution.
With particular gratitude, I reiterate our heartfelt
appreciation to the Chairman and members of the
Group of 77 and China, as well as to the members of the
group of least developed countries. I also wish to extend
our very sincere thanks to our development partners,
especially Australia, New Zealand, the European
Union, Japan and the United States of America, for the
understanding and flexibility that they have shown in
accommodating our request for an extension.
Last but not least, allow me to express our sincere
gratitude to Mr. Jeffrey Salim Waheed of the Maldives
for the helpful manner in which he facilitated the
drafting of resolution 70/78, as well as to Mrs. Maureen
Francella Strickland-Simonet of Samoa and Ms. Kavita
Desai of Timor-Leste for coordinating the resolution.
The impacts of tropical Cyclone Pam on our
country are still being felt. As the Assembly is aware,
64 per cent of our economy was severely affected. This
year tourism, which is our major economic mainstay,
saw a significant decline, and our agricultural sector is

A/70/PV.70

still severely affected. The World Bank’s latest needs
assessment predicted that the economy will decline this
year and the year after, and then begin to slowly grow
again in the medium term. That growth is predicted only
if significant investments are realized in the economy.
Despite this daunting environment, we are a
determined people. We take this opportunity to assure
the Assembly and the international community that we
will put our greatest efforts into rebuilding our economy
and putting Vanuatu back on the path of high, sustained
growth and development. We fully understand that the
cyclone has stacked serious obstacles against our vision
of becoming a middle-income developing country.
Nevertheless, our determination will not be deterred.
We are confident that once again, with the help our
development partners, we will emerge from the disaster
stronger than ever before and proceed with the process of
graduation, as specified in resolution 59/209. So far, the
Vanuatu Government has already adopted the Cyclone
Pam recovery plan, and international consultations with
our development partners have already taken place. We
hope that, with the renewed development partnership,
Vanuatu will be able to grow again and develop a more
robust, inclusive and climate-resilient economy.
As we all know, natural disasters will continue to
increase if climate change is not adequately addressed
by the international community. That remains a
cause for concern for small island developing States
(SIDS), especially with regard to the efforts to achieve
sustainable development. Cyclone Pam has clearly
illustrated that daunting challenge. It is therefore
important that the concerns of SIDS and the least
developed countries be addressed by the international
community, especially with regard to the new climate
agreement currently being negotiated in Paris. Such
an agreement is indeed indispensable to achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1).
In conclusion, the adoption of resolution 70/78
demonstrates the support and goodwill of the
international community to see vulnerable States
achieve sustainable development. Once again, on behalf
of my Government and my people, I would like to take
this opportunity to sincerely express our gratitude for
all the invaluable support.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
9.

15-411917/24

A/70/PV.70

Reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
The President: The General Assembly will consider
the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) on agenda items 50 to
63 and 120 and 135.
I request the Rapporteur of the Committee,
Ms. Clotilde Ferry of Monaco, to introduce the reports
of the Fourth Committee in one statement.
Ms. Ferry (Monaco), Rapporteur of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) (spoke in French): I have the honour to
introduce to the General Assembly the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (the
Fourth Committee), submitted under agenda items
50 to 63 and 120 and 135. The reports, contained in
documents A/70/492 to A/70/529, include the texts of
draft resolutions and decisions recommended to the
General Assembly for adoption. For the convenience
of delegations, a checklist has been prepared by the
Secretariat containing actions taken in the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee, which is
contained in document A/C.4/70/INF/3.
During the main part of the seventieth session
of the General Assembly, the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee held a total of 25 formal
meetings, during the course of which it adopted 27 draft
resolutions and 3 draft decisions.
The first report, submitted under agenda item
50, entitled “University for Peace”, is contained in
document A/70/492. In the draft resolution submitted
under this agenda item and contained in paragraph 9
of the report of the Fourth Committee, the General
Assembly requests the Secretary-General to expand
the scope for using the services of the University as
part of his conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts
through the training of staff in these disciplines.

09/12/2015

make voluntary contributions to the general trust fund
established by the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme and also to make
contributions in kind, in order to support the work
of the Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation. The General Assembly also requests the
Secretary-General to provide the Assembly at its
seventy-second session with a list of the Member
States that have expressed their particular interest in
membership of the Committee between the sixty-sixth
and seventy-second sessions for consideration.
The fourth report, submitted under agenda item 53,
entitled “International cooperation in the peaceful uses
of outer space”, is contained in document A/70/495 and
contains two draft resolutions in paragraph 16. In the
draft decision found in paragraph 17 of the report, the
Fourth Committee also appoints six Member States as
members of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space.
In draft resolution I, the Assembly requests the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to
continue to consider, as a matter of priority, the ways
and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful
purposes and to report thereon to the Assembly at its
seventy-first session.
In draft resolution II, the Committee, inter alia,
agrees to reinstate several activities in 2016 under the
United Nations Programme on Space Applications.
During it consideration of the agenda item, the Fourth
Committee held a number of meetings of the Working
Group of the Whole, chaired by the delegation of
Algeria.

The second report, submitted under agenda item
51, entitled “Assistance in mine action”, is contained
in document A/70/493. The draft resolution submitted
under this agenda item is contained in paragraph 8 of
the report of the Fourth Committee.

The fifth report, submitted under agenda item 54,
entitled “United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East”, is contained in
document A/70/496. The Fourth Committee considered
the report of the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as well as other relevant
reports. The Committee adopted four draft resolutions
on various aspects of the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, as contained in paragraph 16 of the report.

The third report, submitted under agenda item 52,
entitled “Effects of atomic radiation”, is contained in
document A/70/494. In the draft resolution contained
in paragraph 8 of the report, the General Assembly
decides, inter alia, to encourage Member States to

The sixth report, submitted under agenda item
55, entitled “Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories”,
is contained in document A/70/497. The Fourth

8/24

15-41191

09/12/2015

A/70/PV.70

Committee considered the forty-seventh report of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
an Other Arab Inhabitants of the Occupied Territories,
as well as other reports by the Secretary-General. The
Fourth Committee proposes the adoption of five draft
resolutions contained in paragraph 19 of its report.

the Department of Public Information to disseminate
the message of the United Nations around the world.
The Fourth Committee adopted draft resolution A,
entitled “Information in the service of humanity”, and
draft resolution B, entitled “United Nations public
information policies and activities”. Both are contained
in paragraph 9 of the report.

The seventh report, relating to agenda item
56, “Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”,
is contained in document A/70/498. The Fourth
Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Deputy Secretary-General, as well as comprehensive
introductory statements by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations and the UnderSecretary-General for Field Support . Many of the issues
raised during the comprehensive general debate held
under this agenda item will be further considered by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at
its 2016 session, the report of which will be considered
by the Fourth Committee in a resumed session in the
first half of 2016.

With regard to the cluster of items on the non-selfgoverning territories and the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples — agenda items 59 to 63 — the Fourth Committee
considered those five items together. The Fourth
Committee held a general debate on those issues and
heard 80 petitioners on the various non-self-governing
territories as well as the Chief Minister of Gibraltar,
a minister of the Government of New Caledonia and
a senator from Guam. For the consideration of those
items, the General Assembly received the following
five reports: the report submitted under agenda item
59, entitled “Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under paragraph Article 73
e of the Charter of the United Nations”, contained in
document A/70/501; the report submitted under agenda
item 60, entitled “Economic and other activities which
affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories”, contained in document
A/70/502; the report submitted under agenda item 61,
entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations”,
contained in document A/70/503; the report submitted
under agenda item 62, entitled “Offers by Member
States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-governing Territories”, contained in document
А/70/504; and the report submitted under agenda item
63, entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples”, contained in document A/70/505. Under
that item, the Fourth Committee adopted seven draft
resolutions and a draft decision on issues relating to
the implementation of the Declaration and the Non-Self
Governing Territories, as contained in paragraphs 32
and 33 of the report.

This year, the Committee also jointly considered
items 56 and 57 of the agenda, in addition to the report
(A/70/357) of the Secretary-General on the future of
peacekeeping operations in order to follow up on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
The eighth report of the Committee, submitted
under item 57 of the agenda, entitled “Comprehensive
review of special political missions”, is contained in
document A/70/499. In accordance with paragraph 9 of
the draft resolution, the General Assembly requested
the Secretary-General to submit to it at its seventy-first
session a report on overall policy issues pertaining to
special political missions, including efforts towards
improving transparency, accountability, geographical
representation, the participation of women, expertise
and effectiveness.
The ninth report, submitted under item 58 of the
agenda, entitled “Questions relating to information”, is
contained in document A/70/500. The Fourth Committee
considered the report submitted to it by the Committee
on Information contained in document А/70/21 and
the related report of the Secretary-General contained
in document A/70/220. The Committee was briefed by
the Under-Secretary-General for Communications and
Public Information concerning the measures taken by

With regard to item 120 of the agenda, entitled
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”,
the draft decision on the proposed programme of work
and timetable of the Fourth Committee for the seventyfirst session of the General Assembly is contained

15-411919/24

A/70/PV.70

in document А/70/528. The Fourth Committee
recommends to the General Assembly to adopt the draft
decision.
The need did not arise for the Fourth Committee
to take up item 135, entitled “Programme planning”, as
indicated in the report of the Committee contained in
document А/70/529.
I have the honour to submit to the General
Assembly for consideration and adoption the draft
resolutions and draft decisions recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in its
reports, documents А/70/492 to А/70/529.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize
the spirit of cooperation that prevailed in the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee throughout its
work. The Committee was able to fulfil the mandate
entrusted to it by the General Assembly and to complete
its work effectively and constructively within the time
allotted. I wish to express, on behalf of the Bureau of the
Committee, our sincere appreciation to all delegations
for their constructive participation during this session.
In particular, I would like to pay tribute to the Chair
of the Fourth Committee, His Excellency Mr. Brian
Bowler of Malawi, whose knowledge and experience
in multilateral institutions enabled the Committee to
consider in depth all the agenda items allocated to it.
The other members of the Bureau — namely, Mr. Danijel
Medan of Croatia, Mr. Abdulaziz AlJarallah of Kuwait
and Mr. José Eduardo Proaño of Ecuador, with
whom I had the pleasure to work — also contributed
significantly to the successful conclusion of the work
of the Committee.
I would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretariat and to the Committee’s team in the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management for their support and effective assistance
throughout the session.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) for her introduction of the
Committee’s reports.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Special Political

10/24

09/12/2015

and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to the explanations of vote.
Before proceeding further, I wish to advise
members about how I intend to proceed to refer to the
reports of the Committee. In order to save time and
given that this morning the Assembly is taking up only
the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), I will only mention
the term “the Committee”, on the understanding that
the formal name of the Committee, the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee, will be reflected in the
official records.
As I hear no objection, we shall proceed accordingly.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records.
May I remind Members that, under paragraph 7
of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main
Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should,
as far as possible, explain its vote only once, that is,
either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless
that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee, I should like
to advise representatives that we are going to proceed
to take decisions in the same manner as was done in
the Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified to the
contrary in advance. That means that, where recorded
votes were taken, we will do the same. I should also
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.
I would also like to draw the attention of members
to a note by the Secretariat entitled “Checklist of the
reports of the Special Political and Decolonization

15-41191

09/12/2015

Committee (Fourth Committee) to the General
Assembly on agenda items 50 to 63, 120 and 135”,
which has been circulated, in English only, as document
A/C.4/70/INF/3. The note has been distributed deskto-desk in the General Assembly Hall as a reference
guide for action on the draft resolutions and decisions
recommended by the Committee in its reports. In that
connection, Members will find, in column 4 of the note,
the symbols of the draft resolutions and decisions of
the Committee, with the corresponding symbols of the
reports for action in the plenary in column 2 of the same
note. For reports containing multiple recommendations,
the draft resolution or decision number is contained in
column 3 of the note.
Furthermore, Members are reminded that
additional co-sponsors are no longer accepted now
that the Committee has adopted the draft resolutions
and decisions. Any clarification about co-sponsorship
should be addressed to the Secretary of the Committee.
Agenda item 50
University for Peace
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/492)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/79).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 50?
It was so decided.

A/70/PV.70

Agenda item 51
Assistance in mine action
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/493)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/80).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 51?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 52
Effects of atomic radiation
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/494)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/81).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 52?
It was so decided.

15-4119111/24

A/70/PV.70

Agenda item 53
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/495)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
two draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 16 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 17 of the
same report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution II, entitled
“Matters relating to activities under the United
Nations Programme on Space Applications in 2016”, is
postponed to a later date to allow time for the review
of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft
resolution II as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.
We will now take a decision on draft resolution I
and on the draft decision, one by one.
The Committee adopted draft resolution I, entitled
“International cooperation on the peaceful uses of outer
space”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/82).
The Acting President: We now turn to paragraph
17 of the report to take action on the draft decision
entitled “Increase in the membership of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,

12/24

09/12/2015

El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Chad, Iraq,
Kuwait, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Pakistan,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Yemen
The draft decision was adopted by a vote of 155 to
none, with 16 abstentions (decision 70/412).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Tunisia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.

15-41191

09/12/2015

Agenda item 54
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/496)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
four draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 16 of its report.
As there are no requests for the floor in explanation
of vote or position before we take action on the draft
resolutions, we will now take a decision on draft
resolutions I to IV, one by one. After all the decisions
have been taken, representatives will again have the
opportunity to explain their vote or position on any or
all of the draft resolutions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Assistance to Palestine refugees”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,

A/70/PV.70

Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Côte
d’Ivoire, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, Paraguay, United States
of America, Vanuatu
Draft resolution I was adopted by 167 votes to 1,
with 11 abstentions (resolution 70/83)
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled, “Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967
and subsequent hosilities.” A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,

15-4119113/24

A/70/PV.70

Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ghana, Honduras, Liberia, Paraguay
Draft resolution II was adopted by 164 votes to 7,
with 7 abstentions (resolution 70/84)
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Operations of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,

14/24

09/12/2015

Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Cameroon,
Vanuatu

Côte

d’Ivoire,

Nauru,

Paraguay,

Draft resolution III was adopted by 169 votes to 6,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 70/85)

15-41191

09/12/2015

The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Palestine refugees’ properties and their
revenues”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

A/70/PV.70

Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Paraguay, Vanuatu
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 167 votes to 7,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 70/86)
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 54?
It was so decided
Agenda item 55
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories
Report of the Special Political
andDecolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) (A/70/497)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
five draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 19 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I to V, one by one. After
all the decisions have been taken, representatives will
have an opportunity to explain their votes or positions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Work of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Gabon, Grenada, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s

15-4119115/24

A/70/PV.70

Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
Panama, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Draft resolution I was adopted by 92 votes to 9,
with 75 abstentions (resolution 70/87)
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab
territories”. A recorded vote has been requested.

09/12/2015

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America

A recorded vote was taken.

16/24

15-41191

09/12/2015

Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Paraguay, Togo, Vanuatu
Draft resolution II was adopted by 163 votes to 6,
with 8 abstentions (resolution 70/88).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied
Syrian Golan”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,

A/70/PV.70

Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Côte d’Ivoire, Honduras, Paraguay, Togo, Vanuatu
Draft resolution III was adopted by 161 votes to 7,
with 8 abstentions (resolution 70/89).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Mauritius
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Israeli practices affecting the human rights
of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New

15-4119117/24

A/70/PV.70

Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ghana, Honduras, Liberia, Malawi, Paraguay,
Togo, Vanuatu
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 158 votes to 8,
with 10 abstentions (resolution 70/90).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “The occupied Syrian Golan”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,

18/24

09/12/2015

Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Honduras, Liberia, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
Palau, Paraguay, Togo, Tonga, United States of
America, Vanuatu
Draft resolution V was adopted by 160 votes to 1,
with 16 abstentions (resolution 70/91).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Cyprus informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 55?
It was so decided.

15-41191

09/12/2015

Agenda item 56
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/498)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Committee contained in document A/70/498?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 56.

A/70/PV.70

without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution 70/93 A).
The Acting President: Draft resolution B is
entitled “United Nations public information policies
and activities”. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution 70/93 B).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 58?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 57

Agenda item 59

Comprehensive review of special political missions

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations

Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/499)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report. The Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/92).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 57?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 58
Questions relating to information
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/500)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
two draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions A
and B, one by one.
Draft resolution A is entitled “Information in
the service of humanity”. The Committee adopted it

Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/501)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic

15-4119119/24

A/70/PV.70

of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
France, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 175 votes to
none, with 4 abstentions (resolution 70/94).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Germany informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 59?
It was so decided.

20/24

09/12/2015

Agenda item 60
Economic and other activities which affect the interests
of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/502)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,

15-41191

09/12/2015

Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by a vote of 176 to
2, with 2 abstentions (resolution 70/95).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 60?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 61
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/503)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,

A/70/PV.70

Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by a vote of 126 to
none, with 53 abstentions (resolution 70/96).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 61?

15-4119121/24

A/70/PV.70

It was so decided.
Agenda item 62
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities
for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(À/70/504)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/97).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 62?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/505)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
seven draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 32 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 33 of the
same report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution VII, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”,
is postponed to a later date to allow time for the
review of its programme budget implications by the
Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action on
draft resolution VII as soon as the report of the Fifth
Committee on its programme budget implications is
available.
There being no requests for the floor in explanation
of vote or position, we will now take a decision on draft

22/24

09/12/2015

resolutions I to VI and on the draft decision, one by one.
After all the decisions have been taken, representatives
will again have an opportunity to explain their votes or
positions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Question
of Western Sahara”. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/98).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Question of New Caledonia”. The Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/99).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III
is entitled “Question of French Polynesia”. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 70/100).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Question of Tokelau”. The Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 70/101).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the
Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands”. The Committee adopted it without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 70/102).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Dissemination of information on decolonization”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,

15-41191

09/12/2015

Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
France
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 175 votes to 3,
with 1 abstention (resolution 70/103).
The Acting President: We will now take action
on the draft decision entitled “Question of Gibraltar”.
The Committee it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

A/70/PV.70

The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/520).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 63.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/528)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Fourth Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Proposed programme of work and timetable
for the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
for the seventy-first session of the General Assembly”.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/521).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 120.
Agenda item 135 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/529)
The Acting President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Fourth
Committee contained in document A/70/529?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 135.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to
thank Mr. Brian Bowler, Permanent Representative of
Malawi to the United Nations and Chair of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), the members of the Bureau and the
Secretary of the Committee, as well as representatives,
for a job well done.

15-4119123/24

A/70/PV.70

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Special Political

09/12/2015

and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
before it for this meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

24/24

15-41191
