S/2014/598

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 August 2014
Original: English

Twenty-eighth progress report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in Liberia
I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, by its resolution 2116 (2013), extended the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) until 30 September 2014, and
requested me to keep it informed of the situation in Liberia and the implementation
of that resolution. The present report provides an update on major developments
since my report of 18 February 2014 (S/2014/123), and contains the findings and
recommendations of a strategic review and electoral needs assessment missions
conducted during the period under review.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The October 2014 senatorial elections served as the backdrop of
developments, with political discourse dominated by controversies over allegations
of corruption, perceptions of economic injustice amid weak fiscal performance ,
community animosity towards concessionaires and public expressions of
dissatisfaction with national authorities.
3.
The National Elections Commission intensified preparations for the October
elections. Between January and March, the Commission updated the voter roll,
registering 104,710 new voters, well short of its target of 400,000, which it attributed
to public apathy. Just over 1.9 million Liberians are registered to vote, 49 per cent of
whom are women. While the Executive Branch has allocated $13.6 million for the
elections, delays in releasing the funds hampered preparations. Meanwhile, on
21 May, the Commission requested UNMIL to provide support for the elections. That
same day, a court in Monrovia ruled in favour of a petition by the Commission to
deregister 15 of 31 political parties for constitutional, procedural and other violations,
a decision upheld by the Supreme Court on 23 July. A request to deregister another
five parties is still being considered by a lower court. In June, the Legislatur e passed
the Election Law Amendment Bill, clarifying complaint mechanisms and
encouraging greater female participation as candidates and party executives. While a
code of conduct adopted in March requires lawmakers to declare their assets and

14-58631 (E)

200814

*1458631*

S/2014/598

stipulates that Government officials must resign three years prior to standing for
election, so far there has been no monitoring or enforcement.
4.
Political parties also prepared for the elections, with the ruling Unity Party
(UP) and opposition party Congress for Democratic Change (CDC) holding
primaries in June. UP selected its Chair, Varney Sherman, as its senatorial candidate
for Grand Cape Mount County and endorsed the re-selection of Senator Gbehzongar
Findley of Grand Bassa County, the President Pro-Tempore. Former presidential
candidate and CDC standard-bearer George Weah secured the party’s nomination for
Montserrado County, and CDC Secretary General Nathaniel McGill was nominated
for Gbarpolu County. However, procedural issues marred selection processes, and
partisans accused party executives of skewing primaries in favour of preferred
candidates. The nomination process took place from 2 to 24 July; a provisional list
of 140 candidates was announced by the National Elections Commission.
5.
Liberia’s weak economic performance triggered heated discussions,
particularly between the Executive Branch and the Legislature, which intensified
oversight activities. The House of Representatives summoned the Minister of
Finance and Planning twice in May, requesting an exp lanation for revenue shortfalls
that impeded implementation of the 2013/14 budget. On 16 May, President Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf submitted to the Legislature a proposed 2014/15 national budget of
$529 million, approximately $54 million less than for 2013/14; as at 1 August, the
legislative review continued. Responding to public concern about the economy, on
28 May, the President acknowledged declining economic growth.
6.
In May, the Legislature conducted public hearings on the General Audit
Commission’s reports on State entities between 2006 and 2010, though no action
followed. The House of Representatives also summoned the Minister of Public
Works in July to account for poor performance in infrastructural development and
maintenance; earlier, in February, the President announced an investigation into all
contracts between the ministry and construction companies, following findings of
the International Monetary Fund that contracts were issued without budgetary
allocations or proper procurement procedures. Meanwhile, on 15 July, the President
announced 48 Government nominations, which are pending Senate confirmation.
7.
On 16 June, Christopher Neyor, former president of the National Oil Company
of Liberia, published an open letter to President Johnson Sirleaf con taining detailed
allegations of nepotism, cronyism, corruption and political interference in the
management of the oil sector, including the solicitation of bribes, which allegedly
were used for her campaign activities in 2011 and now to advance the politi cal and
economic prospects of her son, Robert Sirleaf, former Chair of the Board of
Directors of the National Oil Company of Liberia. The President publicly denied the
allegations, while the House of Representatives and the Liberia Anti -Corruption
Commission announced their intentions to investigate. Meanwhile, Mr. Sirleaf and
Mr. Neyor announced their intention to contest the Montserrado senate seat as
independent candidates, respectively, on 17 July and 23 July.
8.
Concerns about the Government’s commitment to press freedom were
triggered by arrests of outspoken critics of the President. Radio journalist Henry
Costa was detained in March on charges of “terroristic threats” for statements made
during a broadcast about Fomba Sirleaf, the President’s stepson and head of the
National Security Agency. In July, publisher Octavin Williams was detained and
later charged with assaulting a police officer. The Press Union of Liberia publicly

2/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

condemned what it characterized as a “classic act of harassment” compelling selfcensorship of journalists.
9.
Some 500 people gathered on 3 July to protest the ArcelorMittal iron ore
company in Nimba County, claiming non-compliance with the company’s social
commitments. The demonstration escalated into a clash between the Liberi a
National Police and protesters, some of whom reportedly used firearms and
destroyed company property. UNMIL supported the response by national security
actors. Many protesters reportedly refused to engage in dialogue other than through
their Senator, Prince Johnson. The following day, Nimba County Representative
Prince Tokpa was briefly detained after demanding the release of arrested protesters;
57 persons were arrested for kidnapping and terroristic threats, among other
charges. On 10 July, President Johnson Sirleaf announced that the demonstration
was “an attack on the Liberian economy”, and that those involved would be
prosecuted. Government ministers and the head of the Nimba legislative caucus
subsequently met with the affected communities and constituted a peace and
recovery committee.

B.

National reconciliation and reform initiatives
10. Delays continued in the national reconciliation process, with the Palava Hut
programme launched last October stalled pending the development of an
implementation strategy. The national technical forum on reconciliation convened
irregularly. While funding has been lacking for reconciliation initiatives, the
Government committed $3 million for reconciliation in the proposed 2014/15
budget. In June, a national symposium provided an opportunity to discuss the
importance of reviewing national symbols, which is part of the National
Reconciliation Roadmap.
11. The Constitution Review Committee, supported by UNMIL and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), continued efforts to advance
constitutional reform. Though experiencing resource and organizational constraints,
the Committee completed in May simultaneous civic education and public
consultations, with support from the Peacebuilding Fund. Thousands of sub missions
were received during these consultations. As each proposed change requires
approval by referendum, the Committee intends to integrate issues arising from
consultations into a few proposed amendments, which it aims to submit to the
President and Legislature by the end of August.
12. The Ministry of Internal Affairs continued to implement its decentralization
programme, including consultations on possible changes to local government
structures, although the deconcentration of functions within the 14 entities identified
has yet to begin. A draft local government act proposing changes requiring
constitutional amendments, including streamlining administrative and statutory
districts and cities, and electing local authorities, has yet to be submitted to the
Legislature.
13. Proposed acts on land rights and the establishment of a new land authority, as
well as policies on land administration and alternative dispute resolution, are under
development, while the Legislature passed a land conveyance bill on 22 July. Six
land coordination centres established by the Land Commission continued to mediate

14-58631

3/22

S/2014/598

disputes, and the Commission is pursuing the development of an alternative dispute
resolution policy.

C.

Security situation
14. The overall security situation remained generally stable, though fragile.
Insecurity was characterized by tensions between concessionaires and affected
communities; high rates of sexual and gender-based violence, with 18 per cent of
reported cases involving children under 10 years of age; and armed robbery, with
one third of cases involving firearms; and inter-communal violence. Incidents of
mob violence decreased, owing in part to a joint Government and UNMIL
information campaign. UNMIL provided support to national security actors, w hich
continued to face challenges.
15. The incident that occurred on 3 July at ArcelorMittal, described in paragraph 9,
was the most serious security incident in almost three years, illustrating that
tensions between communities and international concessions represent a significant
security concern. Previously, following a week of failed negotiations in April,
youths had demonstrated against ArcelorMittal, claiming that the company had
failed to meet its social commitments. In March, workers and community members
protested against Golden Veroleum, in Grand Kru County, and BHP Billiton, in
Nimba County, for the same reason.
16. In March, a confrontation between Christians and traditionalists in Lofa
County resulted in the destruction of a church and reporte d incidents of beatings and
abductions. While district authorities settled the dispute, tensions remain.

D.

Regional issues
17. The situation in the area bordering Côte d’Ivoire remained generally stable,
notwithstanding attacks in Côte d’Ivoire near the border on 23 February and
15 May, resulting in the arrival of 600 Ivorian refugees. Additionally, as I reported
in my report of 15 May on the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
(S/2014/342), on 17 February Liberian and Ivorian security forces colluded in the
forcible return to Côte d’Ivoire of 21 Ivorians, including 14 holding refugee status,
raising concerns of refoulement.
18. On 17 June, a Monrovia court sentenced to life imprisonment 13 Liberians
found guilty of mercenarism in connection with two cross -border attacks into Côte
d’Ivoire, including the attack that resulted in the killing of seven United Nations
peacekeepers in June 2012. Five persons similarly charged were acquitted in May.
The case prompted critical reactions from some politicians, alleging targeting of
Grand Gedeans.

E.

Humanitarian situation
19. Since the start of 2014, 12,022 refugees have returned voluntarily to Côte
d’Ivoire with assistance from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), leaving approximately 37,700 Ivorian refugees in Liberia.
In March, the Tripartite Commission for the Voluntary Repatriation of Ivorian

4/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

Refugees expressed satisfaction at progress towards the return and reintegration of
refugees and agreed to accelerate the pace of voluntary repatriation; 37,727 refugees
remain in three camps and border communities in Liberia.
20. As indicated in my May report on UNOCI, the Ebola viral disease was
confirmed in Guinea, near the Liberian border, on 22 March, subsequently spreading
to Liberia and Sierra Leone. By 30 July, a total of 383 cases had been reported in
Liberia, resulting in 216 deaths, including of health-care workers. The Government
of Liberia, supported by the United Nations, initiated an awareness-raising
campaign, including messages carried in local languages on UNMIL Radio, and
revised its national response plan with support from the World Health Organization
(WHO). However, tradition, denial and community resistance proved difficult to
surmount. WHO and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) received
$617,000 from the United Nations central emergency response fund on 14 July.
While the Tripartite Commission comprising Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and UNHCR
agreed in March to accelerate voluntary returns, facilitated repatriations from
Liberia were suspended at the request of Côte d’Ivoire, resuming in June, and
suspended again in July amid a second wave of the virus. Facing a continuing
pandemic, the Government of Liberia launched an accelerated plan on 30 July,
seeking $20.9 million for its response effort.

F.

Human rights situation
21. The human rights situation was characterized by an absence of effective
mechanisms to guarantee accountability and ensure human rights protection; high
incidence of sexual and gender-based violence; and harmful traditional practices.
22. Harmful traditional practices included abduction, forced initiation into secret
societies and female genital cutting. Two incidents involving the Poro secret society
drew national attention, including the gang rape of a woman in Grand Cape Mount
County in April and the abduction and forced initiation of a police officer in
Gbarpolu County in May. In June, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the National
Council of Chiefs and Elders publicly condemned these incidents, reiterating
regulations on society activities. However, the perpetrators were not held
accountable.
23. The Government made some progress implementing the national human rig hts
action plan, identifying focal points and developing a monitoring framework. In
March, a national action plan on human trafficking was launched, and a proposed
strategy for fulfilling Liberia’s international human rights obligations is being
considered by the Cabinet.

G.

Economic situation
24. Economic growth slowed from 8.1 per cent in 2013 to 6.8 per cent in 2014,
with revenues affected by reduced global demand for commodities. Inflation rose to
9.8 per cent in April owing to exchange rate depreciation. Between December 2012
and April 2014, the Liberian dollar depreciated by 21 per cent against the United
States dollar, 6.5 per cent since mid-January, resulting in reduced spending power
for the most economically vulnerable people.

14-58631

5/22

S/2014/598

III. Development of national security and justice capacities
A.

Security transition
25. The handover of the UNMIL security functions progressed in accordance with
agreed timelines. National security agencies continued to serve as first line
responders, with UNMIL providing back-up when required. By June, Liberian
agencies had assumed responsibility for 81 per cent of static guard duties and all
road-bound cash escort functions. Four of 15 counties no longer have UNMIL
troops or formed police units deployed, creating public anxiety. Owing to the
Government’s financial and material constraints, the national security presence
remains thin across the country. In addition to providing back-up, UNMIL secures
international airports, two prisons and locations related to the security of the
President. The proposed 2014/15 budget reflects a 27 per cent increase in
allocations for the security sector over the previous fiscal year.

B.

National security strategy and architecture
26. A review of the national security strategy continued, as did efforts to
streamline the security architecture, with the Ministry of National Security and the
National Bureau of Investigation ceasing operations in February. In May, the
Ministry of Justice submitted a draft police act to the Pre sident that would provide
for improved recruitment and promotion systems, as well as stronger oversight
mechanisms, while insulating the police from political interference. Preparation of
alien and nationality legislation is under way, while proposed legislation on drugs
and the Drug Enforcement Agency are pending legislative approval. Liberia drew
closer to compliance with regional small arms conventions, acquiring two weapons marking machines in March that remain unused, and making appointments to the
national small arms commission.

C.

Liberia National Police
27. Despite some progress, the police struggled with inadequate manpower,
limited logistics, particularly vehicles, which fall far short of the requirements, and
a centralized organizational structure, which, along with insufficient incentives,
perpetuated understaffing outside of Monrovia. In many areas, the police rely on
UNMIL for transportation and other operational support. On 26 July, a new strategic
plan was launched to guide further police capacity development. With the
graduation of new recruits in May, the strength of the police stands at 4,846, of
whom 18 per cent are female; 23 per cent of police personnel are based outside of
Monrovia.
28. The middle- and senior-level management of the Liberia National Police
remained the focus of efforts to improve leadership and command, with 78 officers
to date completing training at the Ghana Institute of Management and Public
Administration. In March, the President appointed four senior police o fficials,
including three graduates of the programme. In July, training commenced at the
Liberia National Police training centre in Harper, although overall funding and
organizational constraints hampered training.

6/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

29. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and UNMIL
supported national law enforcement in the transnational crimes unit, which had
some operational success, despite lacking allocations for permanent operations.
Inter-agency collaboration on intelligence gathering, investigation an d operations
remained weak.

D.

Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
30. Efforts to professionalize the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
continued, including senior management training for 50 officers completed in July.
Command-level changes made in June sought to enhance accountability. However,
the Bureau requires greater capacity to control Liberia’s borders effectively, as well
as financial resources to deactivate nearly 600 unsuitable officers. The training of
new recruits is pending the completion of the rehabilitation of the Foya training
facility.

E.

Judicial, legal and corrections institutions
31. In April, the justice and security hub in Gbarnga became fully operational with
the inauguration of its circuit court. However, the operations of personnel deployed
to monitor human rights and advise on sexual and gender-based violence were
disrupted owing to government failure to provide for recurring costs. While
construction on the hubs in Zwedru and Harper has not begun, personne l, including
human rights monitors, prosecutors and public defenders, have begun providing
services. Initial assessments of the Gbarnga hub found that the provision of security
services is delayed by centralized reporting lines and command structures, and more
public outreach is required. Moreover, sustaining the hubs requires government
funding for recurrent costs.
32. As recommended by a management and accountability review conducted in
2013, the Department of Prosecution developed a strategic plan and i nitiated the
training of 20 prosecutors. The Supreme Court continued efforts to standardize court
fees and fines to increase judicial transparency.
33. Pretrial detention rates remained high, at 74 per cent. Insecurity at corrections
facilities remained a concern, with seven escape incidents and five prison
disturbances. Construction of a new prison in Cheesemanburg, near Monrovia,
began with support from the Peacebuilding Fund, though government funding will
be required for its completion. The Bureau of Co rrections and Rehabilitation faced
serious staffing shortfalls. In June, the training of 70 recruits, including 15 women,
began. The Bureau has 267 personnel, 20 per cent of whom are women.

F.

Armed Forces of Liberia
34. The National Defence Strategy of 11 February 2014, made public in July,
defines the role of the army as protecting territorial integrity, disaster response and
assisting the police in national emergencies. Under the strategy, the force should reach
2,500 personnel by mid-2015, an increase of some 25 per cent. In April, 134 recruits
completed basic training, bringing the strength of the armed forces to 2,040. The code

14-58631

7/22

S/2014/598

of military discipline was signed by the Minister of Defence in 2013, but has not yet
been ratified by the Legislature.
35. The United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) trained 16 army personnel
in explosive ordnance disposal, bringing to 32 the total number of army engineers
trained to an intermediate level. UNMAS and UNMIL are supporting the Ministries
of Defence and Justice on the modalities, operating procedures and timelines for
national assumption of explosive ordnance disposal responsibilities.
36. Liberia continued to contribute a platoon to the United
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

Nations

37. On 12 February, the President commissioned two defender boats for the coast
guard.

IV. Extension of State authority
A.

State authority
38. The Government continued to consolidate its authority throughout the country,
though challenges remained with respect to service delivery, which were most acute
in the health and education sectors. A report published in June by the Governance
Commission outlined these challenges. Services were disrupted by protests by
health and education workers over poor or unpaid benefits.
39. The Government prioritized infrastructure, energy and transport, including
electrification projects. Construction began on roads to connect Monrovia with Côte
d’Ivoire and Guinea, though most of the country remained inaccessible, particularly
during the rainy season.
40. Since January 2014, the Ministry of Finance expanded direct payroll deposits
to nine counties, facilitating salary payments to county authorities and increasing
transparency. In May, the Civil Service Agency and UNMIL carried out joint field
assessments revealing that local official absenteeism had reduced since the
devolution of some administrative functions. The Ministry of Internal Affairs began
a process to eliminate “ghost” and over-age workers from ministry records. Some
perceived this as an attempt to remove uncooperative chiefs from the payroll, which
could have implications during the electoral period.
41. The Ministry of Internal Affairs maintained a freeze of county development
funds imposed in December, pending an audit of 10 funds. In June, the Senate began
confirmation hearings for county assistant superintendents for fiscal and financial
management appointed by the President to manage the funds.

B.

Governance
42. The Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission increased audits, investigations and
prosecutions of corruption cases, and reviewed asset declarations, including those of
the President. While it investigated two cases involving former government
officials, the Commission has not yet taken action against 30 individuals believed to
have misrepresented their assets during a verification conducted in 2013.

8/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

43. On 15 May, the Executive Director of the Public Procurement and Concessions
Commission resigned, citing the reluctance of officials heading some public
corporations to abide by procurement procedures.

C.

Natural resources
44. Mining and agriculture activities generated tensions between companies and
communities. In February, the Government attempted to mediate long -running
disputes with communities opposed to the expansion of Equatorial Palm Oil in
Grand Bassa County and Golden Veroleum in Sinoe County. Both disputes remain
unresolved.
45. In February, representatives of communities in Gbarpolu, Grand Bassa, Lofa
and Rivercess counties threatened to halt logging activities unless they received the
30 per cent share of land rental fees owed to them by law. The Government
committed to paying $1.5 million, an amount disputed by the communities.
46. In February, the former managing director and five other senior officials of the
Forestry Development Authority were indicted on conspiracy charges related to the
irregular granting of private use permits. Thirty-four permits remain under review
for non-compliance with applicable regulations. In April, a moratorium on the
issuance of new community forestry management agreements was lifted, although
an internal investigation revealed continued flaws in the award process.
47. Diamond revenues were affected by monitoring difficulties a nd illicit mining.
The report of the March 2013 Kimberley review mission, published in May, outlined
areas of non-compliance with the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme,
including weak internal controls and records, and an inadequate licensing system.
48. In June, the Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, reporting on
extractive sector revenue during the 2011/12 period, revealed challenges such as
poor record-keeping across government entities, and recommended measures to
improve revenue collection and compliance, including additional audits and
establishment of sanctions mechanisms.
49. In March, the House of Representatives conducted consultations on the draft
petroleum bill and the National Oil Company of Liberia, during which partic ipants
questioned how Liberians would benefit from revenues stemming from the oil
sector.

V. Comparative advantages of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia and the country team
50. As indicated in my special report of 16 April 2012 (S/2012/230), the United
Nations in 2012 began the civilian transition process, cataloguing UNMIL civilian
tasks and conducting a capacity assessment of the country team. As I cautioned in
that report, this revealed that the country team was unlikely to be in a position to
assume most of the mission’s residual civilian functions, and planning should
therefore focus on identifying critical tasks that would eventually be transferred to
Liberian or other non-United Nations partners, or cease upon UNMIL withdrawal.
The process also revealed that, given positive developments in the country, UNMIL

14-58631

9/22

S/2014/598

no longer needed to fulfil child protection tasks beyond its general human rights
mandate, as support for the protection needs of children i s addressed by UNICEF.
51. Further to resolution 2116 (2013), UNMIL and the country team undertook a
follow-up exercise to identify their respective comparative advantages. Preliminary
findings showed that, generally, there is no duplication of effort, given the
fundamental differences between peacekeeping operations and country team
members, including mandates and resourcing, as well as integrated planning under
“Delivering as one”. It revealed several areas central to the mandate of UNMIL
where mission engagement is critical, and where synergies with the country team
and other partners remain important.
52. For example, while UNMIL has a comparative advantage in supporting access
to justice, UNDP, UNICEF and UNODC complement those activities with
specialized programming. While UNDP has an advantage in supporting the long term process of decentralization, UNMIL has greater geographic reach and political
leverage to support the process. Support to the constitutional review is a more timebound process requiring political facilitation from UNMIL, while UNDP provides
technical expertise. UNMIL and the country team also have complementary roles
with respect to gender and natural resource management.
53. Planning for the reconfiguration of United Nations engagement in Liberia will
continue. An effective and sustainable transition from peacekeeping will require
considerable efforts to secure voluntary funding for expanding the country team’s
interventions.

VI. Strategic review
54. As I informed in my report of 15 May 2014 on UNOCI (S/2014/342), the
United Nations engagement in West Africa will transform considerably in the
coming years, with the ongoing drawdown and eventual withdrawal of UNOCI and
UNMIL. While the trajectory in both Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire remains positive,
there are still serious political and security challenges, as well as latent threats,
which risk undermining the stability achieved over the past decade, facilitated by
regional and United Nations peacekeeping operations. I have therefore been
cautioning in my recent reports on UNMIL and UNOCI that every precaution must
be taken to prevent any serious reversal of the hard -won gains in the region. Prudent
planning for their eventual withdrawal is therefore essential, while ensuring that
they are adequately equipped to fulfil their mandated tasks and achieve their
strategic objectives.
55. Strategic reviews led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
comprising participants from the Department of Field Support, the Department of
Safety and Security, UNMIL and UNOCI visited Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and the
border area between the two countries from 7 to 19 February, to assess the strateg ic
contexts so as to ensure that the missions are appropriately configured to perform
their core mandated political and security tasks. Military and police capability
studies of both missions preceded the reviews. The members of the strategic review
received detailed briefings from UNMIL and UNOCI, and in Liberia consulted with
President Johnson Sirleaf and members of her Cabinet; members of the legislature;
representatives of political parties and civil society; the Governance Commission;
the leadership of the national army, police and other security agencies; members of

10/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

the donor and diplomatic communities; and the United Nations country team. The
team also travelled to Nimba and Grand Gedeh counties on the Liberian side of the
border and to Toulépleu on the Ivorian side, in order to consult with civil authorities
and security officials; community representatives, including traditional leaders,
women and youth; and Ivorian refugees and returnees. The findings and
recommendations pertaining to Côte d’Ivoire and the border area, including with
respect to intermission cooperation, are contained in my report of 15 May 2014 on
UNOCI (S/2014/342).

A.

Findings of the strategic review
56. A review of Liberia should be placed in its historical context, including nearly
a century and a half of constitutionally sanctioned exclusion of the vast majority of
the population, a quarter century of political crisis, and 14 years of successive,
brutal civil wars. What has been achieved since peace was restored in 2003,
including the return to democratic order in 2006, is remarkable. Socioeconomic
indicators have improved, and President Johnson Sirleaf has spearheaded reforms
focused on transforming the country. As the President has observed, Liberia’s
journey has not been easy and it is not over.
57. At the same time, the peace process is far from complete and risks reversal in
the absence of sincere efforts to address issues at the root of Liberia’s conflict,
including exclusion and impunity. The review found a fraught political environment,
characterized by deep public distrust of the Government and other political actors,
and lack of confidence in national institutions. Many interlocutors provided a
sobering assessment of the growing perception regarding a lack of political will and
sense of urgency in pursuing an inclusive national reconciliation process, enhancing
good governance or pursuing political reforms aimed at enlarging political space
and addressing historical injustices deeply entrenched in Liberia’s political,
economic and social fabric. Meanwhile, stressing their role in a democratic society,
civil society and media representatives pointed to examples of Government hostility
and tactics they characterized as punitive and intimidating.
58. Dynamics have also been affected by preparations for the October senatorial
elections and manoeuvring in advance of the 2017 presidential elections. Pointing to
the expected transfer of power to a new Government in January 2018, some
interlocutors assessed that much more progress should be achieved during the tenure
of the present administration, given its experience and international prestige. Most
urgent would be efforts to reform pre-war governance structures widely perceived as
enabling a narrow elite to benefit with impunity from corruption, nepotism and
cronyism, while most citizens still await the promised peace dividend.
59. There has been no apparent military threat in Liberia for several years.
However, risks continue to be posed by civil unrest and mob violence, which ignites
quickly, often escalating beyond the capability of national security institutions.
Moreover, risks remain that could be exacerbated by latent threats, many of which
led to the civil war, including deep divisions characterized by ethnic and regional
tensions, economic inequality and competition over national resources, land
disputes and the incomplete integration of former combatants. Serious concern was
also expressed about the large population of unemployed, unskilled youths having

14-58631

11/22

S/2014/598

nothing to lose from violent or other antisocial behaviour, who are vulnerable to
manipulation for political or other ends.
60. In 2012, the United Nations and the Government of Liberia agreed that the
gradual handover of the UNMIL security responsibilities would be conducted
gradually over two to three years, during which time the Government would
accelerate the build-up of national security capacity. It was further agreed to
combine a progressive geographic and functional handover of the UNMIL security
responsibilities, while the mission would simultaneously continue its military
drawdown. To date, there has not been any major security incident in areas that no
longer have an UNMIL military presence, though public percept ions of insecurity is
high, as deployment of additional national security personnel in those areas has been
limited, amid budgetary and other constraints.

B.

Recommendations of the strategic review
61. Given expectations that the 2017 presidential election and subsequent transfer
of power to a new administration in January 2018 will be a sensitive period for the
country, the security transition process, specifically the full handover of the UNMIL
security tasks to national authorities, should conclud e no later than 2016. This
would provide the Government with nearly two years to consolidate its efforts to
fully assume all its security responsibilities, including those most vital to national
security. It was also assessed that lack of progress on sensitive processes such as
national reconciliation and inclusive political reforms has contributed to a
continuing disarticulation between the operational achievement of security sector
reform and security sector governance. Therefore, at this stage of Liberia ’s postconflict recovery, it was assessed that there was a need to reimagine United Nations
support for the country. It is therefore recommended to further adjust the UNMIL
military and police components, as detailed in section VIII below, while also
strengthening the mandate of UNMIL in critical areas related to national
reconciliation and political processes, including through an explicit good offices
role for the Special Representative.

VII. Electoral needs assessment mission
62. The Liberian National Elections Commission, in a letter dated 29 January
2014, requested United Nations assistance in preparing for the presidential and
legislative elections scheduled for October 2017. Accordingly, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, in his capacity as the United Nations focal point for
electoral assistance activities, deployed an electoral needs assessment mission to
Liberia from 2 to 13 May, which included representatives from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP.
63. The assessment mission consulted broadly with Liberian and international
stakeholders, including the Commission; ministers and other senior Government
officials; Supreme Court justices; legislators; the Governance Commission; the
Constitutional Review Committee; representatives of opposition political parties and
civil society; media; members of donor and diplomatic communities; UNMIL; and
the United Nations country team. The mission assessed the political and electoral
environment and evaluated the legal and institutional framework for the elections

12/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

and the capacity of national elections stakeholders to develop recommendations on
the electoral assistance the United Nations should provide. The assessment mission
based its recommendations on the requirements for b uilding national capacity to
conduct electoral operations.

A.

Findings of the assessment mission
64. Considerable attention is already being focused on Liberia’s third post -conflict
presidential elections, scheduled for October 2017, with speculatio n about who
would succeed President Johnson Sirleaf, who is constitutionally serving her last
term in office. Meanwhile, preparations are under way for the 2014 senatorial
elections. Many parties have begun efforts to consolidate leadership and other party
structures, generating conflict within some political parties, while the campaign
period is scheduled to begin on 12 August. The high degree of interest in these
elections has heightened tensions among political parties, and between parties and
the Commission, in the absence of a fully functioning dialogue platform. The
deregistration of some parties was also controversial.
65. The situation remains stable, but fragile, given underlying tensions that could
be exacerbated during the electoral period, unless political and social challenges are
properly addressed, and socioeconomic development fairly benefits communities,
including unemployed youths. Interlocutors also expressed unease about election
security as UNMIL continues to draw down, given the slow build-up of national
security capacity.
66. Efforts to revise the legal framework for elections are under way. The
constitutional review could have implications for the 2017 elections, as several
issues relevant to elections and the scope of presidential appointments have been
proposed. In accordance with the Constitution, a national referendum on each
proposed change would have to be held at least one year after legislative approval. A
review of the electoral law has been under way since 2012, with a draft proposal
before the Legislature that would give the Commission greater autonomy, though it
maintains some contentious provisions, including the presidential power to appoint
all seven commissioners, subject to Senate confirmation, which opposition parties
believe compromises the independence and impartiality of the Commission.

B.

Recommendations of the assessment mission
67. In view of the possible escalation of political and social tensions, as well as
Liberia’s history of electoral violence, the mission recommended that all Liberian
stakeholders, supported by the United Nations and other international partners,
should redouble their efforts to facilitate constructive dialogue and undertake other
measures to provide reasonable guarantees that elector al outcomes would be
accepted by all stakeholders. It further recommended that the Inter-Party
Consultative Committee, which provides a forum for dialogue and engaging
political parties, should receive additional support to strengthen its effectiveness.
Efforts are also required to enhance the participation of women in electoral
processes, both as voters and candidates.
68. Given the primary responsibility of Liberian institutions for organizing and
conducting elections, the mission considered that building local capacities,

14-58631

13/22

S/2014/598

including for logistics, should be the primary focus of international electoral
assistance, which would mostly be provided through a UNDP -managed project. The
Commission would need to develop sustainable solutions for addressing the
persistent challenge of accessing remote areas for electoral processes.
69. UNMIL is not currently mandated to provide electoral assistance. The mission
recommended that the mandate of UNMIL be revised to include the provision of
logistical support to facilitate access to remote areas during the 2014 elections.
UNMIL should also work closely with national stakeholders to support the
development of a national security coordination mechanism involving all
institutions with a role in providing, financing or over seeing election security.
70. For the duration of its presence in Liberia, UNMIL, working closely with
UNDP, should coordinate electoral assistance to ensure harmonization and prevent
duplication. UNMIL should also have a mandate to support Liberian stake holders in
creating an environment conducive to the conduct of peaceful elections, including
through an explicit good offices role for the Special Representative.

VIII. Proposed adjustments to the United Nations Mission
in Liberia
A.

Military component
71. As indicated in my previous reports, UNMIL has been progressively drawing
down since 2006, bringing the mission from its peak of 15,250 troops to its current
strength of 4,619 military personnel. The force comprises four infantry battalions,
including a battalion-sized quick reaction force (2,750 troops); force headquarters
(82 staff officers); enabling units (1,654 personnel); and 133 military observers.
72. In my special report of 16 April 2012 (S/2013/230), I presented
recommendations for the further drawdown of UNMIL in three phases through
mid-2015, taking into account the threat environment and assessment of the time
required for building national capacity to assume the UNMIL security responsi bilities,
which would bring the mission to approximately 3,750 troops concentrated in
Monrovia and sensitive border areas. By its resolutions 2066 (2012) and 2116 (2013),
the Security Council endorsed those recommendations, while reaffirming the primary
responsibility of the Government for security and protecting civilians. The second
phase of the drawdown was completed in June 2014; consequently, UNMIL n o
longer has a military presence in 7 of 15 counties.
73. Owing to the challenges experienced by the Government in assuming greater
security responsibility, it would be prudent to maintain the drawdown timelines agreed
in 2012, which would involve reducing a further 988 military personnel by mid-2015,
leaving UNMIL with 3,631 troops, including three battalions deployed in Monrovia
and at the borders with Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea. Specifically, the adjustments would
include the repatriation of the quick reaction battalion (650 troops) and military
enablers, including one engineering unit (191 personnel), transport elements
(30 personnel), a military hospital (60 personnel), staff officers (29) and military
observers (28).
74. However, it could be possible to accelerate the military drawdown, taking into
account the lack of an apparent military threat, while ensuring that the mission

14/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

retains critical enabling capability, bringing UNMIL to a strength of 2,619 troops by
mid-2015. This could be achieved by repatriating the battalion and enablers as
detailed in paragraph 73 above, in addition to the battalion deployed at the border
with Guinea (700 personnel), as well as additional engineering assets (207 personnel)
and additional transport elements (105 personnel).
75. Under both options, in order to project military effect, UNMIL would focus on
high-risk areas, while shifting to a more mobile posture, requiring the retention of
all its military helicopters, and enhancing situational awareness and early warning
capabilities. UNMIL would continue to protect the population within its capabilities
and areas of deployment, without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the
Liberian authorities.
76. In view of the recommendation to complete the security transition by mid-2016,
it would be possible to drawdown further by then, bringing the UNMIL strength to
one battalion and required enablers by mid-2016, which would be consolidated in
Monrovia, in order to provide a rapid response capability to assist national secu rity
services in protecting the population as required. The regional quick reaction force to
be established within UNOCI in accordance with Security Council resolution 2162
(2014) could provide over-the-horizon support to UNMIL in the event of a serious
deterioration of the security situation in Liberia, without prejudice to its primary
responsibility for providing security in Côte d’Ivoire.

B.

Police component
77. As at 1 August, UNMIL police strength stood at 1,434, out of an authorized
strength of 1,763 personnel, including 498 police advisers, 1,265 personnel in
10 formed police units and 32 correction advisers. There are now eight formed
police units deployed in Liberia: three in Monrovia; one e ach in Gbarnga,
Greenville, and Voinjama; and one has been split to cover Tubmanburg and
Buchanan and another split to cover Zwedru and Harper.
78. In its resolution 2066 (2012), the Security Council authorized the deployment
of three additional formed police units. As indicated in my last report, one unit was
deployed to provide temporary support for the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) in January, while another was diverted to support the start-up of
MINUSMA. It is feasible to maintain the UNMIL police component at the currently
deployed level of eight formed police units. However, given the enhanced
requirements for supporting the development of the national security services, no
reduction of UNMIL police advisers is recommended. Additional advisers would be
added within the authorized ceiling to support the reform efforts of the national
immigration service.

C.

Support implications
79. The poor and limited infrastructure in Liberia presents unique challenges for
UNMIL. During the six-month rainy season, roads become impassable and cannot
sustain major logistics movements, and require repair during the dry season to allow
transport operations. There are no in-country commercial alternatives to the UNMIL
military engineering units that keep critical supply lines open; there are also serious
shortfalls in the national medical system. Despite the military drawdown, UNMIL is

14-58631

15/22

S/2014/598

still required to support civilian personnel, including police, d eployed throughout
the country. While commercial alternatives to the UNMIL military enablers may be
procured from outside of Liberia, this option would be prohibitively expensive.
Given the serious logistical challenges, UNMIL must retain military enabling
capabilities for the duration of its presence in Liberia, or the mission would not be
able to fulfil its mandate. The Government and the country team have been advised
to identify alternative options for their access to remote areas once the UNMIL
enablers are withdrawn.

D.

Safety and security of personnel
80. The Government has primary responsibility for ensuring the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and installations. While that capacity is being
developed, the United Nations relies on UNMIL as back-up for its civilian security
structure, which is sufficient in areas of the country without UNMIL troops, as the
threat to the Organization is assessed as low. Since 1 February, three incidents of
armed robbery targeting United Nations personnel were reported, in addition to
30 non-weapons-related crimes. Two national staff members, one soldier and one
police officer, died.

IX. Financial implications
81. The General Assembly, by its resolution 68/291 of 30 June 2014, appropriated
the amount of $427.3 million, equivalent to some $35.6 million per month, for the
maintenance of UNMIL for 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015. By the same resolution, the
General Assembly decided to assess among Member States, without setting a
precedent, $213.6 million limited for the period 1 July to 31 December 2014. Should
the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of UNMIL beyond 30 September
2014, the cost of maintaining UNMIL until 30 June 2015 would be limited to the
amounts approved by the General Assembly.
82. As at 30 July 2014, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNMIL amounted to $147.5 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $4,747.9 million.
83. As at 30 June 2014, amounts owed to troop and formed police contributors
totalled some $13.1 million. Reimbursement of troop/formed police and contingent owned equipment costs have been made for the period up to 30 April 2014 and
31 March 2014, respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

X. Observations
84. The October senatorial elections will be a litmus test for Liberia’s third post conflict presidential elections in 2017, which will be a watershed and measure of
sustained stability. The elections have set the context for political realignment and
heightened tensions, while also prompting clashes in concession areas. I welcome
the readiness of the National Electoral Commission to maint ain dialogue with
political parties, an important factor in managing a credible electoral process, even

16/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

as it faces heightened scrutiny. I would also urge the Government to ensure the
provision of adequate funding for the elections.
85. In 2011, the National Electoral Commission conducted elections that
international observers considered generally credible, although controversy,
including an opposition boycott and violence on the eve of the presidential run -off,
prompted national and international stakeholders to stress the urgency of
constitutional and electoral reforms to improve perceptions about the legitimacy,
transparency, fairness and inclusiveness of elections. Continuing opposition
perceptions about the partiality of the Commission, and general publ ic discontent
with public sector performance and the overall political environment, are therefore
concerning. The United Nations will respond positively to Liberia’s request for
electoral assistance for the period 2014-2018, primarily through a project managed
by UNDP.
86. I am encouraged that the security situation has remained calm as UNMIL
draws down, and welcome the excellent cooperation between the Government and
UNMIL on transition planning. However, while the handover of security functions
has progressed according to agreed timelines, limited national security presence and
crippling resource constraints raise concerns about national capacity to sustainably
fill gaps. It is encouraging that the Government has proposed increased allocations
for the security sector in the 2014/15 national budget, pending legislative approval;
however, there remains an urgent need to identify funding sources to address the
urgent logistical and mobility gaps of the Liberia National Police.
87. I would also stress the critical need for an overarching strategy for addressing
institutional weaknesses, which will become even more apparent as Liberian
institutions assume greater security responsibility. It will be important that the
Government formulate a concrete plan, with timelines and benchmarks, for building
its security sector in tandem with the UNMIL drawdown, detailing leadership,
coordination, monitoring and resources. Maintaining momentum in efforts to
professionalize the Liberia National Police is essential. Oversight mechanisms are
also critical and, in that regard, I would urge the early passage of the Police Act. I
also welcome that many recent appointments to the police’s senior leadership have
come from within the ranks, and would encourage further reform of promot ion and
manpower policies, with a view to reducing over-concentration of the police in
Monrovia.
88. The Constitution Review Committee has made important progress, despite
facing serious constraints, including tight timelines, and concerns of civil society
regarding a perceived predetermination to narrow the constitutional review. I would
stress to all parties the importance of a transparent and inclusive process that meets
the expectations of all Liberians.
89. I remain concerned about the slow pace of taking forward meaningful national
reconciliation, including by addressing structural inequalities, enhancing
accountable governance and building the democratic foundations of a nation
reflecting the aspirations of all Liberians, and would urge the people and
Government of Liberia to bring a renewed sense of urgency to the important work of
building a unified nation for the future, while healing the cleavages of the past. The
five-year anniversary of the release of the important report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission at the end of June provides an opportunity to help
transform the social and institutional fabric of the country.

14-58631

17/22

S/2014/598

90. Natural resources are essential to the Liberian economy, and should provide
equitable benefits for the economic develop ment of all and the consolidation of
peace. The Government has a critical role to play in mitigating conflict, enhancing
transparency and reducing corruption. In that regard, I would urge the Government
to implement appropriate consultation and dispute resolution mechanisms, and fasttrack ongoing land reform initiatives.
91. Important progress has been made in decentralizing justice and security
services through the hub in Gbarnga and the initiation of services by future hubs in
Zwedru and Harper. However, it will be critical that the Government provide for the
hubs’ recurring costs. It is concerning that a high incidence of sexual and gender based violence persists, and I would reiterate the importance of addressing impunity
and strengthening the rule of law throughout the country.
92. Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone have been hit by a devastating outbreak of
the Ebola viral disease, which has taken the lives of far too many. I wish to pay
tribute to the national and international health-care workers and community leaders
who have lost their lives treating the sick and sensitizing people about this highly
contagious virus. In all three countries, fear, denial and distrust undermine the
efforts of the brave women and men who are so courageously working to p revent its
further spread. I welcome the efforts made by the Governments to contain the virus.
The United Nations will continue to fully support those efforts, and I call upon
partners to urgently and generously support the Governments of these three
countries in controlling this vicious epidemic.
93. While some of the 13 Liberians convicted of the crime of mercenarism were
implicated in the killing of seven UNOCI peacekeepers in June 2012, I wish to
reiterate my expectation that Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire will bring the perpetrators of
that international crime to justice, and that Liberia will domesticate the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. I welcome continued efforts to
implement the Mano River Union cross-border security strategy, and would
encourage the two Governments to work together within this framework, with
support from UNMIL and UNOCI and the United Nations country teams.
94. Liberia’s institutions remain weak, limiting the ability of the Government to
deliver services to its citizens in most sectors. Building professional, effective and
credible national institutions will require a renewed effort on the part of the
Government to ensure the allocation of appropriate financial and human resources,
and that reforms are undertaken to enhance transparency. In that regard, I welcome
measures such as the passage of the code of conduct for civil servants, and would
urge the implementation of complementary policies to address the continued lack of
accountability, including empowering the Anti-Corruption Commission to impose
sanctions.
95. At this juncture, we must reimagine the role of the United Nations in Liberia,
with UNMIL enhancing its focus on core political and security tasks. I therefore
recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of UNMIL for one year,
until 30 September 2015, while supplementing the political role played by my
Special Representative with an explicit good offices mandate, which would focus on
facilitating national reconciliation and political reform, and an environment
conducive to peaceful and transparent elections, which includes due attention to the
rule of law. I also recommend that the mission be mandated to provide logistical
support for the October 2014 senatorial elections, limited to facilitating access to

18/22

14-58631

S/2014/598

remote areas. United Nations support for subsequent electoral processes would
focus on supporting the coordination of international assistance, to ensure
coherence, as well as national capacity-building.
96. Though Liberia no longer faces any apparent military threat, national security
institutions are still working to develop their capacity to maintain stability and
protect the population without support from a peacekeeping operation. I would
therefore recommend the drawdown of UNMIL uniformed personnel, as elaborated
in paragraphs 73 and 78 of the present report, resulting in an authorized strength of
3,631 military and 1,515 police personnel by mid -2015. The primary focus of
UNMIL would be protecting civilians within its capabilities and areas of
deployment.
97. Looking ahead to the sensitive period that Liberia will enter in 2017, I further
recommend that the security transition conclude by mid -2016, at which point the
Government should fully assume security responsibility throughout the entir e
country. UNMIL would therefore draw down to one battalion and appropriate
enablers, or some 1,500 troops, by mid-2016, which would remain until the
withdrawal of the mission. I welcome resolution 2162 (2014), authorizing the
establishment within UNOCI of a regional quick reaction force that could deploy in
Liberia in the event of a serious deterioration of security, as well as its approval to
use all UNMIL and UNOCI military aviation assets in both count ries. However,
Liberia will require long-term support for sustaining its institutions, and should
explore options for bilateral or regional partnerships in preparation for the
withdrawal of UNMIL.
98. I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative for Liberia,
Karin Landgren, and all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel for their
commitment to peace in Liberia. I am also grateful to troop - and police-contributing
countries, the African Union, ECOWAS, the Mano River Union and other regional
organizations, multilateral and bilateral partners, United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, non-governmental organizations and other partners for supporting the
consolidation of peace in Liberia.

14-58631

19/22

S/2014/598

Annex
United Nations Mission in Liberia: military and police
strength as at 1 August 2014
Military component
Military
observers

Staff
officers

Argentina

0

0

0

0

12

Bangladesh

13

7

508

528

15

Benin

1

1

0

2

0

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

2

1

0

3

0

Bosnia and Herzegovina

0

0

0

0

9

Brazil

2

2

0

4

0

Bulgaria

1

0

0

1

China

2

6

558

566

Croatia

0

2

0

2

0

Czech Republic

0

0

0

0

0

Denmark

3

2

0

5

0

Ecuador

2

1

0

3

0

Egypt

7

0

0

7

5

El Salvador

2

0

0

2

2

Ethiopia

9

4

0

13

0

Fiji

0

0

0

0

27

Finland

1

3

0

4

0

Gambia

1

0

0

1

16

Germany

0

0

0

0

5

Ghana

9

9

693

711

India

0

0

0

0

Indonesia

1

0

0

1

0

Jamaica

0

0

0

0

0

Jordan

1

5

0

6

Kenya

0

2

0

2

24

Kyrgyzstan

3

0

0

3

4

Lithuania

0

0

0

0

1

Malaysia

6

0

0

6

0

Mali

0

0

0

0

0

Mongolia

0

0

0

0

0

Montenegro

1

0

0

1

0

Namibia

0

3

0

3

3

Nepal

2

3

15

20

Niger

1

0

0

1

Country

20/22

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Civilian
police

0
140

19

30
243

234

260

7

13

16
0

14-58631

S/2014/598

Military component

14-58631

Country

Military
observers

Staff
officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Civilian
police

Nigeria

13

7

1 397

1 417

120

16

Norway

0

0

0

0

7

Pakistan

9

8

890

907

0

Paraguay

2

1

0

3

0

Peru

2

1

0

3

0

Philippines

2

1

114

117

29

Poland

1

0

0

1

3

Republic of Korea

1

1

0

2

3

Republic of Moldova

2

0

0

2

2

Romania

2

0

0

2

4

Russian Federation

3

0

0

3

10

Rwanda

0

0

0

0

5

Samoa

0

0

0

0

0

Senegal

0

2

0

2

0

Serbia

4

0

0

4

6

Sri Lanka

0

0

0

0

15

Sweden

0

0

0

0

14

Switzerland

0

0

0

0

2

Thailand

0

0

0

0

3

Togo

2

1

0

3

0

Turkey

0

0

0

0

17

Uganda

0

0

0

0

14

Ukraine

2

2

206

210

19

United States of America

4

5

0

9

4

Uruguay

0

0

0

0

3

Yemen

0

1

0

1

9

Zambia

3

0

0

3

16

Zimbabwe

2

0

0

2

30

Total

124

81

4 381

4 586

997

437

21/22

S/2014/598

22/22

14-58631
