Reeolutious adopted oa the report.a of the Fourth Con1mittee

of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the
end that such education may be raised as soon as possible to the level enjoyed by the peoples of the advanced
countries;
2. Invites the Administering Members to communicate to the Secretary-General, for the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly, information on the
measures taken and the progress achieved towards the
establishment of universal, free and compulsory primary
education, with the aim of eradicating illiteracy among
the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
which they administer.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1464 (XIV). Equal treatment in matters relating
to education in Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General, Assembly,
RecaUing its resolution 328 (IV) of 2 December
1949 on equal treatment in matters relating to education
in Non-Self-Governing Territories, and all other relevant resolutions,
Having regard to the fundamental importance of race
relations, particularly under modern conditions, for the
attainment of the objectives of Chapter XI of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Having considered the special report submitted by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories, 29
Recognizing that some progress has been achieved in
equal treatment in matters relating to education in
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 328 (IV) ;
2. Urges the Administering Members to intensify
their efforts to fulfil the basic objectives of the abovementioned resolution ;
3. Endorses the view expressed by the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
that on no ground whatsoever can education on a racial
basis be justified ;30
4. Requests the Committee to pay special attention
to this matter and to continue to bring out the salient
facts in its annual report on conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1465 (XIV). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling the obligations of Member States, enumerated in Chapter XI of the Charter of the United
Nations, which have or assume responsibilities for
the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories
towards the inhabitants of these Territories,
Reiterating the principle that the interests of the
inhabitants of these Territories are paramount,
C onsi.dering it necessary that the political, economic,
social and educational advancement of these inhabitants,
as envisaged in the Charter, should he accelerated,
211 Ibid., paras. 30-38.
ao Ibid., para. 37.

SS

Re.caUing the principle uaderlying the public information activities of the United Nations that the Organization cannot achieve the purposes for which it has been
created unless the pe.oples of the world are informed
of its aims and activities,
Considering therefore that it is important that the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories be widely
informed concerning the United Nations,
1. Requests the Administering Members to adopt
necessarv measures for the dissemination of information
concerning the United Nations among the inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories and for this purpose
to seek the active support and participation of the
organizations representative of these inhabitants;
2. Invites the attention of Administering Members
to the recommendations contained in paragraph 54 of
part two of the 1959 report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories, 31 and
requests them to furnish the Secretary-General with
information concerning the implementation of the
recommendations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
fifteenth session of the General Assembly a special
report on the present state of the dissemination of
information concerning the United Nations in NonSdf-Coverning Territories, and un further measures
necessary to this end.
855th p!roary mel'tinr,,
12 December 1959.

1466 (XIV). Participation of the Non-Self-Gov•
erning Territories in the work of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies
The General Assembly,
Rcralling its resolution 5(i6 (VI) of 18 January 1952,
and in JJarticular:
(a) The first preambular paragraph, in which it noted
the Secretary-General's proposal concerning the use of
the Cnited Nations to promote by peaceful mean, the
progress of dependent peoples to a position of equality
with Member States of the lJnited Nations,
( b) The fourth prean1bular paragraph, in which it
stated that the direct association of the N 011-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies is an effective
means of promoting the progress of the peoples of
those Territories towards a position of equality with
Member States of the United Nations,
( c) Operative paragraph 2, in whic-h it commended
the use of the spec-ial provisions in the constitutions of
some of the specialized agencies and of the regional
t·con,nnic commissions of the United \'ations permitting
1he admission of the No11-Self-Govcrni11g Territories
to those agencies and commissions as assoriate memh~rs,
1111 tht' proposal of the Administering Member concerned,
Rerallin_q its rt'solutions 647 (\"IT) of 10 Dect>mbcr
1G5:.? and 7•+~ ! V f I I ) of :.?7 N ovcmber 1953, in whic-h
1t re:iffirnwcl the provisions of the above-mentioned
resolution Jll(] expressly im·ite<l the Member States
administering Non-Self-Governing Territories progressively to increase the participation of indigenous representatives from those Territories in the work of the
technical organs of the United Nations, including the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories and the specialized agencies,
81 fbid., Supflletn-ent No. 15

(A/4111).
