United Nations

S/PV.6274

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6274th meeting
Friday, 19 February 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-24612 (E)

*1024612*

S/PV.6274

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Haiti, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mérorès
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.

staging area for the relief operation, I thanked the
Government for its exemplary cooperation and its
contribution to the relief effort in Haiti. I visited a
public hospital, in which severely injured Haitians,
including children, have been receiving life-saving
medical treatment. I also visited the border area
between the Dominican Republic and Haiti to see in
particular the fragile and flood-prone road corridor
through which large quantities of relief supplies enter
Haiti. This road must be repaired and strengthened
urgently, before the rainy season causes major damage
and blocks it.
In Haiti I visited Léogâne, the epicentre of the
earthquake, where its devastating effects were
particularly clear, before going on to Port-au-Prince to
look at progress there, as well as to meet the
Government and the many actors, humanitarian and
military, engaged in the relief operation.
Let me repeat first of all that the national and
local authorities, civil society and the people of Haiti
themselves have coped with extraordinary resilience
and patience in the midst of devastation on a scale
which has rarely been seen, particularly in a capital
city. Life of all kinds was visibly returning to the
streets. Meanwhile, a large and complex humanitarian
response is in place, despite the destruction of
government, United Nations and non-governmental
organization (NGO) offices, the loss of many key
personnel and the initial absence of so many basic
services.

Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on my visit to Haiti
and the Dominican Republic last week and on the
humanitarian situation in Haiti.

It was heartening to see the determination shown
by United Nations, NGO and Red Cross/Red Crescent
national and international staff in the field. They have
worked tirelessly since just hours after the earthquake
struck, in often dreadful working and living conditions
themselves, to launch the relief operation in support of
the Haitian people. Let me also pay tribute to the
peacekeepers of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and United Nations
police, as well as to the other military forces, who are
all playing a vital role, using their indispensable assets
and helping to distribute aid safely and to maintain
public order.

The aim of my trip, following an initial visit with
the Secretary-General four days after the earthquake,
was to review on the ground the challenges the
humanitarian community faces in the months ahead. In
the Dominican Republic, a vital logistics hub and

The humanitarian situation is now gradually
improving on a daily basis. The worst of the medical
emergency is behind us. More than 3 million people
have received food rations and continue to do so on an
increasingly targeted basis. Clean water is available for

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. John Holmes and Mr. Alain Le Roy. I now give
the floor to Mr. Holmes.

2

10-24612

S/PV.6274

the vast majority of those in need. Essential
infrastructure — such as the port, airport, electricity
and telecommunications facilities and most roads,
which during the first days and weeks were bottlenecks
for relief and aid workers trying to get into the
country — is increasingly operational. Every day,
larger quantities of relief supplies are reaching Haiti
and being distributed.
Nevertheless, it is clear that not everyone in need
has yet been reached and that we have much more to
do on the ground, particularly in terms of emergency
shelter, other non-food items and sanitation. The
estimated 1.2 million Haitians in need of emergency
shelter support desperately need a waterproof cover
over their heads, and we are still only 30 per cent there.
We are straining every nerve to speed up the delivery
of shelter materials, mainly plastic sheeting, but also
tents, before the rains begin in earnest. This shelter and
sanitation surge is the top priority.
While life may be returning in some ways, the
devastating effect of the earthquake is still abundantly
evident in the capital and elsewhere. Around 3 million
people — one in every three Haitians — were badly
affected by the earthquake. The majority of those are in
the capital, Port-au-Prince, but also in other
surrounding towns and cities, including Jacmel, and the
epicentre, Léogâne, where 80 per cent of buildings
were destroyed. It was encouraging to see in Léogâne
that, despite the initial difficulties involved in reaching
the city, a good deal was happening in terms of relief
assistance. Over 70 organizations are on the ground in
Léogâne, including an office of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Cooperation
with the large and effective Canadian military presence
was clearly good. Food and shelter distribution had
made good progress.
However, it was also clear that some of the
informal sites, where those unable to return to their
homes were living, were not sustainable. They were
overcrowded, liable to flood and at serious risk of fire
from cooking in the makeshift shelters. The
identification of alternative sites is a challenge, but
land should be easier to find in Léogâne than in the
more congested and geographically challenging context
of Port-au-Prince itself.
In Port-au-Prince, I visited an informal camp in
the grounds of the Pétionville Club, where tens of
thousands of people have taken refuge. It was both

10-24612

encouraging and worrying. It was encouraging because
the camp seemed well organized and relatively clean,
with good availability of food and shelter material, a
rudimentary school already established and a calm
atmosphere overall. There was excellent cooperation
between the NGOs and the United States forces on the
spot. But it was worrying, again, because of the very
obvious unsuitability and unsustainability of the site
once the rainy season begins. The steep slopes and
floodable area at the bottom of the site mean that a lot
of people must be moved out soon. But there is
nowhere for them to go until alternative, more
acceptable sites are made available. I give this detail
because there are many similar sites with high risk of
flooding that also need to be decongested. So,
provision of suitable land is a high priority, and we are
working with the Government on this.
In a meeting with President Préval and
Government ministers, I thanked him for the
Government’s continued leadership and engagement
with the United Nations and partners. He was
understandably anxious to see faster progress, on
shelter in particular. I assured him that we were doing
our utmost to meet the emergency shelter and
sanitation requirements before the rainy season, as well
as making an early start on the huge task of rubble
removal: rapid clearance of some urban sites would
free up areas to which the people on currently
congested sites could move. To do this, we need to
mobilize urgently more heavy equipment, including
assets which the military and the private sector can
provide, to supplement the efforts of the 75,000
Haitians who have already been engaged in United
Nations cash-for-work programmes. We also need to
start a systematic effort to assess earthquake-affected
structures, to decide which need demolition, which can
be repaired and which can be used.
The cluster approach that the international
humanitarian community has developed since the
Asian tsunami five years ago is proving its worth in
improving coordination and the effectiveness of the
response. Local cluster leadership is being reinforced,
faced with a catastrophe of this magnitude and the
900-plus organizations on the ground whose efforts
need to be coordinated. A Deputy Humanitarian
Coordinator has also now been deployed to Port-auPrince, not least to strengthen and expand partnerships
with key stakeholders, including bilateral donors,
military forces and private actors.

3

S/PV.6274

The situation in Port-Au-Prince, the capital, and
surrounding towns has been the main focus of relief
efforts so far, but there are huge needs elsewhere too,
which require a nationwide response. Nearly half a
million people have left earthquake-affected areas and
dispersed around the country. Many have gone to areas
that were already highly vulnerable before the
earthquake. Host families and communities have been
very generous, but are poorly placed to feed and look
after their guests for long. Help is badly needed for all
concerned and is now a priority for the relief operation.

There are no instant solutions. It will take time to
cover all these needs and care to maintain help to the
most vulnerable without creating dangerous aid
dependency. But we must not waver in helping several
million people not only to survive this catastrophe, but
also to rebuild better, more prosperous lives and
livelihoods for the future.

While we continue to refine our assessment of the
humanitarian needs, the longer-term post-disaster
needs assessment process is now under way in parallel
to look at reconstruction and redevelopment
requirements. We need to make sure that our relief
efforts pave the way as effectively as possible for this
phase to enable Haiti to be built back better, which is
the overriding aim of us all.

Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Since the tragedy
of 12 January, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has focused on three main
objectives: supporting and facilitating relief operations,
ensuring law and order and security, and — given its
enormous losses in personnel and infrastructure —
restoring the Mission’s capacities.

On the resource mobilization front, I thank all
Member States and private donors again for
contributing generously to the relief operation and
fully funding the initial six-month Haiti flash appeal.
However, sustained and additional support will be
necessary for the long haul before us. The SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Clinton, launched yesterday the revised humanitarian
appeal, taking into account not only relief needs but
also early recovery help to be delivered within a
12-month time frame, including in key areas such as
health, education and agriculture. The revised appeal,
for a total of $1.4 billion, includes the amounts raised
in response to the initial six-month appeal. Unmet
needs therefore amount to $768 million, which is the
amount we are asking for now to fund projects from
54 non-governmental organizations, 21 United Nations
agencies and the International Organization for
Migration. They include plans for the upcoming rainy
and hurricane seasons, not least transitional shelter
requirements, as well as vital disaster-risk reduction
measures.
In sum, the humanitarian situation in Haiti is
undoubtedly improving day by day, but we are under
no illusion about the scale of the challenges still ahead
for the next weeks and months. The international
humanitarian community will continue to support the
Haitian Government in addressing the most urgent
needs and gaps as the longer-term recovery and
reconstruction processes gather pace in parallel.

4

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Holmes for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.

I should like to begin by referring to the
Mission’s capacities. MINUSTAH, as members of the
Council are aware, has lost 91 staff members, including
the head of Mission. Over the past five weeks, we have
not only replaced our deceased colleagues, but also
deployed additional personnel and resources. More
than 300 officers have been dispatched to reinforce the
Mission.
As everyone knows, military operations have
continued, in particular led by the Brazilian and other
contingents deployed to MINUSTAH and to our police
forces. Thanks to the timely decision of the Security
Council to increase authorized troop numbers, we are
currently strengthening those military and police
capabilities. We intend to deploy more than 1,500
troops and up to 500 additional police officers by the
second week of March, and they should be operational
in April. Of course, I wish to thank the many Member
States that have offered troops and police to
MINUSTAH in recent weeks. Those reinforcements are
crucial at this very critical time.
A flexible approach to resource management
allowed MINUSTAH to react immediately to the
unprecedented challenges raised by the earthquake. In
the coming weeks, we shall ask Member States for
additional resources, initially on the basis of a
preliminary study, before we submit a new, detailed
budget.
In the days that followed the earthquake,
MINUSTAH redirected its efforts and, to the extent

10-24612

S/PV.6274

possible, supported the delivery and distribution of
humanitarian assistance. Since then, in close
cooperation with the United States and Canadian
military on the ground, we have guaranteed security
and provided logistical support to the humanitarian
effort. This has been a true challenge, but I am
convinced that the mechanisms we have established to
coordinate the international presence in that area and
its support of the Haitian authorities have considerably
improved the situation.
Our United States and Canadian bilateral partners
will gradually reduce their presence, although it is
important that those reductions and withdrawals
correspond to benchmarks and transfers scheduled
jointly with MINUSTAH. I was very pleased to receive
confirmation in Washington, D.C. yesterday that the
United States shared that view.
Allow me to say a few words about the security
situation and the rule of law as a whole. Following the
earthquake, one of MINUSTAH’s main priorities was
to restore law and order in the affected zones and the
capacities of the Haitian National Police (HNP). To
that end, more than 70 per cent of the MINUSTAH
police were redeployed in the affected zones. Like all
Government institutions, the HNP was several
impacted by the earthquake. Some 40 per cent of its
facilities and equipment is no longer operational.
While the vast majority of officers have resumed their
duties, the HNP’s intervention capacity is severely
limited by the loss of vehicles, communications
systems and essential databases. Nevertheless, since
the earthquake the HNP has proved to be very effective
and has contributed significantly to restoring the
general calm that has prevailed in the affected zones.
The judicial apparatus has also been affected. The
Ministry of Justice and Public Security, the Palace of
Justice, the Court of Cassation and the trial courthouse
have been destroyed. Several judges have been killed.
Apart from the small number of particularly urgent
cases, the judicial process has been largely suspended
in the zones affected by the earthquake. Of the
country’s 17 prisons, eight have been totally or
partially destroyed, and nearly 5,000 detainees —
60 per cent of the prison population — have escaped.
Several hundred of these fugitives are considered to be
particularly dangerous. Some 80 per cent of those who
have escaped were in provisional custody.

10-24612

Today, the security situation remains stable, but
potentially fragile. The deterioration in living
conditions has led to an increase in such crimes as
robbery, mugging and looting. Of course, we fear a
resumption of gang violence, despite the fact that it has
hitherto been limited largely to internal power
struggles, as those who escaped seek to regain control
of their former turfs. The HNP and MINUSTAH are
following the situation very closely.
Despite the relative stability, we are aware that
the current calm is extremely precarious. If are unable
to meet humanitarian imperatives — in particular the
need for shelter before the rainy season — Haitians
will become increasingly frustrated, opening the door
to possible political manipulation. We must critically
address this potential source of instability in the weeks
and months to come. Security will also depend on our
ability to help the police, judicial and penal systems
not only to recover the resources that were at their
disposal before the earthquake, but also to increase
them, inter alia, by training new officers.
(spoke in English)
Just as important as the physical security of Haiti
and its people is the question of political stability, the
lack of which has often caused violent tensions in the
past. The legislative elections planned for the end of
March have now been postponed by President Préva1.
They may be held later this year or even in 2011.
While this decision has been broadly supported by all
political forces, it raises very significant constitutional
questions about the period following 10 May, when the
mandates of the members of the lower house and of a
large number of senators expire. Ensuring full
legislative capacity beyond 10 May is a key challenge
that will need to be resolved quickly.
There have also been calls to replace the current
Government, for example with a gouvernement de salut
public that would include members of the opposition.
Others have emphasized the need to restructure the
Government and form a new Cabinet that can deal with
the complex challenges ahead. Some parties have
accused the Government of political favouritism in the
distribution of aid.
At the same time, there has been no shortage of
ideas on how to move forward. Several political parties
and electoral platforms have engaged in consultations
on critical issues ranging from governance, elections
and constitutional reform to decentralization. The

5

S/PV.6274

Prime Minister himself has advocated fundamental
changes, including decentralization of the Government
and greater focus on the regions. A number of highprofile private sector leaders are actively involved in
the humanitarian response and see the current situation
as an opportunity to steer reconstruction efforts
towards a modernization of the State architecture by
initiating critical socio-economic reforms.
It is of the utmost urgency that such discussions
now be channelled into an executive-led dialogue on
the political way forward. Otherwise, spoilers may take
advantage of the fluid and fragile political situation to
spark instability. President Préval, in recent weeks, has
rightly focused on the relief activities, and his
leadership is now required more than ever. It is now
more important than ever for the Government to
engage all political forces in substantive discussions on
key governance issues, to work constructively with the
private sector, and to enhance its communication and
outreach efforts to the Haitian public. The Government
of Haiti is fully aware of this and of the need to reach
broad political consensus before the 31 March donors’
conference, and the United Nations stands ready to
support such an effort by the Government.
There is no doubt that the earthquake has
fundamentally changed the context in which
MINUSTAH is operating. And there is no doubt that
this will have — as in fact it has already had —
implications for the role of MINUSTAH and the
broader United Nations. The damage to Haiti’s
legislative,
administrative,
socio-economic,
educational
and
cultural
centres
has
been
unprecedented. The Government of Haiti has lost much
of its infrastructure and a large number of its civil
servants, with devastating consequences for its ability
to deliver basic services and to deal with the
emergency at hand.
That Haiti needs assistance — lots of it — is of
course very clear. However, much less clear right now
is exactly what kind of assistance is required and how
such assistance should best be delivered. The postdisaster needs assessment — which was launched, as
John Holmes said, on 18 February — should address
much of this. It is a very important process which is led
by the Haitian Government and supported by the
United Nations, the Inter-American Development
Bank, the World Bank and the European Commission,
and will provide a crucial basis for the 31 March
donors’ conference. The outcomes of the post-disaster

6

needs assessment and the discussions at the New York
conference will provide a much better basis to plan for
MINUSTAH’s future and that of the broader United
Nations engagement.
Yesterday, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mulet attended a meeting of
development ministers of the European Union on Haiti.
Among the topics discussed were the important issue
of shelter and the issue of division of labour among
donors, which would help to lessen the burden of
coordination on the Haitian Government. This issue
will undoubtedly be taken up at the New York
conference.
To conclude, I would like to recall that the
earthquake hit Haiti at the moment when the country
was, for the first time in nearly five decades, making
significant strides toward stabilization and governance.
With the support of MINUSTAH, Haiti had organized
successful presidential and parliamentary elections,
established an unprecedented level of security, and set
strategies in motion for economic reconstruction and
development that contributed to two years of
successive
economic
growth.
Planning
for
comprehensive constitutional and administrative
reform was very much under way. Haiti finally had a
national vision and a road map for sustainable peace
and development.
The earthquake has, of course, caused
unprecedented destruction and suffering, but it has not
destroyed that vision. The international community and
the United Nations must come together behind the
Government of Haiti and align their interventions and
long-term plans with a national vision for
reconstruction. This will require a sustainable level of
support, in terms of both resources and technical
assistance. In doing so, we need to empower the
Government and not supplant it.
I count on the Council’s support to ensure that
MINUSTAH will continue to have the means required
to help Haiti through this challenge.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Le Roy for his briefing.
Before I give the floor to the Haitian
Ambassador, all of my colleagues will no doubt join
me in paying tribute to the work of United Nations
personnel on the ground in difficult conditions. I would
ask Mr. Holmes and Mr. Le Roy to convey the

10-24612

S/PV.6274

appreciation of all Security Council members to their
personnel.

quickly and extended to people and places throughout
the country that have yet to receive them.

I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

Thus, the revised $1.44 billion flash appeal
launched yesterday by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, which will assist 3 million
people gravely affected by the catastrophe by the end
of the year, comes at the right moment. As we know,
more than 1.2 million people require emergency
assistance in terms of shelter and sanitation needs. At
least 2 million people require food assistance. The host
families and communities assisting displaced persons
who have fled the most heavily impacted cities are
bearing that weighty burden with virtually no help, and
they need assistance as well. At the same time, the
Government needs assistance to re-establish the
agricultural sector as the hurricane season approaches.

Mr. Mérorès (Haiti) (spoke in French): I am very
grateful to you, Sir, for having organized this meeting
of the Council to hear the very edifying briefings of
Mr. Holmes and Mr. Le Roy, which, in the view of the
Haitian delegation, reflect the tireless commitment of
the entire international community to the ongoing
effort to assist, re-establish and rebuild my country.
The woes unleashed upon Haiti on 12 January
have given the international community an opportunity
each day to express its great solidarity and compassion
for a wounded people that continues to be battered by
fate. It is also another opportunity for me and for
President Préval, as he has done many times, to
sincerely thank the great comity of nations and to
express the gratitude of the Government and people of
Haiti for the overwhelming generosity exhibited in this
tragic situation. I take this opportunity to once again
convey the condolences of the people and Government
of Haiti to the United Nations and the families of staff
members of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) who have been so sorely tested.
The Haitian delegation welcomes resolution 1908
(2010), adopted last
month, endorsing the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to increase
the overall force levels of MINUSTAH. We welcome
that timely decision and, on behalf of the Government,
thank the troop-contributing countries and through
them their Governments that promptly acceded to that
request.
In spite of improved conditions on the ground, as
today’s speakers have noted, the situation remains of
great concern. The humanitarian needs are immense,
and urgent action must therefore be taken to meet the
requirements of the population. The heavy toll is
known to all — more than 270,000 deaths, more than
250,000 public, commercial and residential buildings
destroyed, and more than 1 million people living in the
streets or public areas. These figures speak for
themselves, and have also been reflected in televised
images.
Until the situation is stabilized, and given the
urgent need to prepare for the coming rainy season,
assistance and recovery activities must be strengthened

10-24612

A significant problem mentioned by Mr. Le Roy
is public security. It is important to note that, although
the security situation has remained relatively stable
since 12 January, there have been various instances of
banditry not only in the capital but also throughout the
country. Over 4,000 escaped prisoners, including some
of the most dangerous criminals, are still roaming the
streets and beginning to resume their activities. They
pose a potential threat to life and property, and the
Government is in the process of tracking them down.
With the assistance of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, the Haitian National Police is
working to apprehend them to ensure that they can do
no further harm.
The Government continues to mobilize itself to
prepare for the ministerial meeting on Haiti’s
reconstruction to be held on 31 March. A
comprehensive reconstruction plan will be presented to
our various partners that will cover all the basic
elements necessary to the viable reconstruction and
sustainable development of the country. It will be an
arduous task. International solidarity allowed us to
quickly address the situation in the first few hours
following the quake. The conference will be another
step in the enormous effort of building the new Haiti
sought by the Government and people of our country.
That cannot be done without the support of the
international community. I should like in advance, on
behalf of the Government and people of Haiti, to thank
the international community, which has always stood
by us.

7

S/PV.6274

The President (spoke in French): As the
representative of Haiti knows, he can count on the
support of the entire Security Council in the great
effort to provide emergency assistance and to rebuild
Haiti.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of its prior consultations, I now invite the
members of the Council to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

8

10-24612
