A /75/PV.59

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

59th plenary meeting

Friday, 16 April 2021, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of John Pombe Joseph
Magufuli, President of the United Republic
of Tanzania
The President: It is my sad duty to pay tribute to
the memory of His Excellency Mr. John Pombe Joseph
Magufuli, President of the United Republic of Tanzania,
who passed away on 17 March. On behalf of the General
Assembly, I would like to ask the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania to convey our condolences
to the Government and the people of Tanzania and to
the President’s bereaved family.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to express my deepest condolences to the family of
President Magufuli and to the Government and the
people of the United Republic of Tanzania on the
President’s passing. Tanzania is a cherished member of
the United Nations family and a committed supporter
of multilateralism. President Magufuli embodied that
sentiment at the general debate in September, when he
pledged, through the Permanent Representative, that
“the United Republic of Tanzania will continue to
render the necessary support to the United Nations
in ensuring success in all important global agendas,
including the promotion of the equality and selfdetermination of nations, peace and security,
human rights, development, the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda and the United Nations reform
processes.” (A/75/PV.15, pp. 13-14)

Tanzania’s commitment to multilateralism is
particularly evident through its contribution to United
Nations peacekeeping. More than 2,000 Tanzanian
peacekeepers are currently serving in six operations,
demonstrating Tanzania’s commitment to peace and
security, the cornerstones of social development.
Tanzania and the United Nations are close development
partners and have a rich history of working together. In
2007, Tanzania became one of eight countries worldwide
to pilot the Delivering as One reforms. Today, 23 United
Nations agencies are closely working to implement the
United Nations Development Assistance Plan 20162021, which supports the Government in achieving
the objectives of its national visions, the Tanzania
Development Vision 2025 and the Zanzibar Vision
2020, as well as the Sustainable Development Goals.
President Magufuli was a champion of Tanzania’s
development. During his time in office, he invested in
many large infrastructure projects such as a standardgauge railway, major highways and bridges and the
upgrading of ports and ships. He championed the
building of health-care and clean water facilities.
He also focused on the youth of Tanzania, devoting
resources to educating Tanzania’s future doctors,
lawyers, engineers and teachers and raising enrolment
in primary schools by more than 50 per cent in five
years. Those achievements will long be remembered
here at the United Nations. I wish the people of Tanzania
and the family of the President well as they mourn this
great loss.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-09455 (E)

*2109455*

A/75/PV.59

I now ask representatives to join me in observing a
minute of silence in tribute to the memory of President
John Pombe Joseph Magufuli.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: We are gathered today
to honour the memory of His Excellency Mr. John
Magufuli, the late President of the United Republic
of Tanzania. As we convey our condolences to the
Government and the people of the United Republic of
Tanzania, we also recognize the service of President
Magufuli. He sought to expand access to social
services and tackle corruption. The late President
was a noted proponent of infrastructure development
and industrialization — vital tools for economic
advancement. Tanzania reached its ambition of
becoming a middle-income country four years ahead of
its 2025 goal. The late President also helped strengthen
the education system and increased the enrolment of
new students in secondary schools. Furthermore, his
Government improved rural electrification with the
aim of expanding Tanzania’s electricity-generation
capacity to ensure nationwide access to energy.
On behalf of the United Nations, I once again
offer our condolences to the late President’s family,
the Government and the people of the United Republic
of Tanzania. We recognize Tanzania’s long history of
support for multilateralism and applaud its dedication
to international and regional cooperation. I would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate and reinforce the
commitment of the United Nations to continue working
closely with his successor, President Samia Suluhu
Hassan, the country’s first woman President. We stand
with the people of Tanzania in advancing sustainable
development and supporting their aspiration for a
prosperous Tanzania for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of the Congo, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Balé (Congo) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Group of African States, I have the sad duty to
address this solemn ceremony of the General Assembly
and pay posthumous tribute to a great statesman,
President John Pombe Joseph Magufuli of the United
Republic of Tanzania, who passed away on 17 March.
2/11

16/04/2021

I bow to the memory of the late President and extend
our deepest condolences to the Government and brother
people of Tanzania who have been bereaved by the
sudden death of this distinguished African leader. I
also want to extend my condolences to his family.
In these dark hours for Tanzania, the members of
the African Group would like to express their solidarity
and deepest sympathy with their Tanzanian brothers and
sisters. Figuratively, we use the term “bulldozer” — a
powerful earth-moving machine mounted on a tractor
on caterpillar tracks and used to dig soil and level
ground — to describe a person who is undeterred by
any obstacle, and the sobriquet suited the builder who
was President Magufuli perfectly. After his election in
2015, he committed his Government to an ambitious
programme of infrastructure construction for his
country’s economic and social development. His first
five years in office were marked by emblematic projects
building roads, railways and extension bridges and
modernizing ports and airports, along with a number
of socioeconomic achievements. He also earned his
nickname of “Bulldozer” through his relentless fight
against corruption and simultaneous commitment to
fiscal consolidation and rationalization. Thanks to his
far-sighted economic governance, putting the national
interest first, Tanzania’s growth rate was among the
highest in Africa at 5.5 per cent in 2018 and trending
upward at around 6 per cent in 2019.
President Magufuli was a believer, and as if
prophesying he once said, speaking in English,
“One day you will remember me. I know one day
you will remember me, not for bad things but for
good deeds, because I have sacrificed my life for
the poor in Tanzania.”
The eradication of poverty was one of his priorities and
his hobby horse. As if to echo that prophecy, the whole
of Tanzania, grieving but grateful, gave him a tribute
and funeral worthy of a hero. The passing of an iconic
pan-Africanist political figure, so loved and appreciated
by his people, is a difficult and painful ordeal. May his
soul rest in eternal peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait): On behalf of the Group
of Asia-Pacific States, I would like to extend our deepest
and most sincere condolences to the Government and
21-09455

16/04/2021

the people of the United Republic of Tanzania and to
our colleagues at the Permanent Mission of Tanzania
on the passing of their late President, His Excellency
Mr. John Magufuli, on 17 March.
It was with great sorrow that we learned of the
passing of the President last month. He was a man of
devout faith, who served his country and people with
distinction throughout his political career. President
Magufuli was devoted to bringing growth and prosperity
to the people of Tanzania as he strove to develop his
country’s economy and infrastructure. His efforts
to combat corruption will also be remembered as he
looked to build a more transparent and affluent nation
for his people. Over the years, President Magufuli
took concrete steps to unlock his country’s potential,
and his reform efforts were recognized by the people
of Tanzania as significant strides towards progress and
development across many sectors, including health,
education and transport. He leaves behind a country
filled with hope that it will continue to build on what
he started.
I would like to conclude by once again reiterating
the heartfelt condolences of the members of the AsiaPacific Group to the late President’s family and loved
ones. May he rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Ms. Dinculescu (Romania): I am taking the floor
on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States to
express our deepest condolences to the Government
and the people of the United Republic of Tanzania on
the passing of His Excellency Mr. John Pombe Joseph
Magufuli, late President of the United Republic of
Tanzania and a well-known political figure of the
African continent who had a significant influence
on his country’s development. President Magufuli
played a major role in Tanzanian politics for several
decades. Prior to his presidency, he served as Minister
of Works, Transport and Communications from 2000
to 2005 and from 2010 to 2015, and was Chair of the
Southern African Development Community from 2019
to 2020. His efforts and determination, especially in
promoting the economic advancement of Tanzania, will
be remembered and remain a lasting legacy. We would
like to take this opportunity to express our confidence
that Tanzania will continue its efforts to ensure the
well-being and prosperity of its people and make a

A/75/PV.59

noteworthy contribution to the African continent. May
his soul rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
honoured to speak on this solemn occasion on behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States in
order to pay tribute to His Excellency Mr. John Pombe
Joseph Magufuli, the late President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, a statesman who served as the
leader of the people of Tanzania during his five years
in office and as Transport Minister before that. During
his tenure President Magufuli worked to eradicate
corruption, improve public services and promote
public health as the country was fighting the spread of
cholera. As soon as he took office in 2015 he embarked
on a process aimed at transforming his country’s
infrastructure, improving its system’s efficiency
and connecting markets in his region through the
introduction of agricultural technology and by building
railways and a road network that is growing by the day.
The international community, and in particular our
sister region of Africa, has lost a leader who advocated
for redefining the role of public service in pursuit of
the effective service delivery that the entire population
deserves. We should pay tribute to him. The Member
States of Latin America and the Caribbean, and their
Permanent Representatives here at the United Nations,
express their deepest condolences to his family and to
the Government and the people of the United Republic
of Tanzania, and their hope that they may find solace in
his lasting legacy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Western
European and other States. On Wednesday, 17 March,
we received with sadness the news of the passing of
President John Pombe Joseph Magufuli of the United
Republic of Tanzania. On behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States, I would like to
extend our sincere condolences to the Government and
the people of Tanzania and to the family and friends of
President Magufuli.

21-094553/11

A/75/PV.59

We meet here today to contemplate the memory of
the late President and great African leader and to reflect
on his loss. President Magufuli will be remembered for
his desire and action to realize the dreams of the first
President of Tanzania, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere. We
will also remember his perseverance and dedication in
transforming and developing Tanzania. As soon as he
was sworn in, we witnessed how President Magufuli
worked vigorously to root out corruption while at
the same time promoting an improved public-service
ethos for civil servants and politicians alike. He lived
to see Tanzania achieve the status of middle-income
country, an ambition that was set for 2025 but had
already been reached before the sad event we are
commemorating today.
We applaud Tanzania’s strong commitment to
constitutionalism as shown in its strict adherence to
the constitutionally prescribed process and provisions
with regard to President Magufuli’s successor, and
we welcome President Samia Suluhu Hassan as a new
member of the growing United Nations community of
women Heads of State and Government. We pledge our
full support to her in the new role and responsibilities
that have been conferred on her.
On behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States, I would once again like to extend our
heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and to
the Government and the people of the United Republic
of Tanzania.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): On
behalf of the Government and the people of the United
States, I would like to begin by extending our deepest
sympathies to the wife and children of the late President
John Pombe Joseph Magufuli, his extended family and
friends and all the people of Tanzania.
As we gather here today, we remember a man
who took immense pride in leading Tanzania and
consistently reminded all of us of his country’s history
as a leader in securing independence and promoting
sustainable development across the continent of Africa.
When President Magufuli assumed office in 2015, my
Government saw the sense of urgency that he brought
to the fight against corruption and heard his desire to
improve the efficiency of the Tanzanian Government.
When he took steps to cut down the size of presidential
4/11

16/04/2021

delegations and shrink his Cabinet, we took notice.
We also took notice of Tanzania’s improvement in
transparency metrics and of President Magufuli’s
efforts to strengthen his Government’s corruption
accountability mechanisms. May his memory be a
blessing for those commemorating his life and tenure.
His successor, President Samia Suluhu Hassan,
and her Government are in our thoughts during this
difficult time of transition. The United States has a
long history of partnership with the people of Tanzania.
We stand with all Tanzanians as they seek to move
forward, united in their determination to build a more
democratic, healthy and prosperous society. We are
committed to working with Tanzania’s new leaders and
support their efforts as they strive to build that society
for all Tanzanians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Gastorn (United Republic of Tanzania): Let
me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, on behalf of
Her Excellency Samia Suluhu Hassan, the President
and Commander-in-Chief of the United Republic of
Tanzania, the Government and the people of the United
Republic of Tanzania, and on my own behalf, for
organizing this meeting to pay tribute to the memory
of my late President, Mr. John Pombe Joseph Magufuli,
who passed away on 17 March. This is an immense
honour, and we are deeply humbled. The gesture attests
to the importance that the membership attaches to the
spirit of solidarity within the United Nations. I thank
all those present unreservedly for the kind words and
heartfelt condolences expressed to me, and through me
to the Government and the people of the United Republic
of Tanzania and especially to the bereaved family.
Life has seasons. It has been said that every so
often — very rarely — people who are the best of their
generation are gifted to the world. Our late President
Magufuli was one of those rare people. He discovered
the mission of his generation and never betrayed it. His
love for God and his nation, his trust in his people and
his charisma made him a remarkable person, with the
dignity of a President but a common touch. He was a
towering figure who inspired many across the world
and spoke truth to power, through tough love and in the
tradition of humility. Among his peers, he conducted
himself with remarkable candour.
He will always stand out as an unrelenting and
hard-working leader, a true patriot and great statesman
21-09455

16/04/2021

with a humble and selfless disposition. He was a
paragon of virtue, an economic national who believed
unapologetically in self-development. He was also a
visionary leader and ardent pan-Africanist who believed
that Tanzanians, Africans and all of humankind
deserved the best. Taking over from his predecessors’
achievements, he was an architect of the contemporary
infrastructural development of Tanzania, and his
development philosophy and anti-corruption drive
created a unity of purpose and actions that propelled
Tanzania to the status of a middle-income country in the
lower category nearly five years ahead of the projected
time. He was a champion of self-determination and
initiated several daring strategic institutional and
regulatory reforms in order to build an independent
and sustainable economy with self-reliance at its core.
He was a true believer in global solidarity and a force
for stability in the search for greater understanding and
harmony among the peoples of the world. May God rest
his soul in everlasting peace.
The chapter of the fifth phase Government of
Tanzania has closed and a new chapter has opened
smoothly. On 19 March, Her Excellency Ms. Samia
Suluhu Hassan was sworn in as the sixth President
and Commander-in-Chief of the United Republic of
Tanzania. We are proud as a nation and grateful to
have ushered to the helm the first woman President in
the history of our country. She is currently the only
woman Head of State and Government in Africa, and
we could not be prouder. President Suluhu Hassan is
patriotic, a seasoned politician with high principles,
a visionary stateswoman and a staunch supporter of
multilateralism. She is no stranger to this Organization,
and her commitment to and belief in the ideals of the
Charter of the United Nations is unquestionable. Under
her leadership, the United Republic of Tanzania will
continue to be a faithful member of the United Nations
and what it stands for — international peace and
security, human rights, development and the well-being
of the human race. The President has already taken over
the leadership with unprecedented vitality, humility,
creativity, speed and passion with regard to achieving
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Finally, on this solemn occasion in which we are
gathered to honour the memory of the late President
John Pombe Joseph Magufuli, let me conclude by
recalling what the late President of the United Republic
of Tanzania Benjamin William Mkapa said at the
passing of the father of our nation, Mwalimu Julius

A/75/PV.59

Nyerere, in 1999. “Our world is composed of givers
and takers. The takers may eat better, but the givers
sleep better.” Indeed, in death as in life, President John
Pombe Joseph Magufuli sleeps better, for his entire life
was one of giving, not taking. He died a fulfilled man at
the age of 61, and history will remember him fondly. I
thank the Assembly for the kindness and courtesy with
which it has listened to me.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 139, 141, 147 and 148.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Tsu Tang Terrence Teo of Singapore, to introduce
in one intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee
before the Assembly.
Mr. Teo (Singapore), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour to present to the General
Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee containing
recommendations on issues considered during the first
part of the resumed seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly. The Fifth Committee met from 1 to 26 March
and held three plenary meetings, as well as numerous
informal and informal-informal consultations.
I shall now present the reports of the Fifth
Committee containing recommendations on issues that
require action by the General Assembly.
Regarding agenda item 141, “Proposed programme
budget for 2021”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained
in document A/75/682/Add.1, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of a draft resolution on special subjects relating to the
programme budget for 2021, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 147, “Joint Inspection Unit”,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/75/830, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 148, “United Nations
common system”, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/75/670/Add.1, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
a draft resolution adopted by the Committee without
a vote.

21-094555/11

A/75/PV.59

Finally, regarding agenda item 139, “Review of
the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 6 of its
report A/75/683/Add.1, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft decision
entitled “Questions deferred for future consideration”,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
I thank delegations for their cooperation and
spirit of compromise, which enabled the Committee to
finish its work on time. I would also like to thank the
Chair of the Committee, Ambassador Carlos Amorín
of Uruguay, and his team, Fernanda Silvera Flores,
for their guidance and encouragement. I also thank
my colleagues in the Bureau, Katlego Mmalane of
Botswana, Jakub Chmielewski of Poland and Armağan
Crabtree of Turkey, with whom we have always had
robust and good-hearted exchanges. I look forward to
working with them to ensure the success of the second
part of the resumed session, to take place in May,
when the Committee will focus on the financing of
peacekeeping operations. Finally, I would also like to
give special thanks to the Fifth Committee secretariat,
led by Lionelito Berridge and his team, Wiryanto
Sumitro, Sarah Mueller, Geraldine Velandria, Lindsay
Edwards, Ilene McGrade and Rogena Inductivo, for
their tireless and admirable dedication to their work.
The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee for his report.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall therefore
take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. I would like
to remind members that in accordance with General
Assembly decision 34/401, a delegation should, as far
as possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either
in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from
its vote in the Committee, and that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
6/11

16/04/2021

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we will proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 147
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/830)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 75/270).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 147.
Agenda item 148
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/670/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(resolution 75/245B).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 148.
21-09455

16/04/2021

A/75/PV.59

Agenda item 141

action on this document, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of the sub-item.

Proposed programme budget for 2021
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/682/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for 2021”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(resolution 75/253B).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 141.
Agenda item 139
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/683/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Questions deferred for future consideration”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 75/553B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 139.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it at this meeting.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of sub-item
(d) of agenda item 120 at its 30th plenary meeting on
23 November 2020. In order for the Assembly to take

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 18 September 2020, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (d) of
agenda item 120 to the Fifth Committee. To enable the
Assembly to proceed expeditiously on this sub-item
today, may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
sub-item (d) of agenda item 120 directly in plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504B).
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(d) Appointment of members of the International
Civil Service Commission
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/104/Add.1)
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda
item 120.
In his note, the Secretary-General informs the
General Assembly that he has received notification
of the resignation of Luis Mariano Hermosillo Sosa,
of Mexico, from the International Civil Service
Commission, effective 22 February 2021. The Assembly
will therefore be required to appoint, at its current
session, a person to fill the vacancy for the remainder
of Mr. Hermosillo Sosa’s term of office, which expires
on 31 December 2021. The Secretary-General also
informs the General Assembly that the Government
of Mexico has nominated Claudia Angélica Bueno
Reynaga to fill the vacancy arising from the resignation
of Mr. Hermosillo Sosa.
The Secretary-General further informs the
Assembly that he has undertaken consultations with
Member States, through the Chairs of the various
regional groups; with the executive heads of the other
organizations; with staff representatives, through the
Federation of International Civil Servants’ Associations
and the Coordinating Committee for International Staff

21-094557/11

A/75/PV.59

Unions and Associations of the United Nations System;
and with the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, pursuant to the provisions of
articles 3 to 5 of the Statute of the International Civil
Service Commission and in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 43/226, section II, paragraphs 3
and 4.
May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to appoint Claudia Angélica Bueno Reynaga
as a member of the International Civil Service
Commission for a term of office beginning on the date
of appointment by the General Assembly and ending on
31 December 2021?
It was so decided (decision 75/407 B).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting on 18 September 2020, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 19 to the
Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on draft resolution A/75/L.73,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 19 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504B).
Agenda item 19
Sustainable development (continued)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.73)
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 19 to take
action on the draft resolution contained in document
A/75/L.73. I give the floor to the representative of
Kyrgyzstan to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.73.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): Today we
are considering important draft resolutions for our
Organization, and I am glad that we in this Hall are
8/11

16/04/2021

showing our unity and ambition to move forward on the
path to sustainable development.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
adopted in 2015, became a universal and comprehensive
plan that considers all aspects of sustainable
development. The goals and targets outlined in that
cornerstone document give us a precise map for
achieving the resilient economies and social stability
that are essential to a better future. We underline
the importance of the goals designed to protect the
environment as a critical element of sustainable
development. They are proof of a universal recognition
that urgent measures and international cooperation
are needed to overcome current threats and challenges
in the environmental arena. The Kyrgyz Republic
fully supports the 2030 Agenda and most of the key
international initiatives on the environment. We believe
firmly that recognizing environmental challenges and
the need for international cooperation opens up vast
opportunities for cooperation and development aimed
at finding solutions to those problems.
In the light of the current situation, the Kyrgyz
Republic has supported and launched several
international initiatives, including a global initiative
on snow leopards designed to preserve a rare species
and its natural habitat. In 2019, the Kyrgyz Republic,
with strong support from the relevant Member
States, established the informal Group of Friends
of Mountainous Countries to promote sustainable
mountain development principles, including with
regard to preserving fragile mountain ecosystems. In
addition, in 2018 Kyrgyzstan put forward an updated
resolution on the role of the international community
in preventing the threat of radiation in Central Asia
(resolution 73/238). In 2019, in cooperation with Italy,
we worked on the updated resolution on sustainable
mountain development (resolution 74/227). Those
resolutions also contributed to the development of
transboundary cooperation and were broadly supported
by Member States.
Draft resolution A/75/L.73, entitled “Nature knows
no borders: transboundary cooperation — a key factor for
biodiversity conservation, restoration and sustainable
use”, is also designed to preserve the world’s biodiversity
through cooperative action aimed at providing our
countries’ future generations with a pure, safe and
stable environment, ensuring the rational use of natural
resources in line with the principles of sustainable
development and implementing the 2030 Agenda. It has
21-09455

16/04/2021

A/75/PV.59

garnered positive responses from global environmental
organizations. The promotion of transboundary
cooperation is timely given the restrictions that
have been instituted to curb the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The effect of those restrictions has shown
how interconnected our world is. The decision to
develop transboundary collaboration in favour of
environmental stability will also help to overcome the
obstacles to reviving interaction among Member States.
The active discussion of the draft resolution over the
past two months has resulted in a well-balanced text
reflecting key issues in transboundary cooperation for
biodiversity protection, restoration and sustainable use
and for development.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to all the Member States that participated in
the informal consultations and supported and sponsored
this initiative. Adopting this draft resolution today will
once again show our united intention to cooperate on
preserving biodiversity for future generations.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/75/L.73, entitled “Nature
knows no borders: transboundary cooperation — a key
factor for biodiversity conservation, restoration and
sustainable use”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.73, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, India, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Qatar, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Senegal, Singapore, Tajikistan,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Zambia and Zimbabwe. In addition, the delegations of
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, the Gambia, Guinea, Mauritania,
Nigeria and Peru have also become sponsors.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.73?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/271).

A/75/L.73

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 19.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
69 at its 46th plenary meeting on 16 December 2020.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
decision, it will be necessary to reopen consideration of
agenda item 69. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda
item 69?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 18 September 2020, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 69
to the Third Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the draft decision, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 69
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504B).
Agenda item 69
Rights of indigenous peoples (continued)
Draft decision (A/75/L.77)
The President: The General Assembly will
now resume its consideration of agenda item 69 to
take action on the draft decision, entitled “Informal
interactive hearing with indigenous peoples”, contained
in document A/75/L.77.
We shall now proceed to consider draft decision
A/75/L.77. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision?
Draft
decision
(decision 75/561).

A/75/L.77

was

adopted

21-094559/11

A/75/PV.59

16/04/2021

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 69?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting on 18 September 2020, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 111 to the
Third Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 111
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately to
its consideration?

The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/75/L.74, entitled “Participation in the 2021
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS”. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision?
Draft
decision
(decision 75/563).

A/75/L.74

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 10.
Agenda item 64 (continued)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.72)

Agenda item 111
Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Draft decision (A/75/L.75)
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 111 to take
action on the draft decision contained in document
A/75/L.75.
Draft decision A/75/L.75 is entitled “Special
session of the General Assembly against corruption”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?
A/75/L.75

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 111.
Agenda item 10 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/
AIDS
Draft decision (A/75/L.74)
The President: The General Assembly will
resume its consideration of agenda item 10, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/
10/11

Members are reminded that the debate on the item
will be held during the high-level meeting scheduled to
take place from 8 to 10 June 2021.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

It was so decided (decision 75/504B).

Draft
decision
(decision 75/562).

AIDS”, to take action on the draft decision contained in
document A/75/L.74.

The President: The General Assembly will
resume its consideration of agenda item 64, entitled
“Peacebuilding and sustaining peace”.
I would like to remind members that the debate on
this item is scheduled for 18 May 2021.
I now give the floor to the distinguished
representative of Turkmenistan to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.72.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan): I have the honour
to present draft resolution A/75/L.72, entitled “Role
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia”. It was submitted on
behalf of the five countries of Central Asia, that is,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and
my own country, Turkmenistan, to emphasize the role
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy in Central Asia and in the region. The
Central Asian countries would like to underscore their
broad, unwavering interregional support for the draft
resolution and to express their deep gratitude to the
other sponsoring countries. We would also like to point
to the constructive atmosphere that accompanied the
entire process of deliberations on the draft resolution.
The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA) is a special
political mission of the United Nations, established in
December 2007 in Ashgabat at the initiative of the five
21-09455

16/04/2021

A/75/PV.59

Central Asian States. The Centre promotes dialogue
between the Governments of the countries of Central
Asia on finding solutions to emerging problems and
eliminating potential threats, keeping regular contact
with regional and international organizations operating
in the region in order to stimulate their peacemaking
efforts and initiatives and cooperating with other United
Nations agencies working in the areas of sustainable
development and conflict prevention.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.72.

Since its establishment, the Centre has provided
Governments with a platform for dialogue on the
most challenging regional issues, ranging from
the management of shared resources to addressing
transnational threats such as terrorism and violent
extremism, organized crime and drug- and other forms
of trafficking. In doing so, UNRCCA has closely
cooperated with all Governments in the region and
built their capacity to use the methods and instruments
of preventive diplomacy to address existing and
emerging challenges.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.72, and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Angola, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Hungary, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Morocco, Nauru, Nicaragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and Viet Nam. In addition, the delegations
of Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Equatorial
Guinea, the Gambia, Guinea, Iceland, Indonesia,
Mauritania, Nigeria, North Macedonia and Peru have
also become sponsors.

Today’s draft resolution generalizes the experience
of the Regional Centre for use by other countries
around the world and once again emphasizes the
role of preventive diplomacy. In addition, it draws
attention to the need to continue cooperation between
the Regional Centre and the Central Asian countries,
within its mandate, in order to mitigate the effects of
the coronavirus disease pandemic in the region. The
draft resolution notes the initiatives of the Regional
Centre aimed at empowering women and youth, such
as the Preventive Diplomacy Academy, which trains
young people in preventive diplomacy, and the Central
Asian Women Leaders’ Caucus. Within the global
agendas for women and peace and security and youth,
peace and security at the United Nations, the Centre
has continued its efforts to increase the participation
and role of women and young people in public and
political life.
In conclusion, we would once again like to express
our gratitude to the delegations that have sponsored
draft resolution A/75/L.72, as well as our hope that it
will be adopted by consensus, and we call on Member
States that have not yet done so to become sponsors.

The Assembly will take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.72, entitled “Role of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.72?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/272).

A/75/L.72

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 64.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

21-0945511/11
