S/PV.8254

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8254th meeting

Monday, 14 May 2018, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka/Mr. Lewicki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2018/407)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14598 (E)
*1814598*

Kosovo

S/PV.8254

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2018/407)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/407, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: As reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/407), the past period in Kosovo was
generally characterized by a decline in both the
quality of actions and the tenor of political discourse
between Pristina and Belgrade. In March, tentative,
but important, meetings of the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union (EU) were held at the technical
and political levels. That working atmosphere was
affected when Marko Đurić, Director of the Serbian
Government’s Kosovo office and Belgrade’s lead
negotiator for the EU-facilitated dialogue, was arrested
after entering northern Kosovo, against the advice of
Kosovo authorities, to attend a session of President
Aleksandar Vučić’s internal dialogue. During the
2/26

14/05/2018

arrest, stun grenades, disabling gas and other acts of
physical force were deployed, resulting in a number
of injuries, including to an attending Minister of
the Government of Kosovo, two municipal leaders,
journalists and other attendees. Mr. Đurić was then
theatrically and improperly paraded through a street
in Pristina before being expelled from Kosovo. Many
Kosovo Serbs, already unsettled by the unsolved
murder case of Oliver Ivanović in Mitrovica in January,
perceived such events with apprehension.
Following the incident, political figures from
both sides engaged in an escalation of rhetoric that led
to further setbacks in the effort to continue the EUfacilitated dialogue. The Kosovo Serb caucus, Serbian
List, announced its intention to withdraw from Pristina’s
governing coalition. Moreover, it stated its intention
to unilaterally form the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities, setting a deadline of
20 April, which, however, was subsequently recanted.
Whatever factors drove the series of reciprocal taunts,
the results seemed close to precipitating the collapse
of the Government in Kosovo. The waters were only
calmed again with intensive efforts, including with
some support from external parties. Most important,
significant efforts made by Prime Minister Ramush
Haradinaj and his Government, including protracted
discussions with the Serbian List and other parts of the
coalition, as well as the opposition, have helped to keep
the channels of communication open.
There has been discussion over many months about
the prospects of a shift in the essentially frozen positions
of both sides through the new EU focus on the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina and on wider regional
engagement. Despite those expectations, recent rising
political temperatures have hampered the advancement
of the dialogue, which requires sufficient political will
from both sides to bring a new level of engagement to
bolster the process. There is no other viable option.
However, for that to happen, there is a clear need to
exercise leadership to stand up to challenges, even with
short-term political costs. A new focus by Brussels, at
all levels, provides a mutually beneficial opportunity
for Pristina and Belgrade to leave the current difficult
moment behind and take the dialogue to the next stage
of real progress. Moreover, member States of the
European Union have set an ambitious calendar for
the region, including the EU-Western Balkans summit
in Sofia later this month — the highest-level regional
summit since 2003. Additionally, the next crucial
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

meeting of the Berlin process economic forum in July,
alongside many other initiatives this year to engage
the Western Balkans more intensively, would help all
to navigate cross-currents and take advantage of a
new commitment.
As much as top-level political assurances remain
essential, commitments made in negotiations are
unlikely to endure without some impetus for confidence
among communities and individuals at the grass-roots
level. To create the atmosphere for reason and goodfaith compromise to prevail, engagement is needed
across all levels, which remains a main priority of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I am pleased to inform the Council
that I have just come from the United Nations Kosovo
trust-building forum, held in Ljubljana from 6 to 8 May,
which I opened alongside Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita. We were joined by representatives of the
United Nations Kosovo team, the European Union,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Over 100 community leaders
from throughout Kosovo came together to discuss ways
to address common challenges caused by mistrust and
stale political approaches, some 20 years after the
height of conflict.
The starting point of the forum was simple: not
to reinvent or reinterpret the past, but to illuminate,
guide and pursue a more positive path for the future.
Motivated and energetic individuals from across
Kosovo society debated the prospects for trust-building
through a wide range of positive action and cooperation.
The main thematic areas were media accountability,
access to impartial justice, economic growth, access to
public services, religious coexistence and educational
reform. Multiple focus groups worked to strengthen
understanding across community divides. The resulting
outcomes identified by participants provide a road map
for measures to be implemented in Kosovo. Assistant
Secretary-General Keita stressed that the forum was
a proactive attempt to further the sustaining peace
agenda, engage in prevention at the local level, as well
as link political and developmental frameworks. I urged
all leaders to organize the future, rather than mourn
the past, and to move forward with more compassion,
understanding and clarity in advancing trust in the
areas of work they identified during the forum.
Important for Kosovo’s European perspective,
the Kosovo Assembly ratified the 2015 agreement on

S/PV. 8254

territorial delineation with Montenegro. That issue has
been singled out by the European Union as a necessary
step for Kosovo’s integration with the EU, including
visa liberalization, for quite some time. While the
international community appreciated that achievement,
it has been underlined that the strengthening of the rule
of law and human rights and visible progress in the
fight against corruption and organized crime remain
major issues in meeting the aspirations of the people of
Kosovo for their European perspective.
It is also important to acknowledge the approval
of a new draft of the Kosovo criminal code, which
introduces stricter penalties for offences related to
corruption and misuse of official duty. That positive
initiative complements ongoing efforts to depoliticize
and enhance the performance of the judiciary. We also
share the analysis about the effective application of
human rights and the rule of law in Kosovo, as recently
presented in the European Commission’s annual
progress report. It is in that context that Kosovo’s rule
of law institutions continue to be a major focus of both
internal and external attention, as EULEX is preparing
a significant reconfiguration that will transfer direct
responsibility to the Kosovo court system for cases
heretofore handled with EULEX in the lead.
Concerning the protection of cultural heritage, I am
pleased to note that the Implementation and Monitoring
Council, tasked with overseeing the treatment of
special protected zones surrounding religious sites,
has restarted its work. It is a timely development, as
there have recently been attempts to undermine the
judgements of Kosovo courts, as well as of those of
the Monitoring Council, regarding construction near
the Visoki Dečani Monastery, in western Kosovo. The
international community will continue to closely watch
the Government’s actions in that case.
UNMIK continues to prioritize its own work in
the areas of confidence-building, human rights and
limited, but essential, aspects of support for rule-oflaw and justice institutions. Crucial to the Mission’s
efforts are the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda and the youth, peace
and security agenda. On 5 March in Kosovo, in
collaboration with UN-Women, the Mission hosted
the eighth Global Open Day on Women, Peace and
Security. Focused on women’s political participation,
the event brought together more than 150 women
political leaders from the central and local levels,
including parliamentarians; Government officials;

18-145983/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

representatives of the international community, civil
society, academia and women’s organizations; and
youth activists. The Global Open Day recognized the
need for women’s full and effective participation in
leadership at all levels of decision-making in political,
economic and public life. It also underlined the fact
that women’s political participation is indispensable to
gender justice so as to end inequality, subordination,
hierarchical status and asymmetries concerning
political power. The event was central to the Mission’s
recently adopted gender framework strategy and part
of a number of other important initiatives throughout
Kosovo commemorating International Women’s Day.
The youth, peace, and security agenda is also of
paramount importance to UNMIK. Later this week, the
Mission, while working together closely in cooperation
with UNICEF and the United Nations Development
Programme, will host the second United Nations Youth
Assembly in Kosovo. The event will bring together
180 young leaders from diverse backgrounds alongside
officials, civic organizations and business leaders.
In the multifaceted areas of the Mission’s
recalibrated work, UNMIK works fully in line with the
core principles of Secretary-General Guterres’ reform
agenda and the guidance of the Council. Our efforts are
aimed at sustaining peace; ensuring that we remain at
the forefront of monitoring and analysing the situation;
and reinforcing strategic cooperation with members
of all United Nations entities, as well as international
partners, in complementing the efforts of Kosovo’s
institutions. I thank the members of the Council for
their continued support for our efforts and their support
to the EU-led dialogue aimed at the normalization of
relations and increased cooperation between Pristina
and Belgrade.
The President: I thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and his Special Representative and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for the
report (S/2018/407) on the work of UNMIK and their
committed engagement to the implementation of the
mandate conferred upon the Mission by the Security
Council under resolution 1244 (1999).
4/26

14/05/2018

I will be open and straightforward in my statement.
For some time now, while some members of the Security
Council have called for decreasing the frequency of
reporting periods and meetings on this topic, others
have proposed a closed format for the meetings. Other
radical ideas that have been put forward have included
that the Mission be terminated and transformed into a
political one. We understand some of those arguments.
The Security Council agenda is congested, and the
crises in Syria and Yemen are incomparable to the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. Yet I call on Council
members to listen to my arguments and consider them
as well.
The situation in Kosovo and Metohija has
changed since 1999, but it is far from ideal. Clearly,
based on all prior reports, Kosovo is neither the
young democracy or the multi-ethnic society facing
occasional challenges that some purport it to be. The
reports raise very important questions, as does the
situation on the ground. Has genuine reconciliation
among communities occurred in Kosovo and Metohija?
Have the perpetrators of all crimes been punished?
Are the basic human rights of minority communities
respected in Kosovo and Metohija? Have internally
displaced persons been allowed to return? Regrettably,
the answer to all of those questions is “no”.
I will discuss the report before us and the events
that took place during the reporting period in due
time. Prior to that, however, I will point out several
important facts that should be borne in mind by all
of those calling for the termination of the Mission or
decreasing the frequency of our meetings.
UNMIK has been present on the ground for
19 years and has done much to change the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija. A great job has been done,
but it has not been completed. A long road has been
traversed since 1999. Much time was needed to bring
the representatives of Belgrade and Pristina to sit at the
same table and begin negotiations.
The first agreements were not easy to achieve, but
they were achieved nonetheless. Although we have
faced substantial problems in the implementation of
the agreements by Pristina from the very beginning,
we continue to believe that the only way to find a longterm sustainable solution is through dialogue, and that it
must be resumed. I therefore believe that it is a duty and
an obligation of the Security Council to help find such
a solution and normalize the situation in Kosovo and
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

Metohija, which is — we must not forget — important
for the stability of the entire region as well. Much effort
has been made to stabilize the situation throughout the
past years, and, only if we continue to address all open
questions peacefully, can we expect to normalize the
situation in the province.
We therefore must not allow all our efforts made
thus far to be placed in jeopardy through hasty or
unnecessary actions. That is why I call on members
to look at the broader picture and support our efforts
to arrive at a lasting solution together. Calls for
downsizing UNMIK, reducing its budget, changing
its mandate and reducing the frequency of Security
Council meetings on the subject fall far short of
contributing to the creation of a climate conducive to
the achievement of those goals. They only add to the
existing rifts both among the members of the Security
Council and between Belgrade and Pristina. At this
moment we do not need a back-and-forth on whether
the Security Council should devote three hours every
three months — 12 hours per year — to this topic. What
we need is to implement all agreements without adding
conditions and to find solutions to all unresolved issues
exclusively through dialogue.
Let me say now a few words about the current report
of the Secretary-General and the events that took place
during the reporting period. Those events provide telling
evidence that the situation in Kosovo and Metohija
continues to be unstable and that an international
presence is still very much needed. Members will recall
our shock at the previous meeting (see S/PV.8176) at the
brutal murder of Oliver Ivanović, the leader of the Civic
Initiative “Freedom, Democracy, Justice” and one of
the most prominent Serbian politicians in Kosovo and
Metohija. The Pristina representatives vowed to leave
no stone unturned until the perpetrators were brought
to justice. The perpetrators have not been brought to
justice. Furthermore, next to nothing is known about
the investigation except that no progress has been
made and that, due to the complexity of the case,
the investigation has been taken over by the Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo.
Serbians in Kosovo and Metohija were shattered
and deeply concerned by the news of the events that
took place in northern Mitrovica on 26 March, when
the talks under the internal dialogue on Kosovo were
interrupted by a barbaric act committed by members
of the Kosovo special police units. Armed to the
teeth, they conducted a brutal raid on the building,

S/PV. 8254

using naked force against unarmed civilians. The
dangerous, irresponsible and unacceptable behaviour
of the representatives of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government was thrown into sharp relief.
The Director of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija
of the Government of Serbia, Marko Đurić, other
Serbian Government officials, as well as Ministers of
the provisional Government of Kosovo and Metohija
from the Serbian community, deputies in the provincial
Parliament and other citizens, 36 in all, were injured
in the raid. One Serb, a Minister of the provincial
Government, was detained in hospital for treatment.
Mr. Đurić, the main negotiator on the Serbian side,
was apprehended illegally during the technical dialogue
with Pristina. He was harassed, beaten, handcuffed and
eventually dragged through the streets of Pristina in
an orchestrated display of mob hatred. That was an
unseemly act of humiliation unrecorded in the history
of diplomacy. I hope everyone saw the footage of
how Pristina treats the main negotiator of the Serbian
side. How can Mr. Đurić be expected to sit again at
the negotiating table in the wake of such treatment?
Pristina sought to justify that behaviour by alleging
that the visit of Mr. Đurić had not been approved. That
is absolutely false. Notification of the visit, in line with
the agreement on the arrangement of official visits
made under the auspices of the European Union (EU),
was sent in time. In fact, the notification was sent long
before the deadline provided for by the agreement. EU
representatives are informed in detail about this. It is
difficult to understand that act as anything other than
provocation by Pristina.
The event dealt a serious blow to the dialogue and
undermines the peace and security not only of the Serbs
of Kosovo and Metohija but also of the entire region.
The event provides eloquent proof of the instability
of the situation in the province and of the speed with
which peace and security fall prey to irresponsible and
one-sided acts. We were shocked by what happened
in Kosovo and Metohija on that day, just as we were
disheartened by the absence of a proper response from
the European Union, the facilitator of the dialogue. In
particular, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo is supposed to oversee the rule of law,
including the conduct of Kosovo police. The Kosovo
Force (KFOR) also turned a blind eye to the actions
of the Kosovo special police units, notwithstanding
prior agreements, according to which it should have
prevented the members of the special police units from

18-145985/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

coming to the northern part of the province, which has
a majority Serbian population and which is where the
sad incident occurred.
I would like to recall that I signed the Brussels
Agreement along with Hashim Thaçi and Catherine
Ashton. Before the Agreement was signed, we were at
NATO headquarters in Brussels where then-SecretaryGeneral Rasmussen took responsibility from KFOR to
prevent the entry of any armed forces into a territory
with a majority Serb population without approval. Why
then did this incident happen? Threats and the use of
force must not be tolerated under any circumstances;
they must be clearly and unequivocally condemned by
all the relevant international actors without reserve.
I would also like to recall that Marko Đurić came to
Kosovo to talk about the political solution of the Kosovo
problem. He did not come to spark an uprising or to do
anything that was contrary to the Brussels dialogue.
Has anyone ever witnessed a diplomatic representative
of any State receiving the kind of treatment observed
in Pristina? This is the Head of the negotiating team
who, several days ago, sat at the table with the other
side, the way Council members are sitting here now.
I invite Council members to imagine how they would
feel if they were paraded in handcuffs through the
streets of a town and then expected to talk about peace.
It is clear what the intention was. We support the call
in the report of the Secretary-General for a thorough
investigation, with corrective action in case of failures
to uphold human rights.
There should be great concern over Pristina’s
aspiration to change and expand the mandate of the socalled Kosovo Security Force. At a recent meeting in
Skopje, I had an opportunity to hear Boyko Borissov,
the Prime Minister of Bulgaria, who holds the current
EU presidency, ask Hashim Thaçi if the incident had
to occur in that way. Serbia responded with restraint.
The aspiration to transform the Kosovo Security Force
into an army should be a cause of great concern. That
would not only be a flagrant violation of resolution
1244 (1999) and the Kumanovo Military Technical
Agreement, it would also be a major step towards
destabilizing the security situation in the province
and the entire region. I would like to recall that the
resolution does not provide for the establishment of
a Kosovar armed force; it does, however, provide for
KFOR as the only legal military force in Kosovo and
Metohija responsible for all aspects of security in the
province. Safeguarding KFOR’s status neutrality and
6/26

14/05/2018

its undiminished presence is of paramount importance
for the realization of its mandate.
Let me point out that the EU and NATO have not
supported Pristina’s intentions to establish an army
of Kosovo, and I expect that they will continue to
uphold their position consistently. I would like to draw
the Council’s attention to the fact that a number of
countries, EU and NATO members, have accepted the
accreditation of so-called Kosovo military attachés,
in violation of resolution 1244 (1999). The resolution
says that Pristina may not have an army or a ministry
of defence or, for that matter, military attachés. Under
what provisions of the Vienna Convention has this been
allowed to happen? How can military attachés exist
in an entity recognized as a State that does not have
an army?
I would like to recall once again that Serbia
is firmly committed to solving all issues through
dialogue, and that we have demonstrated considerable
political maturity and responsibility in the past year.
Five years ago I personally signed the First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between Belgrade and Pristina, the so-called Brussels
Agreement. As I have already said, the Agreement was
not at all easy to achieve and the obligations assumed
under it were not easy to implement. Yet we implemented
the majority of them, including the most sensitive
political ones, such as the integration of the police
and judiciary. Pristina also assumed its obligations by
signing the Agreement, the most important of which is
the establishment of the community of Serb-majority
municipalities, mentioned in as many as six provisions
of the Agreement.
I emphasize that that is the key part of the
Agreement and the obligation that, despite repeated
calls by the international community, Pristina has not
implemented all these years. As a consequence, instead
of analysing the achievements of the community
over the past five years, we continue to talk about its
establishment even today. The establishment of the
community is of crucial and enormous importance
for Serbia and Kosovo and Metohija Serbs, since it
is designed to protect their vital interests, guarantee
the preservation of their identity and improve their
everyday life in Kosovo. Its establishment is not and
must not be a gesture of goodwill, but a right achieved
and guaranteed by all the signatories to the Brussels
Agreement, including the European Union. It is not
possible to implement agreements selectively and alter
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

them unilaterally. The community must be established
in accordance with the Brussels Agreement, its
principles and implementation plan.
Statements that may be heard from Pristina’s
representatives, such as the most recent one to the
effect that the establishment of the community of Serbmajority municipalities is contingent upon the granting
of a seat at the United Nations, confirms that Pristina
has no real intention to fulfil its obligations under the
Brussels Agreement and that it is grossly violating
it instead. It is with regret that I note that the Head
of European Union Office in Kosovo has violated its
mandate by expressing her support for the Pristina
platform, in wanton disregard of the Agreement on
which the European Union put its seal. We have
reason to believe that, five years later, Pristina is
being disingenuous by embarking upon that process,
notwithstanding making assertions that measures
will be taken with regard to the community. We are
afraid that that may very well be yet another political
stratagem aimed at reducing international pressure,
rather than genuine readiness to finally comply with
the obligations that Pristina has assumed. It is therefore
necessary that the Security Council calls in unison
today for the establishment of the community of Serb
majority municipalities without delay. Repeated calls to
both parties to fulfil the obligations they have assumed
are inappropriate since one side has already done so
and the other has not.
To ensure compliance with and facilitate the
implementation of the Brussels Agreement, maintain
stability and establish the rule of law in Kosovo and
Metohija, an international presence is essential. In
that regard, the current EULEX competencies must
be maintained. Nonetheless, potential changes must
carried out under the watchful eye of the Security
Council. It must be borne in mind that such changes
would affect the work of other missions and that they
too must change if they are to continue to function
unencumbered. However, the transfer of EULEX
competencies to the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Pristina would bring about a loss of
the status neutrality of the Mission and underscore the
phony statehood of Kosovo.
It would be remiss of me today not to mention
the 200,000 Serbs and non-Albanians who have been
expelled and the great number churches, monasteries
and cultural and historical monuments that have
been burned or destroyed. The report reveals that

S/PV. 8254

the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees recorded three voluntary returns in the
three-month reporting period. Council members heard
that right — three internally displaced persons in
three months out of the more than 200,000 expelled.
Does the Council believe that that number is enough
and that the international community should give up
and stop creating conditions in Kosovo and Metohija
to make it possible for internally displaced persons to
return and realize their rights? That is the minimum
we owe to all those who could not return to their homes
in Kosovo and Metohija. Is the fact that only 1.9 per
cent of internally displaced persons have achieved
sustainable returns not a strong enough argument in
favour of the continuation of UNMIK activities and of
its strengthening?
The recent arbitrary arrests at the Jarinje crossing
provide ample evidence of the violence the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government resort to and Pristina’s
lack of willingness to promote genuine democracy,
the rule of law and respect for basic human rights
and fundamental freedoms. Most often, secret lists,
compiled mainly on the basis of false reports and
fabricated evidence, are used to make those arrests.
They are aimed at creating insecurity and fear among
the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija, affect their freedom
of movement and discourage the return of internally
displaced persons. The number of returnees can hardly
be expected to increase unless systemic solutions are
introduced to address the problems that plague them
every day, which make for a long and woeful list
indeed. In addition to arbitrary arrests, they include
institutional discrimination, intimidation, failure to
sanction national and religious hatred and ethnically
motivated violence, personal and property insecurity
and an absence of the rule of law.
I reiterate that the crimes committed in Kosovo
and Metohija must not go unpunished. The process
of confronting the truth is the first step towards
reconciliation, but it is necessary that all those who
committed crimes be made to account for them. For its
part, Serbia has made significant steps in that direction.
Conversely, the perpetrators of crimes against Serbs
and non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija have not
been punished, even 19 years later. Positions occupied
by some individuals in the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government cannot and must not obstruct
the pursuit of justice. It is a matter of grave concern
for us that no indictment has yet been brought in the

18-145987/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

Specialist Chambers for crimes committed by the
Kosovo Liberation Army and that the beginning of the
work of the Chambers continues to be postponed. In his
reflections on his time as Specialist Prosecutor, David
Schwendiman summed up that concern well.
“Haste is no friend of justice, but neither is
unreasonable delay. The further things get from
when crimes were committed, the less credible
efforts to address them are going to seem and the
weaker the perception of their efforts as legitimate
is going to be”.
In upholding its laws, in full alignment with
international law, Serbia will not desist from
prosecuting persons for whom there is evidence that
they have committed the criminal offence of war
crimes against the civilian population in Kosovo and
Metohija. The recent decision of INTERPOL to reissue
notices for a number of individuals charged with the
commission of crimes in Kosovo and Metohija is very
important in that regard.
Serbia protects its national and State interests
while fully respecting the tenets of international law,
including, primarily, the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity. It will continue to use all diplomatic
means against Pristina’s secessionist attempts, which
set a dangerous precedent already embraced, as we
have seen, by separatist movements in other parts of
the world. I am convinced that if perchance found in
Serbia’s situation, none of the members of the Council
would act differently. All of Serbia’s endeavours
reflect efforts to protect its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and, ipso facto, the authority of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the legally
binding resolution 1244 (1999), which guarantees its
territorial integrity and sovereignty and underlines the
unacceptability of unilateralism as a way of resolving
international relations issues. I would also like to
mention that for some time now we have been borne
witness to Pristina’s attempts to join international
organizations — the most recent have been its
applications to UNESCO, INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization. Such attempts run counter to the
basic principles of international law and unnecessarily
politicize the work of those organizations.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all countries
that have not recognized the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo for their consistent support and
principled respect of the Charter of the United Nations
8/26

14/05/2018

and resolution 1244 (1999), as well as those that have
withdrawn recognition or are considering it. I would
like to inform the Council that Suriname and Burundi
have revoked their recognition of Kosovo. I would also
like to advise the members of the Security Council
who protest the withdrawals that their protests are not
contributing to the quest for an efficient and effective
solution to the problem. Unconditional support for one
side is not a way to achieve compromise. We treat all
Members of this Organization as friends and partners.
Reciprocal treatment, including greater understanding
of our position and arguments, would be welcome and
is expected.
We were on the same side during both World Wars.
On 28 July we will mark 100 years since the Serbian
flag was first flown on the White House and all public
buildings in the United States on the order of then
President Woodrow Wilson to honour the enormous
suffering of the Serbian people in the First World War.
French President Macron is expected to visit Serbia
this year. Along with President Vučić, he will unveil
the renovated Monument of Gratitude to France, which
was built to honour the historic alliance in the First
World War. A summit of the European Union and the
Western Balkans on the European future of our region
will be held in London in July. Serbia wants to find
common interests with Western countries. I hope that
everyone knows that there can be no lasting peace and
stability in the Balkans or in Europe without respect for
the interests of Serbia and the Serbian people, as it is
the largest State and largest nation in that region.
Serbia’s policy is one of peace and economic links
and prosperity. I therefore call on all of members once
again to focus on seeking a compromise and sustainable
solution to this decades-long problem, so that the entire
Western Balkans may become a region of lasting peace,
stability, security and mutual trust.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: As always, it is an honour to be with
the Security Council today. Three months ago I was
in the Chamber on the eve of the tenth anniversary of
Kosovo’s independence (see S/PV.8176). It has now
been a decade of statehood for Kosovo, and much longer
than that since the end of the war. We have been through
a lot, beginning with a long period of oppression and
systematic human rights violations prior to the war and
culminating with ethnic cleansing. Despite the dire
circumstances and daunting challenges, we never gave
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

up. With hope in our hearts we persevered, and we have
managed to rebuild our lives from scratch.
The past three months have been marked by the
anniversary of our independence and by reminders of
the steep price we had to pay for our freedom. Every
day there is a commemoration. Every day a new
memorial is unveiled. From Meja to Cusk to Abria, in
towns and villages all across Kosovo, people are united
in remembering the noble sacrifices of the fallen.
Approximately 30,000 young Kosovars will
graduate from high school this year. They will be the
first generation of graduates who have not witnessed
the horrors of war. They are the first generation of
Kosovars to be born in a free country, to grow up
without knowing the fear of oppression and without
being scarred by war. They have no fear, because
freedom is all they know. They were born free, and
free they shall remain. What they demand from us is
a better future, better quality of education and better
jobs. It is what they deserve. However, they also
demand truth about the past. In order to truly move on,
they require closure.
But truth and reconciliation cannot be built on
false narratives or on desperate attempts to establish
moral parity. Every time I come here, to this Chamber,
I feel compelled to remind Council members of our
story, of what happened in the heart of Europe not
more than 20 years ago: a brutal war that left hundreds
of thousands massacred, missing or raped. All those
atrocities — from Croatia to Bosnia to Kosovo — were
committed by the Serbian State machinery. I am
repeating these facts today, and I will continue to
repeat them, because that is the only truth. It is very
disturbing to hear the creative revisionist history of
our northern neighbours. Their narrative is a serious
attempt to rewrite the past, and as such has no place in
this Chamber, or anywhere else for that matter, and it is
about time that we put an end to it.
The States Members of the United Nations, our dear
friends, should recognize the truth. This year Kosovo
was omitted from the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250).
International humanitarian organizations and local
non-governmental organizations have collected an
estimated 20,000 accounts of systematic rape and
torture perpetrated by Serbian forces during the war in
Kosovo. Despite the existence of substantial evidence,
no perpetrators of those crimes have ever been brought

S/PV. 8254

to justice. Kosovo’s experience with the survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence and its efforts
to address that issue are a valuable example to the
global community. Beyond politics, we are speaking
about basic human rights, which are expected to be
respected universally and unconditionally. By turning
a blind eye to those crimes we are creating the space
for convicted war criminals to not only be represented,
but to also abuse the public platform, and that has been
happening in our neighbourhood. This is not a matter
of my personal opinion, it is a concern raised by the EU
Human Rights Commissioner, who said that
“In recent years, war criminals from Serbia ...
have been promoted as heroes and role models by
Serbian Government officials, political parties and
the media ... [and] this is unacceptable for an EU
candidate country”.
No wonder we see initiatives for the erection of
monuments to a dictator like Slobodan Milošević.
I ask the Council, what does this say about the
identity of a society, let alone about the normalization of
relations with its neighbours? Surely, it says a lot about
a commitment to the falsification of the facts when
attempts are made to carve dictators in the stone. In this
toxic environment, the infringement of free speech by
the State feels very normal, as do the systematic threats
to Kosovo Serbs who want to join the Kosovo Security
Force or the Kosovo police. Several local Serbs from
Kosovo were arrested in Serbia because they joined the
Kosovo Security Force.
Let me be very clear on this matter: Serbia does
not have a veto on the establishment of the Kosovo
armed forces. That is a decision to be made only by
the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo. With regard
to the Serbs of Kosovo, it is evident that those people
just want to live better lives and be integrated into their
country. Nevertheless, their aspirations are steadily
quashed by a Belgrade that disrupts on all possible
levels, as they do on most issues.
Just the other day, the Serbian Government banned
a Kosovo karate team from entering Serbia, thereby
preventing our kids from taking part in the European
Karate Championships being held in Novi Sad. Kids
were banned. The Council knows how much effort
Kosovo made to become a member of all sports
federations, and how much joy it brings to our nation to
see our sportswomen and men playing and competing
on behalf of their country. Nonetheless, even today,

18-145989/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

we still have to face all sorts of arbitrary barriers
being put up by Serbia. However, in the spirit of true
sportsmanship, young Kosovar athletes did not turn to
anger or hatred, even during one of the most difficult
and heartbreaking moments for them. Instead, they
sent their best wishes to all other athletes who went on
to compete.
That is not an isolated incident. It is part of a pattern
of obstructionism exemplified by a statement made on
23 March by the Serbian Minister of the Interior, in
which he indicated that he did not want to see clashes
between fans and police over things they do not believe
in and are contrary to their interests.
Unfortunately, it seems that with its decisions
the Government of Serbia is supporting only the
violent and destructive part of Serbian society, at the
expense of those who value peace, support dialogue
and cooperation and want to work, play and compete
together. As stated jointly by the Youth Initiative for
Human Rights in Kosovo and Serbia, it is violence
that should be stopped, not sports. With complete
confidence, I can add that sports was the sole motivation
for our kids when they travelled to the border — they
had no political aim whatsoever.
When we are given the chance to be present, to
participate, to play and to compete, Kosovo excels,
thanks to our athletes, artists and activists alike, who
shine brightly and showcase our core values. Such is
the case with Feride Rushiti, who joined the ranks of
10 extraordinary women from around the world to be
decorated with the International Women of Courage
Award this year. Dr. Rushiti is the founder and
Executive Director of the Kosova Rehabilitation Centre
for Torture Victims. Through almost two decades of
research and advocacy, Dr. Rushiti has secured access
to health care and justice for the civilian victims of the
Kosovo war.
Our athletes are not the only ones to be turned
away by the Serbian Government. A group of members
of Kosovo’s Parliament was recently banned from
attending a regional conference in Belgrade — on
Europe Day, of all days. The conference was supposed
to foster regional cooperation and European integration.
The commitment of the Government of Kosovo
to developing democratic, inclusive and effective
governance that will serve the people of Kosovo
without discrimination begins with the strong rule
of law. Our institutions are committed to the rule of
10/26

14/05/2018

law. They are addressing the matter with a concrete
approach, through the enforcement and implementation
of the rule of law, accountability, effective institutional
responsiveness and transparency. Our Government is
focused on, and committed to, the full implementation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and
European Union (EU)-related reforms guided by the
European reform agenda.
Kosovo’s Parliament has now voted on the border
demarcation agreement with Montenegro, thereby
fulfilling the last remaining condition for visa-free travel
within the Schengen Zone. While it was unfortunate
to see that Serbian members of Kosovo’s Parliament,
under the constant threats and pressure from Belgrade,
declined to vote in favour of the agreement, this is just
another demonstration of Belgrade’s manipulation of
Kosovo Serbs. Serbs in Kosovo should be allowed to
make their own choices, without threats from, or fear
of, Belgrade.
Over the course of the past month, a number of
Serbian Government officials have taken a series of
intentional actions that violate the agreement between
our two countries, which regulates the visits of
officials and establishes procedures for such occasions.
That campaign culminated with a public event hosted
in Kosovo and attended by Marko Đurić. That was a
clear violation, which was preceded by and followed by
distinctly inflammatory rhetoric documented by public
statements contrary to the spirit of normalization,
dialogue, integration, peace and stability. As events
unfolded, Kosovo police acted with professionalism
throughout the entire process. Đurić’s detention and
subsequent arrest are standard procedure for law
enforcement agencies. They are an inevitable outcome
in response to any instance of such actions.
However, that particular violation was not an
isolated act. Similar tactics flouting pre-established
procedure and defiant of the authority of the Kosovo
institutions have been employed by Serbian authorities
on various occasions. I must therefore reiterate that
Kosovo does not tolerate provocation and is committed
to refraining from provocation itself. Serbian officials
must understand that Kosovo can be entered only with
the permission of Kosovo authorities. Should they fail
to obtain such permission and nevertheless enter our
country, Kosovo’s institutions will respond by following
procedure, in accordance with the Constitution and
existing laws.
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

What would happen if, I or any Kosovar
Government official, tried to enter Serbia without
permission? Serbian Government officials, when they
comply with procedure, visit frequently. Following the
incident, Mr. Đurić visited Kosovo. Nothing happened,
because he obtained the necessary permission and
followed the procedures.
Kosovo is committed to normalizing relations with
Serbia. We are committed to dialogue, the promotion
of good neighbourly relations and the strengthening of
peace and stability in the Western Balkans region. In
just two days, our leaders will sit together as equals at
the Western Balkans-EU summit. Now more than ever,
it is crystal clear that the EU will not allow ambiguity to
prevail in the region. Serbia must therefore ultimately
recognize Kosovo’s independence. Ultimately, it was at
Serbia’s request that the International Court of Justice
ruled unambiguously on Kosovo’s independence.
Kosovo’s institutions launched a working group
for the establishment of the association of Serbian
municipalities. Unfortunately, owing to the intensive
and extraordinary pressure exercised by the Government
in Belgrade, there is a reluctance from the local Serbian
population to participate in the process. What Belgrade
wants is very clear. They want a territorial solution.
On the other hand, we in Pristina want civil solutions.
We do not believe that the creation of boundaries based
on ethnic lines will contribute to peace and stability.
Kosovo is a republic that belongs to all its citizens.
While we hear numbers floated in the Chamber, let
me remind the Council that only in the last elections,
approximately 100,000 Serbs participated and voted.
Listing Kosovo’s recognition as one of the top
threats to Serbia’s national security is delusional
and harmful to Serbia itself. Kosovo is free and
independent, and that will never, ever change. Let
me also stress that it is misleading to characterize
Kosovo’s independence as a defeat for Serbia. Serbia
has lost nothing, because Kosovo was never Serbian.
Kosovo’s independence has been sealed by our people’s
will, sacrifice and determination.
Allow me also to reiterate that we believe that
the time has come for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo to close. We also
believe that the resources of the United Nations can
be put to much better use. The Security Council can
choose to maintain an expensive mission in Kosovo.
However, the truth is that there is no role for it.

S/PV. 8254

As I stated at the very beginning of my presentation,
the people of Kosovo want to move on. They want
closure. As we failed to deliver that, some of them have
moved on and found peace on their own. They have
risen above the painful past.
Arineta Mula’s first hike was a long, steep trail
over the accursed mountains as her mother and her
three siblings fled for their lives in the spring of 1999
during Serbia’s brutal war. She was only seven years
old when she became a refugee. but the gripping fear
that the Serbian forces would take her brother forced
her to keep her feet planted firmly on the slippery
and steep terrain. Sounds of artillery and blood
stains accompanied her terrifying journey to safety.
But Arineta decided to make something remarkably
beautiful of that experience. She reckoned that Kosovo
was too precious and our nature too beautiful to only
be remembered and associated with the pains and
horrors of war. Today Arineta is the first woman guide
in Kosovo. She proudly walks the mountain peaks with
tourists coming from Spain to China and elsewhere
in the world, thereby breaking the boundaries set by
politics. Arineta resolved that her trail of escape would
become a trail of hope for a better life and a better
tomorrow — a hope that every single Kosovar carries
in their heart.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing and for all
the good work that he and his team do on the ground.
I also want to thank Ambassador Çitaku and Foreign
Minister Dačić for their participation today.
The United States strongly supports Kosovo, its
independence, its sovereignty and its integration with
Europe and the broader international community.
Given the reality of Kosovo’s independence, which is
recognized by the majority of States Members of the
United Nations, we call on Serbia and Kosovo to work
with the utmost determination towards lasting peace
and reconciliation.
The United States underscores its support for the
Brussels dialogue. We greatly appreciate the European
Union (EU) for its leadership in that effort. The EU’s
continuing engagement and guidance will ensure that
both countries make progress towards the normalization
of Kosovo-Serbian relations. We urge the leaders of
both sides to seize this opportunity to demonstrate true

18-1459811/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

political will and to work together to reach agreement
as soon as possible.
Normalization demands that both countries
follow through with the full implementation of their
commitments under the Brussels dialogue. We welcome
Kosovo’s launch of the process to form the association
of Serb-majority municipalities, and we look forward
to continued work in cooperating on that important
and long-overdue task. We also look to Serbia to
fully cooperate and to engage in order to finalize the
implementation of the energy agreement. The long
delays with regard to the agreement have negative
effects not only for ordinary citizens in Kosovo but also
throughout the region and Europe.
The United States commends Kosovo’s ratification
of the agreement on border demarcation with
Montenegro, which represents a political milestone
and a key step towards full visa liberalization with the
European Union for the benefit of all Kosovo citizens.
However, the United States joins the Secretary-General
in expressing concern over the increased tensions
between Belgrade and Pristina, which can undermine
efforts to maintain regional stability and the safety
of citizens in both Kosovo and Serbia. The 26 March
events surrounding the arrest of Marko Ðjurić in
Mitrovica are an example of that. We urge all parties to
avoid provocation and to focus on normalizing relations
through dialogue.
Additionally, we note with concern the increased
tension in the Kosovo Serb community following the
killing of the Kosovo Serb politician Oliver Ivanović.
We continue to support a full and impartial investigation
by Kosovo’s institutions and call on them to work with
urgency and with Serbia’s full cooperation so as to
bring the perpetrators to justice. We also urge Serbian
institutions to investigate the threats against Kosovo
Serbs who have joined the Kosovo security forces and
are making an important public-service contribution.
Rhetorical threats and legal actions against the Kosovo
Serbs who have integrated into Kosovo’s institutions
are contrary to the spirit of the dialogue and must cease.
As we have stated before, the Council must take
corrective action on its outdated approach to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). The Mission is long overdue for
drawdown and closure. The upcoming negotiations in
the Fifth Committee on mission budgets will serve as
a reminder of the Security Council’s critical need to
12/26

14/05/2018

instil fiscal discipline, responsibility and leadership in
the United Nations. The nearly $38 million requested
for the UNMIK operations does not make sense. While
we appreciate the work of Special Representative Tanin
and his team, UNMIK continues to live past its purpose,
and we must wind it down. The reporting period for
UNMIK should be extended to 6 or 12 months, with
fewer meetings of the Council. The Council spends
as much, or more, time on UNMIK as it does on
missions operating in volatile security environments
that are crucial to maintaining stability and protecting
civilians. We must reorient the Security Council’s
time and efforts to pressing peacekeeping concerns.
We welcome recent expressions of support for fewer
UNMIK briefings, and we ask for Council agreement
on that change.
Finally, we continue to support Kosovo’s
membership is all relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations. We strongly encourage all
INTERPOL members to support Kosovo’s membership
at that organization’s general assembly in November.
Kosovo meets all the criteria for membership, which
will enhance the international law enforcement
community’s collective ability to combat terrorism,
violent extremism, trafficking, cybercrime and other
criminal activity in the critical Balkan region. We
also call on United Nations States Members that have
not yet done so to join the more than 110 Member
States that have publicly recognized Kosovo as an
independent State.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in Kosovo. I welcome the presence of
Serbian First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affaris His Excellency Ivica Dačić and thank
him for his remarks. I also thank Ambassador Vlora
Çitaku for her statement.
We took note of what Ambassador Tanin said at
the very outset of his statement regarding how much
the quality of dialogue between the two parties
has deteriorated.
Our position on the issue at hand has always been
consistent and clear. We would like to reaffirm our
support for a responsible handling by the two parties
of the challenge they face and for the peaceful and
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

amicable resolution of all outstanding issues between
Belgrade and Pristina in accordance with the Brussels
Agreement so that there may be reliable and sustainable
peace between the two parties, which can happen only
when there is justice for all and rights are respected.
We welcome the ongoing efforts made by the European
Union (EU) in facilitating the dialogue between Serbia
and Kosovo, as well as its efforts to advance peace and
stability in the region.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the highlevel engagements by the European Union during
the reporting period, including the high-level visits
to Belgrade and Pristina in the months of February
and March. We also welcome the resumption of the
EU-facilitated dialogue and call on Belgrade and
Pristina to continue demonstrating good faith and
positive commitment to the dialogue with a view to
normalizing relations.
The ongoing efforts being made to operationalize
an integrated Kosovo judiciary are a welcome step.
However, we are concerned with the slow progress
on the establishment of the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo. We
therefore encourage the implementation of all existing
agreements, in accordance with the Brussels Agreement.
We are deeply concerned by the heightened tension
and deteriorating relations following the unfortunate
incident of 26 March. The concerns expressed by the
Special Representative are indeed fully justified. It
is our hope that leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina
will continue to engage in dialogue in good faith and
maintain a positive and constructive spirit with a view
to addressing outstanding issues and disagreements
through peaceful means. That requires that both sides
refrain from actions and statements that could cause
ethnic discord, and exert efforts to create an atmosphere
of trust and confidence conducive for dialogue.
Ethiopia fully supports the work that UNMIK
has been undertaking in discharging its mandates in
line with resolution 1244 (1999). Its engagement and
support to promote inter-community reconciliation and
confidence-building measures in the reporting period
is commendable. Recent developments have indeed
made it imperative that UNMIK continue to discharge
its responsibilities.
It is our hope that UNMIK will continue to promote
political dialogue, strengthen community reconciliation
and ensure security and stability in Kosovo and the

S/PV. 8254

region. We also recognize the significant role of the
European Union on matters concerning Kosovo, and
we commend the European Union Rule of Law Mission
and the Kosovo Force for its valuable contribution in
Kosovo in the areas of the rule of law and security.
In conclusion, I would like to state that security
and stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately
be ensured when there is political will and resolve
on the part of both parties. In that respect, we once
again encourage both parties to remain committed to
dialogue and negotiation with the view to finding a
mutually acceptable solution.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for its informative
briefing and for his work. We express our appreciation
to and welcome the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić,
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their statements.
Bolivia calls for the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), including respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic
of Serbia. That resolution remains fully in force,
requiring ongoing supervision by the international
community. In that context, we reiterate that any
attempt to transform the security forces of Kosovo into
an armed force would be in contravention of resolution
1244 (1999) and of international law. We call on the
authorities of Kosovo to refrain from such action.
At the same time, we view with great concern and
condemn the violent acts during the 26 March visit by
the Director of the Office of the Government of Serbia
for Kosovo and Metohija, Marko Đurić. We urge the
authorities of Kosovo to avoid such occurrences,
and on both parties to refrain from inflammatory
rhetoric, which does nothing but detract from any
future arrangement between Belgrade and Pristina and
undermine efforts to build trust between the parties.
Likewise, we call on the authorities to investigate
those events.
Furthermore, we express our concern regarding
the slowness of progress in the investigation into the
assassination of Mr. Oliver Ivanović, leader of the
Civic Initiative “Freedom, Democracy, Justice” party.
As long as the investigation stalls, efforts intended to
build trust between the communities of Kosovo will

18-1459813/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

continue to be undermined. We therefore call on the
relevant authorities to redouble the investigation into
the events that culminated in the assassination of the
Kosovo-Serb politician on 16 January.
With regard to the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, we reiterate that the
rule of law and its impartial application are essential
to fight impunity. Perpetrators of war crimes must
answer for their actions, regardless of their condition or
origin. In that connection we hope that the authorities
of Kosovo fulfil their responsibilities and obligations
pursuant to the agreements reached.
Bolivia values the efforts carried out by the
European Union and the mediation of the High
Representative of the European Union for External and
Security Affairs aimed at advancing the implementation
of existing agreements. In our view, it is important that
the parties comply with the commitments undertaken
in the negotiations under the auspices of the European
Union. In that regard, we encourage them to impart
new energy to the dialogue process, which seems to
have stalled after a brief resumption.
We also call on the parties to work towards a peaceful
solution through dialogue and in compliance with the
obligation to negotiate, as stipulated in international
law. Along the same lines, the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, set forth in the Brussels Agreement more
than four years ago, should be established in accordance
with that Agreement; failure to do so would contravene
the Agreement. We call on the Kosovo authorities to
respect what was agreed and make progress in that
regard in order to ensure the security and rights of
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.
We appreciate the work done by UNMIK in
accordance with its mandate within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). We encourage the Mission to
continue to work on building confidence between the
parties, to resort to good offices to ease tensions, to
use peaceful means to seek consensual solutions and
to promote political dialogue and respect for rights in
safeguarding peace, as provided for in the Charter of
the United Nations.
We also commend the work that UNMIK
continues to do through its engagement with municipal
authorities and representatives of the Kosovo province
in protecting the rights of communities, promoting
intercommunity reconciliation, strengthening the
14/26

14/05/2018

rule of law, bolstering interethnic cooperation and
facilitating the return of internally displaced persons,
as well as its work in providing document certification
services. In particular, in the past period, we wish
to highlight the importance of its work on gender
equality and the activities carried out on the occasion
of International Women’s Day.
Finally, in line with the Secretary-General’s
statement in his latest report (S/2018/407), we call on
the international community to contribute to the trust
fund established to implement community-assistance
projects to benefit the Roma, Egyptian and Ashkali
minority communities affected by lead poisoning in
Kosovo, in order to meet their needs in terms of health,
economic development and infrastructure.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin for
his briefing.
In February, the United Kingdom celebrated
10 years of diplomatic relations with Kosovo. In the
same month, the European Commission adopted a
strategy for a credible enlargement perspective for
the Western Balkans. Kosovo’s opportunity here
was not overlooked. Through implementation of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement, Kosovo has
an opportunity to progress on its European path.
We welcome the significant milestones that Kosovo
has reached since our previous meeting (see S/PV.8176),
including the ratification of the border-demarcation
agreement with Montenegro. Good-neighbourly
relations are a key feature of any European democracy,
and crucial for stability in the wider Balkans region.
We encourage both Serbia and Kosovo to continue to
make progress towards a sustainable solution through
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. Progress is
vital for stability, security and prosperity in the region,
as well as in the two countries themselves. Provocative
acts and rhetoric from both sides are deeply unhelpful
and antagonistic.
Our priority in Kosovo remains strengthening
the rule of law, and challenges remain. We welcome
President Thaçi’s public commitment to upholding
Kosovo’s obligations through the Specialist Chambers.
We also welcome the speedy appointment of Jack
Smith as Kosovo’s Specialist Prosecutor, as well as the
continuity that provides in the Specialist Chamber’s
pursuit of justice for victims.
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

We note that Prime Minister Haradinaj has
requested a review into the arrest and deportation of
Turkish nationals. As a supporter of democratic values,
Kosovo must continue to give priority to the rule of
law and respect for international human rights in all
its institutions.
The investigation into the death of Oliver Ivanović
is clearly ongoing. We have been clear in our expectation
that Kosovo’s rule-of-law institutions will lead a
thorough and full investigation to bring those responsible
to justice at the earliest opportunity. But, equally, we
expect Serbia to refrain from any provocations that
could heighten tensions and to support investigative
efforts in an open and constructive manner.
The hard work and dedication of thousands of
personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has helped to bring peace
to Kosovo. The current situation is in part a result of
their work. We also recognize Kosovo’s commitment
to peace, stability, reconciliation and prosperity. The
United Kingdom will continue to be a proud supporter
of Kosovo as it strives to achieve its full potential.
Given the scale of the threats to international peace
and security around the world right now and the relative
stability and progress on the ground in Kosovo, it is
clearly inappropriate and inefficient for the Security
Council to spend so much time discussing the situation
in Kosovo and devoting so many resources to it. The
United Kingdom joins other European members of the
Council in firmly believing that the situation in Kosovo
allows for a substantial reduction in the current cycle
of reports and meetings. We further believe that the
Security Council must refocus UNMIK’s efforts so that
the means deployed by the United Nations are tailored
fully to the situation on the ground. To this end, we
look forward to a strategic review of the Mission in
due course.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the
progress made over the recent months in Kosovo. I also
wish to thank both His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku
for their statements.

S/PV. 8254

As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/407) and in Mr. Tanin’s briefing, the situation
in the Kosovo region continues to be complex and
fragile. In that regard, resolution 1244 (1999) remains
relevant and provides the main legal basis for resolving
the issue of Kosovo. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
respects the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Serbia and appreciates that
country’s continued efforts to facilitate an inclusive,
peaceful and political solution to the situation.
We would particularly like to highlight the
resumption of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, which
we hope will assist in the implementation of the such
key provisions of the Brussels Agreement as the
establishment of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities in Kosovo. We would also
like to commend the various initiatives undertaken
with the assistance of UNMIK and the United Nations
team on the ground, which have been carried out to
foster dialogue, trust and partnerships between the
parties, with a view to building peace and security
and sustainable development. Ensuring security and
stability in Kosovo requires efforts of both parties to
continue the dialogue, which is why we encourage them
to continue their endeavours aimed at achieving stability
on the ground, while respecting the implementation of
the agreements reached.
Against that backdrop, we also share the concerns
identified in the report with respect to the recent
escalation of tensions between Pristina and Belgrade,
which could affect peace and stability in the Balkans.
Equatorial Guinea finds it unacceptable that Mr. Marko
Đurić, Director of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija
of the Government of Serbia, was arrested and detained
during his visit to Kosovo on 26 March. Similarly, we are
concerned about the slow progress of the investigation
into the 16 January murder of Kosovo Serb politician
Oliver Ivanović. We call for prompt investigations
into those two events. Those challenges only damage
the trust generated among the various communities
and increase the risk of violent extremism and social
instability, which make societies more vulnerable
to conflict.
For those reasons, we call on the parties to intensify
their efforts to improve the rule of law, promote
development, peace and security in Kosovo and
safeguard good relations of trust among communities
living in Kosovo.

18-1459815/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

The issue of Kosovo is complex because of
the existence of such sensitive issues as national
reconciliation, which involve the well-being of
individuals and the protection of the rights of all
populations and communities in Kosovo. The parties
in conflict must therefore refrain from any action that
could increase tension, and instead give priority to
those that will strengthen peace and confidence, which
will undoubtedly influence the quest for a final solution
that is satisfactory to all.
We believe that all parties must continue to act
in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and within the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and existing
agreements, so that through dialogue they can find a
peaceful and lasting solution for the benefit of all. In
that regard, Equatorial Guinea supports and commends
the mandate of UNMIK and the support it provides to
all communities in Kosovo. Similarly, we appreciate the
efforts undertaken by the European Union in pursuit of
a just solution to the situation in Kosovo.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let
me thank my good friend Ambassador Tanin for his
comprehensive briefing. We continue to welcome the
good cooperation between the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and its
international partners, such as the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. I will focus on three points
today: the future of UNMIK, the dialogue facilitated
by the European Union (EU) and the rule of law.
First is the future of UNMIK. Like other European
Union members of the Security Council, we firmly
believe that the situation in Kosovo allows for a
substantial reduction of the current reporting cycle. We
furthermore believe that the Security Council should
refocus UNMIK’s efforts so that the means deployed
by the United Nations are tailored fully to the situation
on the ground. In that light, we look forward to a
strategic review of UNMIK, as suggested by Poland in
our February meeting (see S/PV.8176).
Secondly, I turn to the EU-facilitated dialogue.
We commend High Representative Mogherini for her
continuous efforts in that process. The resumption of
discussions in March was an important step towards
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. It should be stressed that in both countries
such dialogue requires sincere political will and a
united effort to achieve concrete results. We call upon
16/26

14/05/2018

the Serbian and Kosovar authorities to move beyond
the present tensions and prove their commitment to the
dialogue by continuing discussions and implementing
agreements reached thus far.
My third point is the importance of the rule of law.
For peace to become entrenched in the fabric of society,
Kosovo must protect and promote the rule of law and
hold accountable those who have committed crimes. In
that regard, we note recent steps taken by Kosovo to
reform its judiciary, but we stipulate that many more
need to be taken. The Netherlands is the host country
of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office. In that context, we express the
hope that Kosovo will do everything to uphold its
commitments and obligations.
We are encouraged by the recent ratification of
the territorial delineation agreement between Kosovo
and Montenegro. We take that as a sign of Kosovo’s
continued commitment to peace, reconciliation and
good neighbourly relations.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the comprehensive briefing delivered by Mr. Zahir
Tanin on the situation in Kosovo. Peru takes note of
the statements made by Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States.
We note with concern the tensions of recent
months. We stress, however, the existence of a strong
and comprehensive framework, provided by resolution
1244 (1999) and the Brussels Agreement, to maintain
peace and stability in Kosovo and the region. In that
regard, we welcome the timely resumption of the
political dialogue process facilitated by the European
Union, and the meetings held by the technical
negotiation teams. We also welcome the ratification
by the Kosovar Parliament of the territorial delineation
agreement with Montenegro — a development that
promotes stability and the normalization of relations
in the region, which, in turn, should lead to concrete
benefits for Kosovar citizens.
On the other hand, we are concerned about the
recurrence of incidents such as the arrest of the Serbian
politician, Marko Đurić, in Kosovo and the lack of
progress in the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities in the
country. We consider it necessary for the Kosovar
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

authorities to deal with such sensitive issues with
greater diligence.
Similarly, we believe that it is necessary to uphold
and strengthen the rule of law and confidence in
institutions. That is essential to prevent a new conflict
and consolidate sustainable peace. We therefore note
with concern the lack of progress in the relevant
investigations into the assassination of the political
leader Oliver Ivanović.
We also note the need for the Kosovar authorities
to cooperate fully with the Specialist Chambers and the
Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, which are responsible
for prosecuting the allegations of heinous crimes that
occurred during the conflict in Kosovo. We would like
to highlight the important work of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, in particular in the
promotion and protection of human rights. We welcome
its training programmes for the Kosovar police and
encourage the early adoption of the new criminal code.
We also consider it important to move towards
sustainable peace by addressing the root causes of the
conflict, promoting reconciliation and policies aimed
at recognizing and including minorities and addressing
the needs of internally displaced persons. We believe
that women and young people should be called upon
to play a decisive role in rebuilding the social fabric
and creating a shared vision of the future. We welcome
the initiatives organized by UNMIK to promote greater
participation by women and young people in political
and social processes. On the other hand, we must
reject and deplore the illegal destruction of protected
cultural heritage, as well as hate speech that fuels
intercommunal tensions.
We would like to conclude by expressing our support
for the work of UNMIK, as well as for the Kosovo
Force, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in their efforts to
help build sustainable peace in Kosovo and the region.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
comprehensive briefing to the Security Council on the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2018/407). The State of Kuwait fully supports the
Special Representative in his activities and values the
vital role that the United Nations has played over the
past period in helping Kosovo to build its institutions in

S/PV. 8254

accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
notably, resolution 1244 (1999). I would also like to
welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku. I thank them for
their briefings.
I will focus my remarks on the political and security
developments in Kosovo.
First, I will address the political developments. The
State of Kuwait acknowledged the independence of the
Republic of Kosovo in 2013. We support all efforts
by the Republic of Kosovo to strengthen its security,
stability, rule of law and justice system, as well as
its ongoing efforts to build up its State institutions.
We support its efforts to integrate with the European
Union, and we call for stepping up the work to resume
dialogue led by the European Union and implement
all agreements between Kosovo and Serbia to reach
lasting solutions to issues between the two parties so
as to ensure good-neighbourly relations and strengthen
regional stability and security. We commend the steps
taken by Kosovo to accelerate the implementation of
the European Union reform agenda, especially with
regard to the ratification of the agreement signed in
2015 with Montenegro on the demarcation of the two
countries’ shared border.
We welcome the resumption of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina at the technical level. We urge the two parties
to commit fully to honouring all their obligations within
the framework of that dialogue, in particular with regard
to the establishment of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities as a first step towards strengthening
trust between the two parties. We welcome efforts to
create a comprehensive judiciary in Kosovo in line
with the agreements between Belgrade and Pristina.
The European Union-facilitated high-level dialogue
therefore remains the optimal framework within which
to settle pending issues between the two parties and the
only way to reach just and sustainable solutions.
Secondly, with regard to security developments,
we are concerned about signs of deteriorating relations
between Belgrade and Pristina, especially following
the arrest of the Director of the Office for Kosovo
and Metohija of the Government of Serbia, Mr. Marko
Đurić, on 26 March. We call on both parties to avoid
all provocation and inflammatory rhetoric. We urge
the authorities in Belgrade and Pristina to continue to

18-1459817/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

address all matters of concern through dialogue and to
demonstrate the necessary political will so as to ensure
the full normalization of relations between both parties.
We express our concern about the slow progress being
made in investigating the assassination of the Kosovo
Serb politician Oliver Ivanović, on 16 January. We
believe that trading accusations will undermine mutual
trust among communties throughout Kosovo.
The international community must step up its efforts
to encourage Pristina and Belgrade to overcome all their
differences and reach sustainable and just solutions that
are acceptable to the two parties to ensure peace and
stability throughout the region. We encourage UNMIK
to continue its active cooperation with Pristina and
Belgrade, and all communities in Kosovo to strengthen
stability, security and human rights.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Dačić, and the
Ambassador of Kosovo, Ms. Çitaku, for their briefings.
Considering the situation described by the Special
Representative, I will underscore three points.
First, the commitment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo and the region must continue to be
commended. In particular, France welcomes UNMIK’s
activities involving bringing together communities and
promoting the women and peace and security agenda,
together with UN-Women. As the members of the
European Union who sit on the Security Council have
underscored, we must continue to be attentive to the
realignment of UNMIK’s work so that United Nations
resources can be fully adapted to the situation on the
ground. At a time when there is debate concerning
the future of peacekeeping operations, it is our
responsibility, as members of the Security Council, to
attend to such adaptation, as well as to the coordination
of the work of UNMIK with that of other international
actors in Kosovo.
Secondly, the strategy for European Union
engagement with the Western Balkans published on
6 February attests to the commitment of the European
Union countries with regard to the countries of the
Western Balkans. The strategy clearly recalls the
European perspective concerning those countries,
while emphasizing the work that is expected of them
18/26

14/05/2018

so that they might move forward in that direction.
France stands steadfastly with Kosovo so that it can
pursue its development efforts and the progress made
over the past 10 years, deal with issues facing it and
meet the needs of the Kosovar people. We call on
the Kosovar authorities to pursue reform efforts with
a view to consolidating Kosovo’s institutions and its
economic and social development, and on all political
forces to work towards building political consensus on
key issues for the country’s future. We firmly condemn
the use of violent means, such as the use of tear gas, to
disrupt the functioning of Parliament.
The Council knows of our commitment to the
consolidation of the rule of law in Kosovo, which must
be pursued, as well as to the struggle against corruption
and organized crime. We welcomed the significant
development represented by the ratification of the
territorial delineation agreement with Montenegro
on 21 March, which was the result of a difficult
process and will contribute to strengthening goodneighbourly relations at the regional level. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/407) also highlights
the positive work done by the Kosovar authorities to
further protect victims of sexual violence.
Lastly, France regrets that, since this past January,
several incidents have cast a shadow on the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. My country calls on
each party to refrain from any action or statement
likely to provoke tensions and to try to resolve their
differences through dialogue so as to create an
environment sustainably conducive to the progress
that remains to be made. The Serbian and Kosovar
Presidents expressed their willingness to move forward
towards the conclusion of a comprehensive agreement
on the normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo. That commitment must be underscored.
Despite difficulties that might arise, that path must
be resolutely followed. France fully supports such a
perspective and the work carried out to that end by the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy. Ms. Mogherini.
We noted with interest the resumption of efforts by
Kosovar authorities to draft the statute of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, which
is one of the fundamental commitments provided for
in the Brussels agreements. France believes that the
comprehensive normalization of relations between
the two countries is the only way forward for the two
countries and their future generations and — as was
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

recalled in the European Union strategy — a prerequisite
for moving forward on their respective European paths.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing. We welcome the presence and statement
of Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I have also listened very
carefully to the statement by Ms. Çitaku.
Tolerance, reconciliation and peaceful coexistence
serve the fundamental interests of all ethnic
communities in Kosovo and are necessary for achieving
development. Currently, the situation in the Kosovo
region continues to face complex challenges. China
hopes that the parties concerned will always put the
well-being of their people first, protect the legitimate
rights and interests of all communities, refrain from
actions and rhetoric that could escalate the situation
and work together to safeguard the peace, stability and
development of the Balkans.
Resolution 1244 (1999) provides an important
legal basis for resolving the issue of Kosovo. All
parties should act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and,
within the framework of relevant Security Council
resolutions, seek a solution that is acceptable to all
parties through dialogue and negotiations.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, understands Serbia’s legitimate
concerns about the question of Kosovo and commends
its efforts to pursue a political solution thereto. China
welcomes the efforts of Belgrade and Pristina to
continue to enhance dialogue. We hope that the two
sides will reaffirm their firm commitment to a political
solution, implement existing agreements, gradually
build mutual trust, contribute their political will
and wisdom and meet one another half way so as to
create conditions for finding a lasting solution that is
acceptable to all parties concerned.
The Security Council should maintain its attention
on the question of Kosovo and encourage both parties
to undertake sincere dialogue so as to promote a proper
settlement of the Kosovo question. China supports
UNMIK, under the leadership of Special Representative
Tanin, in discharging its mandate and cooperating
constructively with all parties. We hope that UNMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo

S/PV. 8254

and the Kosovo Force will work in close collaboration
to play a constructive role in improving the situation
on the ground and achieving a proper settlement for the
Kosovo question.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing appreciation to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin,
for his briefing on the reporting period. We also thank
His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their updates. Today I wish to
speak on five points.
First, there are still a number of sensitive issues
left to be resolved, such as the lack of inter-community
trust and a large number of persons still missing. An
issue of some concern is the incident that took place on
26 March concerning Mr. Marko Đurić, Director of the
Office for Kosovo and Metohija of the Government of
Serbia. We also note with regret that no progress has
been made in the investigation of the January murder
of Serbian activist Oliver Ivanović. Of equal critical
importance is the protection of vulnerable groups,
including Roma and Ashkali, and of cultural heritage
and diversity in Kosovo.
Secondly, we commend steps taken by the parties
under the auspices of Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, to discuss the implementation
of the agreements by way of holding a series of
technical and high-level meetings in Brussels in
February and March. We fully support her call for
action to urgently establish the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities.
Thirdly, we would like to refer to women and youth.
In that vein, the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, remains a
matter of high importance. Special attention must
be paid to the role of women as actors for peace and
security. They need to be actively involved in political
life and the decision-making process. There is also a
need to implement resolution 2250 (2015), on youth,
peace and security, and to provide full support and
access to youth of all ethnicities to education and skills
development to fulfil their potential. Young people
have great power to prevent conflicts and to promote
trust and peace.

18-1459819/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

Fourthly, we welcome the activity of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
during the reporting period, including the arranging
of nearly 40 confidence-building measures to promote
inter-community cooperation and trust, with the
engagement of representatives of the Government, the
opposition, civil society, women and youth, media and
religious organizations in different parts of Kosovo.
Fifthly, we support the whole-of-pillar approach
in Kosovo, since neither peace and security nor
development can be achieved without good governance,
the rule of law, criminal justice, institutional and
human rights-related reforms, including the fight
against corruption and organized crime. Above all, we
highlight the importance of the nexus between security
and development, the potential for which should be
created through utilizing an innovative revamped
regional approach and a more efficient, transparent and
accountable modus operandi of the United Nations,
delivering as One United Nations at Headquarters and
on the ground.
Lastly, we believe that peace and stability in Kosovo
could be achieved if the parties follow agreements,
focusing on promoting inter-community dialogue and
trust, mutual respect and understanding.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for the quality of his
briefing on the situation in Kosovo. We also welcome
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador of the Republic of
Kosovo to the United States of America.
I will focus my remarks on both the progress
made and the challenges remaining in relations
between Serbia and Kosovo since the previous report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/76). My delegation
notes with satisfaction the ratification by the Kosovo
Parliament, on 21 March, of the Montenegro border
demarcation agreement, which is an important step in
the normalization of relations between the two countries.
My country appreciates the fact that the political parties
have managed to overcome their differences despite the
violent actions of some opposition parties in attempts
to derail the process.
20/26

14/05/2018

My delegation also welcomes the holding, on
23 March in Brussels, under the auspices of the
European Union, of the high-level meeting between the
political authorities of Pristina and Belgrade, as part of
the political dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. My
delegation hopes that that kind of meeting will continue
to happen, in the interests of reconciliation and the
final settlement of the Kosovo question. In that respect,
Côte d’Ivoire would like to reaffirm its support for the
continuation of the political dialogue between Serbia
and Kosovo under the auspices of the European Union.
Despite some progress, my delegation remains
concerned by the signs of continued tension between
Belgrade and Pristina, including the arrest and
subsequent expulsion, on 26 March, of Mr. Marko
Đurić, chief negotiator and representative of Kosovo
Serbs, from northern Mitrovica. My delegation urges
Serbia and Kosovo to give priority to constructive
dialogue and to refrain from any unilateral action that
could jeopardize the prospects for a peaceful settlement
of the dispute between the two countries. My delegation
also calls on them to observe good neighborly relations.
In that regard, my country welcomes the mediation
efforts of the European Union, whose representative,
Ms. Mogherini, travelled to Belgrade on 27 March to
meet with the Serbian leadership in order to discuss
the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina.
My delegation also remains concerned about the
slowness and lack of tangible results in the investigations
into the 16 January murder of Oliver Ivanović, leader of
the Civic Initiative “Freedom, Democracy, Justice”. We
recall the importance of consolidating the rule of law in
the framework of the fight against impunity.
Turning to the situation in Kosovo, Côte d’Ivoire
again calls for the implementation of the agreement
establishing the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities in Kosovo, which will
undoubtedly be a major source of appeasement and
easing of the sociopolitical climate. My delegation
urges the Kosovo political authorities to demonstrate
the necessary political will to remove all obstacles
to the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo.
In conclusion, my country once again welcomes
the work done by UNMIK to stabilize the situation in
Kosovo and to bring the various communities together.
My delegation urges Serbia and Kosovo to give priority
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

to dialogue in order to find solutions to the problems
that hinder their good-neighbourly relations, as both
countries have the duty and the capacity to make the
Balkan region a stable and prosperous region where
their respective communities can live in peace and
harmony with respect for their political, ethnic and
cultural diversity.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin,
and his team for their work and objective assessment of
the situation in Kosovo. The Mission continues to play
an important role in the province. We also acknowledge
Mr. Tanin’s personal efforts. We also welcome the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, to today’s meeting.
We agree with the Minister as he expressed serious
concerns about the situation in the province. We also
support the determination of Serbia’s leaders to resolve
all issues through civilized dialogue. We listened very
carefully to Ms. Çitaku’s statement.
According to our assessment, the situation in
Kosovo is not only not stabilizing; on the contrary, it is
deteriorating. Negative factors continue to accumulate.
The situation requires constructive diplomatic efforts
and strict international control, primarily through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), in particular since we understand
that the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) has plans to leave the province.
No progress has been made to date in the
investigation into the murder of a well-known KosovoSerb politician, Oliver Ivanović. Much time has elapsed
since 16 January, the date on which the crime was
committed. However, thus far we have heard no credible
information about the results of the investigation.
We are therefore left with the impression that the
authorities in Pristina, after they tried and failed to put
the blame on Serbia, decided to simply forget about the
investigation. But the truth must be determined as soon
as possible, and the Security Council must be apprised
of it.
In addition to that tragedy, on 26 March there
was another egregious incident in Kosovo and
Metohija — the brutal, humiliating and violent arrest
of the Director of the Serbian Government’s Kosovo
office, Mr. Marko Đurić. As a result of that staged

S/PV. 8254

and cruel provocative act, scores of people were
beaten. That kind of unprovoked violence on the part
of the Pristina’s special forces calls into question the
already fragile peace in the province. Bloodshed was
prevented only because the Serbs behaved responsibly.
Such lawlessness against Serbs in Kosovo illustrates a
deplorable situation with respect to law enforcement
and human rights. It is drastically different from the
rosy, but virtual, picture painted by those advocating
the independence of the province. In that regard, we
are puzzled about the blatant permissiveness on the
part of the international presence — the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the EULEX. They stood idly by, observed
from the sidelines and refused to act to ensure to public
order and safety.
We believe that that kind of intimidation
against Serbs in Kosovo and the suppression of their
determination to protect their legitimate interests is
very dangerous and can lead to the resurgence of armed
clashes in Kosovo. It could also destabilize the Balkans
as a whole. The line chosen by Pristina serves only to
inflame the situation and undermines the long-lasting
efforts of the international community in the area of
post-conflict settlement. We would like to address
and call upon those with influence over Pristina to put
pressure on those they support to de-escalate tensions.
Regrettably, we are witnessing exactly the opposite.
Pristina believes it can act with impunity, with full
permission to do so. Contrary to resolution 1244
(1999), it continues to prepare for the transformation
of Kosovo’s current security forces into a full-fledged
army. It is being assisted by certain NATO contingents
in KFOR, which by doing so go beyong the United
Nations mandate. The closed Bondsteel base is being
used for those purposes in particular. Kosovo-Albanian
fighters are being prepared for active combat. We
would like to warn the Council that, in the interest of
peace and security in the Balkans, it is important to
halt the creation of a force that hot-headed entities will
employ against Serbs in the province.
We also have questions about the complete closure
of the Bondsteel base. Its establishment was based on the
importance of ensuring an international presence under
the United Nations mandate, within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). The international community
has the right to information about the kind of military
activity conducted at the base. Who is being trained
there and for what purposes? What kind of exercises
are being conducted? We believe it would be logical to

18-1459821/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

include that kind of information in the quarterly reports
about the United Nations Mission in Kosovo.
We are also concerned about the information
we received some time ago from NATO with regard
to the fact that the KFOR command will halt contact
with Russian representatives. What is being hidden
from a permanent member of the Security Council by
an international entity that is in Kosovo on the basis
of the United Nations mandate? We hope that reason
will prevail and that that erroneous decision will
be reviewed.
The Russian position on Kosovo remains unchanged
and is based on the international legal frameworks that
are reflected in resolution 1244 (1999), which remains
the cornerstone of the Kosovo settlement. We are of the
view that the Kosovo issue can be settled only through
politics, on the basis of negotiations between parties in
the spirit of goodwill and international law. Regrettably,
we must acknowledge that dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina has been discredited.
More than five years have elapsed since the Brussels
Agreement was signed but the key obligation contained
therein, which was reached under the auspices of the
European Union, namely, the establishment of the
community of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo,
has still not been implemented. We bear witness to laxity
on the part of the European Union, the international
mediator. It did not compel the Kosovo Albanians
to implement agreements achieved under their own
auspices. As a result, Pristina openly undermines the
implementation of its own commitments and refuses to
abandon its own unrealistic demands. In contrast, we
witness a constructive approach by Belgrade to tackle
the Kosovo issue in the statement made by President
Vučić citing his readiness to reach a compromise.
At the same time, we are therefore concerned about
increased pressure on the Serbian leadership and
attempts to compel Belgrade to acknowledge the de
facto independence of Kosovo. We hope that a Brussels
dialogue will be spared such pressure and ultimatums.
Failing that, we cannot expect to have success in the
form of a long-term solution acceptable to all.
We believe it is untimely to push forward and link
the so-called full and comprehensive normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina to an
artificial timeline. First, we must fully implement
earlier agreements, without which the already weak
trust among the members of the negotiating process
22/26

14/05/2018

could disappear altogether. The implementation of
the agreement concerning the establishment of the
community of Serb-majority municipalities is at the
centre of our attention.
We must note that no practical moves have been
made with regard to Specialist Chambers in The
Hague to investigate crimes committed by the Kosovo
Liberation Army. Eight years have passed since the
publication of the Marty report on the issue. That is
another serious problem. We believe that it is not
constructive to delay the start of the work of that body
under artificial pretexts. We expect that the Specialist
Chambers will start its work in the very near future and
be as transparent as possible. All those who committed
terrible crimes, including trafficking in human organs,
must face justice and be justly punished, regardless of
their current positions. To replace Mr. Shwendiman,
who retired on 7 May, American lawyer, Mr. Smith, has
been appointed to the position of Prosecutor. We hope
that he will quickly assume his post and finally produce
tangible results in the form of specific indictments.
The rate of refugees and internally displaced persons
to the region is also unsatisfactory. As indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/407), only three
people returned to Kosovo during the reporting period.
For some that truth is unpleasant, but it is still the truth.
Attacks on homes and property of Kosovo Serbs,
arson, physical trespass and acts of vandalism continue.
We must pay particular attention to ensuring proper
protection for the Orthodox sites in Kosovo — churches
and monasteries. We must also put an end to the
destructive practice of denigrating sensibilities and
humiliating Serbs and other minorities in Kosovo.
We should not turn a blind eye to acute issues and
problems, such as in the area of counter-terrorism and
combating corruption and crime, but we must actually
address them. The situation with regard to those issues
is very worrisome.
In the current situation, the international
community, with the leading role played by the United
Nations and represented by the Security Council
and the United Nations Mission in Kosovo, should
pay more attention to the situation in Kosovo and
actively contribute to the maintenance stability and
security in the region. Given those and other current
circumstances, we consider the calls to reduce the
frequency of reviewing the situation in Kosovo at
the Secutiry Council to be completely inappropriate.
18-14598

14/05/2018

Kosovo

S/PV. 8254

Allow me to remind those who ignore this fact that
UNMIK was created by the Security Council, and only
the Security Council has the authority to make relevant
decisions in that regard. Unilateral statements are null
and void.

against corruption and organized crime. To that end,
we encourage the Government and the opposition
to engage in constructive dialogue to overcome
political deadlocks and to enable the acceleration of
necessary reforms.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the
Western Balkans, with its rich history and potential,
can, and should, become a region for cooperation and
interaction, rather than tension and hostility. However,
in order to achieve that, we must abandon the logic of
confrontation and the practice of presenting countries
in the region with the false choice of: Are you with or
against us? As in many other parts of the world, what
we need there is collective work on the basis of mutual
respect. The Russian Federation stands ready for that.

It is also crucial that Kosovo’s political leadership
continue to respect the rule of law and human rights.
In that regard, we are concerned over the recent arrest
and expulsion of Turkish nationals without customary
court proceedings, and we are concerned about the
slow pace of progress in the investigation of the murder
of Oliver Ivanović.

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
begin by thanking Special Representative Zahir Tanin
for his briefing today. I would also like to thank Deputy
Prime Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku for their
statements to the Security Council.
As others European Union (EU) members of the
Council have already stated, the situation in Kosovo
calls for a substantial reduction in the frequency of the
reporting cycle. We should also refocus the efforts of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) so that the means deployed by the
United Nations are better tailored to the situation on the
ground. To that end, we look forward to the strategic
review of the Mission.
Kosovo’s European perspective was reconfirmed
in the European Commission’s strategy for a credible
enlargement perspective for and enhanced European
Union engagement with the Western Balkans, which
was adopted in February. The EU-Western Balkans
summit, which will take place later this week in Sofia,
will offer another opportunity for both sides to reaffirm
their political commitment to advancing these efforts.
We welcome the progress made since our
previous meeting (see S/PV.8176), in particular the
ratification of the territorial delineation agreement
with Montenegro by the Assembly of Kosovo, which
represents an important breakthrough. We share the
Secretary-General’s assessment that the ratification
is an indication of Kosovo’s commitment to its
humanitarian perspective.
Moving forward, it is now important to resume
a dedicated reform agenda and to intensify the fight

The continued deadlock in the normalization
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo must be overcome.
The future of both lies within the European Union,
and the normalization of relations is vital for a stable,
peaceful and prosperous Western Balkans. We call on
Pristina and Belgrade to implement their commitments
and to inject new impetus into the dialogue process.
As we have stated before, the status issue must not
hamper Kosovo’s European perspective or membership
in international organizations.
Sweden welcomes the important work being
undertaken on women and peace and security in Kosovo.
That includes support to wartime survivors of conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence, and women’s
political participation. We reiterate the importance of
the role of women in the normalization process.
The United Nations and UNMIK have made
invaluable contributions to help bring Kosovo to
where it is today. However, the EU integration process,
including through the support of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, now provides the
most appropriate framework to deal with remaining
challenges. By continuing to work towards Kosovo’s
European perspective, with support from the EU and the
international community, Kosovo’s leaders can deliver
on the expectations of their people for a better future.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
At the outset, let me thank Special Representative
Zahir Tanin for his briefing. I would also like to thank
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku
for their statements before the Security Council.
I would like to join my European colleagues in
saying that we believe that the situation in Kosovo
allows for a substantial reduction of the current

18-1459823/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

reporting cycle. We furthermore believe that the
Security Council must refocus the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) so that the means deployed by the United
Nations are tailored fully to the situation on the
ground. In that light, Poland also reiterates the need
for a strategic review of UNMIK. Twenty years have
passed since the Mission’s establishment and, in our
view, it is time to reassess its relevance.
Poland has recognized Kosovo as an independent
State and we have confidence in Kosovo’s ability
to resolve its problems. I will now briefly focus on
three points.
First, I would like to stress the importance of
the continuation of the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, which should
lead to a legally binding agreement on a comprehensive
normalization of relations. Moreover, I would like
to highlight that the decisions already made within
the dialogue should be swiftly implemented. That
is a prerequisite for both countries on their path to
European integration.
The second point that I would like to make is on the
importance of the rule of law. We stress the need for
the Kosovo authorities to respect their obligations to
support the work of the Specialist Chambers. We trust
that they will continue to do so. We also note Kosovo’s
efforts to bring the justice system up to international
and European Union standards. The law on courts and
the law on the disciplinary responsibilities of judges
and prosecutors, which were recently adopted, are
important steps in that direction. The support in the
area of the rule of law delivered in recent years by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo was of
the utmost importance.
Thirdly, and finally, let me welcome the ratification
of the demarcation agreement with Montenegro. It
is a crucial step towards visa liberalization with the
European Union and towards further stabilization
of the region. Let me conclude by saying that Poland
regards Kosovo as being fully capable of managing
its own future and exploiting its potential within the
shared framework of European values.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Dačić has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
24/26

14/05/2018

Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I am not going to engage in
polemics with Ms. Çitaku, as that is not my intention.
In the first place, as I have already said many times,
I would like these meetings to be constructive, and
therefore, again, I will not comment on what she
said — although I could do so, of course, as could she.
Moreover, I would like to add something to what I
heard from the representatives of some of the countries
present here. I am glad that the 10-year anniversary
of the independence of Kosovo and the establishment
of diplomatic relations was mentioned, particularly
by the representative of the United Kingdom. But I
would also recall that last year marked the one hundred
and eightieth anniversary of the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Serbia and the United
Kingdom. The first British Consul to Serbia was
George Lloyd Hodges, appointed in 1837. I hope that is
also gratifying, in addition to the 10 years of diplomatic
relations with Kosovo.
In addition, I would like to recall that next year
we will observe 180 years of diplomatic relations with
France, as ties were established in 1839. This year
also marks 180 years of diplomatic relations with the
Russian Federation, beginning in 1838. In 1881 — 137
years ago — we established diplomatic relations with
the United States. In 1899 — 119 years ago — we
established diplomatic relations with the Netherlands.
I am referring exclusively here to the Kingdom of
Serbia, not Yugoslavia. In 1917 — 101 years ago — we
established diplomatic relations with Sweden. And
we established diplomatic relations with Poland 99
years ago.
Therefore, I would like to recall that we are an old
State with which Council members have traditional
and friendly relations. In fact, as one exits the United
Kingdom’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office one
can see a mural, erected after the First World War, that
depicts Britannia with children representing Belgium
and Serbia as the countries that made the largest
contributions and had the largest number of victims in
the war. We lost 40 per cent of our male population
in the First World War. Consequently, I would ask
the Council to consider those aspects when talking
about our relations and our problems — all the more
so considering that these issues are very difficult and
painful to us.
18-14598

14/05/2018

S/PV. 8254

Kosovo

I ask the Council to show greater understanding
for our desire to be partners with every member. We
have a long-standing tradition of diplomatic relations,
several centuries. I also ask the Council to remember
that history and what Serbia did for its allies in the First
and Second World Wars. I do not want to delve too far
into the past, as some might accuse us of dwelling
there, but one cannot make plans for the future based
exclusively on respect for Kosovo’s interests. Serbia is
willing to compromise, but that means respecting the
interests of both sides.
Many countries in the world are facing problems
similar to Serbia’s. They are now reviewing their
decisions to recognize Kosovo for those very same
reasons — because they are now facing their own
separatist movements. How can they recognize these
principles in one situation and not in another? One
could perhaps say that Kosovo is sui generis. Anyone
can say that their case is sui generis. Moreover, this is
not a fight for self-determination or freedom, because
the Albanians in Kosovo are not a people who did not
have a State of their own. They are a national minority
that lived in Serbia. Albanians, as a people, have
already exercised their right to self-determination by
establishing a State of their own — Albania. The fact
that diplomatic relations were such that Kosovo was
recognized as an independent State does not mean that
the same determination will prevail in, say, 20 years,
when the same problems appear at one’s door.

of his country to Serbia — the largest victim of the
First World War — as a country that was included in
Wilson’s 14 points and one that made a huge historical
mistake by creating Yugoslavia and enabling others to
break free from other occupiers. That is an error that we
will have to pay for. I ask the Council to consider that.
The United Kingdom says that it is glad to
commemorate 10 years since the independence of
Kosovo, but I have not heard that Great Britain is
gratified to have enjoyed 170 or 180 years of diplomatic
relations with Serbia. The same is true of other countries
as well. Serbia is the only country in the world that has
a monument in honour of France. We love France as
France loved us.
This is history. Some will say that history is
not important. However, those that have a history
cannot possibly say that; only those that do not have a
history can.
The members of the Security Council have a history.
I would therefore like to thank them for everything that
they said — whether good or bad for us. Everyone has
the right to choose their own future. We understand
that there are no long-standing friends or enemies, but
there are in fact long-standing friends. Do not break old
friendships because of new ones.
The President: Ms. Çitaku has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Ms. Çitaku: I will try to be very brief.

We do not wish conflict. Serbia is a serious
country, an old country that shaped international order
over several centuries for Christianity, for Europe and
for the world at large. That must be taken into account
when other countries are called upon to recognize
Kosovo. I would never call upon other countries
to violate any other country’s territorial integrity.
We would like to be partners with all countries, but
partnership also implies that we should remember that
in this country and in the United Kingdom 100 years
ago, Serbian Day was observed during the First World
War. I can bring a poster of that to the next meeting of
the Security Council.

First, many members of the Security Council raised
the issue of the murder of Mr. Oliver Ivanović. On
behalf of the Kosovo Government, I want to reiterate
that we will leave no stone unturned until we find the
perpetrators of that terrible crime. Mr. Ivanović was a
citizen of Kosovo. He was among the few local Serbian
leaders who spoke openly about Pristina as the capital
of the Serbs living in Kosovo. He spoke openly against
intimidation and the threat to which local Serbs were
subjected by the authorities in Belgrade. We ask for the
cooperation of all the parties. I hope that I will soon
come to the Council with results.

Has anything changed for the British people
over the past 100 years? Probably, but the same thing
happened in the United States. All of us here must be
aware that these are not lies, but rather historical facts
that can be researched. That is why, in Serbia, we will
erect a monument to Woodrow Wilson, President of
the United States, who clearly defined the relationship

Secondly, I need to reiterate that Kosovo’s
independence is not the product of a secessionist
movement. Kosovo’s independence is the product of
the non-consensual dissolution of Yugoslavia — a
union that no longer exists. I urge whoever has any
doubts about the legality of Kosovo’s independence to
read the advisory opinion of the International Court

18-1459825/26

S/PV.8254

Kosovo

of Justice (see A/64/881). The opinion was clear and
unambiguous. It is true that Kosovo is a very young
State, but we are also a very old nation. We can point to
any given date in history. We have always existed. We
are Europeans and we are proud of the friendships and

26/26

14/05/2018

alliances that we have with all members. I hope that
Kosovo will soon establish diplomatic relations also
with Serbia.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

18-14598
