S/2021/1013

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 December 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 6 December 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council
The Niger assumed the presidency of the Security Council on 1 December 2021.
The presidency will attempt to return to the regular conduct of business of the
Security Council, as foreseen by the Charter of the United Nations and the provisional
rules of procedure.
The presidency intends to hold all Security Council meetings in person in the
Council Chamber and, as the situation allows, to hold consultations in the
consultations room.
The conduct of Security Council meetings at Headquarters will be guided by the
advice and guidance of the Health-Care Management and Occupational Safety and
Health Division of the Secretariat. Participants must always wear masks, except while
speaking in the Council Chamber.
If the situation relating to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic
deteriorates during December, the Council may consider reverting to the workin g
methods outlined in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Security
Council contained in document S/2020/372.
Member States that are not members of the Security Council and have been
invited to participate in public meetings of the Counci l under articles 37 or 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure or invited by the presidency as agreed by the Council
prior to the meeting, will be allowed into the Chamber. In addition, Member States
that are not members of the Council will continue to be able to participate in open
debates through the submission of written statements.
With a view to enhancing efficiency and transparency during this extraordinary
period, the presidency encourages the implementation of the note dated 30 August
2017 by the President of the Security Council contained in document S/2017/507,
related to the working methods of the Council, and such subsequent notes.
These guidelines and methods are intended to address exceptional circumstances
and are not intended to set a precedent for the future, and may be reviewed, adapted
or discontinued, at the convenience of all Council members.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

21-18229 (E)

091221

*2118229*
