A/59/PV.65

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-ninth session

65th plenary meeting
Thursday, 2 December 2004, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Sixth Committee on
agenda items 138 to 152, 157, 159, 160 and 162.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Ms. Anna Sotaniemi of Finland, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Sixth Committee before
the General Assembly.
Ms. Sotaniemi (Finland): Today I have the
honour to present to the General Assembly the reports
of the Sixth Committee on the 19 substantive agenda
items allocated to it, namely, items 138 to 152 and 157,
159, 160 and 162.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention
first to agenda item 138, “Nationality of natural
persons in relation to the succession of States”. The
relevant report of the Committee is contained in
document A/59/504, and the draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, invite Governments to
submit comments on the advisability of drafting a legal
instrument on the nationality of natural persons in
relation to the succession of States and would decide to

(Gabon)

consider the agenda item again at its sixty-third
session.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
I now turn to the report of the Sixth Committee
on agenda item 139, “Responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts”, contained in document
A/59/505.
Under the terms of the draft resolution
reproduced in paragraph 6 of the report, the General
Assembly would request the Secretary-General to
invite States to submit comments on any future action
to be taken with regard to the articles on State
responsibility. The Secretary-General would also be
requested to prepare an initial compilation of decisions
of international courts, tribunals and other bodies
referring to the articles and to invite Governments to
submit information on their practice in that regard. In
addition, the Assembly would decide to include the
item in its provisional agenda for the sixty-second
session.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will do
the same.
I now invite the attention of the Assembly to
agenda item 140, “Status of the Protocols Additional to
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to the
protection of victims of armed conflicts”. The relevant
report of the Sixth Committee is contained in document

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-63087 (E)

*0463087*

A/59/PV.65

A/59/506, and the draft resolution that the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly for adoption is
set out in paragraph 7 thereof.

Committee is contained in document A/59/508, and the
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 9 thereof.

In accordance with the terms of the draft
resolution, the Assembly would, in particular, call upon
all States parties to the Geneva Conventions that have
not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the
Additional Protocols at the earliest possible date; call
upon all States that are already parties to Protocol I, or
those States not parties, on becoming parties to
Protocol I, to make the declaration provided for under
article 90 of that Protocol; and call upon all States that
have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to
the 1954 Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and the two
Protocols thereto, and to other relevant treaties on
international humanitarian law relating to the
protection of victims of armed conflict.

I am pleased to note that the draft resolution
contains, in its annex, the text of the United Nations
Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and
Their Property. Under the terms of the draft resolution,
the General Assembly would adopt the Convention and
invite States to become parties to it.

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is hoped that the Assembly will
do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 141, “Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives”. The relevant report of the Sixth
Committee is contained in document A/59/507, and the
draft resolution that the Committee recommends to the
Assembly for adoption is set out in paragraph 7
thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, strongly condemn all acts
of violence against diplomatic and consular missions
and representatives, as well as against missions and
representatives of international intergovernmental
organizations and officials of such organizations, and
urge States to take all necessary measures at the
national and international levels to prevent any such
acts of violence and to ensure, with the participation of
the United Nations where appropriate, that such acts
are fully investigated with a view to bringing offenders
to justice.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and the Assembly may wish to do the
same.
I now invite the attention of members to agenda
item 142, “Convention on jurisdictional immunities of
States and their property”. The relevant report of the

2

In accordance with the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would agree with the general
understanding reached in the Ad Hoc Committee on
Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property
that the Convention does not cover criminal
proceedings. In accordance with its articles 28 and 33,
the Convention shall be open for signature by all States
from 17 January 2005 until 17 January 2007.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
I now turn to the report of the Sixth Committee
on agenda item 143, “Report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its thirty-seventh session”. The report of the Sixth
Committee on that agenda item is contained in
document A/59/509, and the two draft resolutions
recommended to the Assembly for adoption are
contained in paragraph 10 thereof.
Under the terms of draft resolution I, entitled
“Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its thirtyseventh session”, the General Assembly would, among
other things, appeal to relevant international and
regional organizations to coordinate their legal
activities with those of the Commission, to avoid
duplication of efforts and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law. It would also
reaffirm the importance, in particular for developing
countries, of the work of the Commission concerned
with training and legislative technical assistance in the
field of international trade law and would, in that
connection, appeal to Governments, the relevant bodies
of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to support the training and
legislative technical assistance programme of the
Commission and to make voluntary contributions to the
relevant trust fund.

A/59/PV.65

Furthermore, the Assembly would welcome the
Commission’s consideration of the means of actively
engaging non-State actors in its work and would
encourage the Commission to further explore different
approaches to the use of partnerships with non-State
actors in the implementation of its mandate. The
Assembly would also express its appreciation for the
preparation of a digest of case law on the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods.
Under the operative paragraphs of draft
resolution II, entitled “Legislative Guide on Insolvency
Law of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law”, the General Assembly would
express its appreciation to the Commission for the
completion and adoption of the Legislative Guide and
request the Secretary-General to publish it.
Furthermore, the Assembly would recommend that all
States give due consideration to the Legislative Guide
when revising or adopting their relevant legislation.
The Sixth Committee adopted those two draft
resolutions without a vote, and it is hoped that the
Assembly will do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 144, entitled “Report
of the International Law Commission on the work of
its fifty-sixth session”. The relevant report of the Sixth
Committee is contained in document A/59/510, and the
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is contained in paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, take note of the
report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-sixth session and recommend that the
Commission continue its work on the topics in its
current programme, taking into account the comments
and observations of Governments. The Assembly
would also express its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at its
fifty-sixth session, in particular for the completion of
the first reading of draft articles on diplomatic
protection and of the draft principles on the allocation
of loss in the case of transboundary harm arising out of
hazardous activities.
The Assembly would draw the attention of
Governments to the importance for the International
Law Commission of having their views on the various
aspects involved in the topics on the agenda of the
Commission, particularly with regard to the draft

articles and commentary on diplomatic protection and
the draft principles on allocation of loss in the case of
transboundary harm arising out of hazardous activities.
The Assembly would reiterate the invitation to
Governments to provide information regarding State
practice on the topic “Unilateral acts of States”, and
would invite Governments to provide information
regarding their practice, bilateral or regional, relating
to the allocation of groundwaters from transboundary
aquifer systems and the management of non-renewable
transboundary aquifer systems relating to the topic
currently entitled “Shared natural resources”.
The Assembly would endorse the decision of the
International Law Commission to include in its agenda
the topics “Expulsion of aliens” and “Effects of armed
conflicts on treaties”. Moreover, it would take note of
paragraphs 362 and 363 of the report of the
International Law Commission with regard to its longterm programme of work and the syllabus on the new
topic annexed to the report.
The Assembly would encourage Member States
to consider being represented at the level of legal
adviser during the first week in which the report of the
International Law Commission is discussed in the
Sixth Committee — the so-called International Law
Week — to enable high-level discussions on issues of
international law.
The General Assembly would also invite the
Commission to continue taking measures to enhance its
efficiency and productivity and would encourage the
Commission to continue taking cost-saving measures at
its future sessions. Furthermore, it would approve the
conclusions of the Commission regarding summary
records of the Commission and reaffirm its previous
decisions concerning the documentation and summary
records of the International Law Commission.
In addition, the General Assembly would decide
that the next session of the Commission will be held at
the United Nations Office at Geneva from 2 May to
3 June and from 4 July to 5 August 2005.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is hoped that the General
Assembly will do likewise.
Let me now turn to agenda item 145, “Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
The report of the Sixth Committee on this item is
contained in document A/59/511. The draft resolution

3

A/59/PV.65

recommended to the Assembly for adoption is set out
in paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly
would,
inter
alia,
endorse
the
recommendations and conclusions of the Host Country
Committee; consider that the maintenance of
appropriate conditions for the normal work of the
delegations and the missions accredited to the United
Nations and the observance of their privileges and
immunities are in the interest of the Organization and
all Member States; and request the host country to
continue to solve, through negotiations, problems that
might arise and to take all measures necessary to
prevent any interference with the functioning of
missions.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. It is hoped that the Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
Allow me now to turn to the report of the Sixth
Committee concerning agenda item 146, “International
Criminal Court”. The report is contained in document
A/59/512. The draft resolution recommended to the
General Assembly for adoption is found in paragraph 8
thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, call upon all States that are
not yet parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court to consider ratifying or acceding to it
without delay and would encourage efforts aimed at
promoting awareness of the results of the Rome
Conference and the provisions of the Rome Statute.
Furthermore, the Assembly would express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing
effective and efficient assistance in the establishment
of the Court. The Assembly would also decide to
include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session
the item entitled “Report of the International Criminal
Court”, under which it would consider, with the Court
invited to attend and participate, any report of the
Court that may be submitted to the Assembly pursuant
to article 6 of the Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and the Assembly may wish to do the
same.
I now draw the attention of the Assembly to
agenda item 147, “Report of the Special Committee on

4

the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”. The
report of the Sixth Committee on this item is contained
in document A/59/513. The two draft resolutions
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption
are contained in paragraph 11 of the report.
By terms of draft resolution I, entitled “Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”, the General Assembly would, among
other things, request the Special Committee, at its next
session in 2005, to continue its consideration of all
proposals concerning the question of the maintenance
of international peace and security in all its aspects in
order to strengthen the role of the United Nations.
The Special Committee would also be requested
to continue to consider, on a priority basis, the question
of the implementation of the provisions of the Charter
related to assistance to third States affected by the
application of sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter and, also on a priority basis, to continue to
consider ways and means of improving its working
methods and enhancing its efficiency with a view to
identifying widely acceptable measures for future
implementation.
Furthermore, the Assembly would endorse the
Secretary-General’s efforts to eliminate the backlog of
the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council
and would request the Secretary-General to establish a
trust fund to eliminate the backlog of the Repertory of
Practice of United Nations Organs, which would
accept voluntary contributions by States, private
institutions and individuals. It would also request the
Secretary-General to submit a report on both
publications to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session.
By the provisions of draft resolution II, entitled
“Implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations related to assistance to third States
affected by the application of sanctions”, the Assembly
would, inter alia, decide to consider, within the Sixth
Committee or a working group of the Committee, at
the Assembly’s sixtieth session, further progress in the
elaboration of effective measures aimed at the
implementation of the provisions of the Charter related
to assistance to third States affected by sanctions.

A/59/PV.65

The Sixth Committee adopted these two draft
resolutions without a vote. The Assembly may wish to
do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 148, “Measures to
eliminate international terrorism”. The report of the
Sixth Committee is contained in document A/59/514.
The draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is set out in paragraph 11 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, strongly condemn all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations as criminal and unjustifiable, wherever
and by whomsoever committed; remind States of their
obligations under relevant international conventions
and protocols and Security Council resolutions to
ensure that perpetrators of terrorist acts are brought to
justice; and urge States that have not yet done so to
consider, as a matter of priority, and in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1566
(2004), becoming parties to relevant conventions and
protocols.
Furthermore, the Assembly would decide that the
Ad Hoc Committee established pursuant to resolution
51/210 of 17 December 1996 would, on an expedited
basis, continue to elaborate a draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism and resolve the
outstanding issues relating to the elaboration of the
draft international convention for the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism. The Ad Hoc Committee
would also keep on its agenda the question of
convening a high-level conference under the auspices
of the United Nations to formulate a joint organized
response of the international community to terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. For these purposes,
the Ad Hoc Committee would meet from 28 March to 1
April 2005, and if necessary, its work would also
continue during the sixtieth session of the Assembly,
within the framework of the Working Group of the
Sixth Committee.
The Assembly would also request the SecretaryGeneral to make a comprehensive inventory of the
response of the Secretariat to terrorism as part of his
report on measures to eliminate international terrorism.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. It is hoped the Assembly will do the
same.

I now turn to the report of the Sixth Committee
on agenda item 149, “Scope of legal protection under
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel”, contained in document
A/59/515 and Corr.1. The draft resolution which the
Sixth Committee recommends to the Assembly for
adoption is set out in paragraph 10 of the report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, among other things, urge States to
take all necessary measures, in accordance with their
international obligations, to prevent crimes against
United Nations and associated personnel from
occurring, and to ensure that the perpetrators of such
crimes are brought to justice.
The Assembly would recommend that the
Secretary-General continue to seek inclusion of, and
that the host countries include, key provisions of the
Convention, in future as well as, if necessary, in
existing status-of-forces, status-of-mission and host
country agreements. It would further recommend that
the Secretary-General, consistent with his existing
authority, advise the Security Council or the General
Assembly, as appropriate, where in his assessment
circumstances would support a declaration of
exceptional risk for the purposes of article 1 (c) (ii) of
the Convention.
The next meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee
established by General Assembly resolution 56/89
would be held from 11 to 15 April 2005. The Ad Hoc
Committee’s mandate would be to expand the scope of
the legal protection under the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel, including,
inter alia, by means of a legal instrument.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to act likewise.
I now turn to agenda item 150, “International
convention against the reproductive cloning of human
beings”. The report of the Committee is contained in
document A/59/516, and the draft decision
recommended by the Committee to the Assembly is to
be found in paragraph 11 thereof. In accordance with
the decision, a working group of the Sixth Committee,
open to all Member States of the United Nations or
members of specialized agencies or of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, would meet on 14, 15 and
18 February 2005 to finalize the text of a United
Nations declaration on human cloning, on the basis of

5

A/59/PV.65

draft resolution A/C.6/59/L.26, and report to the Sixth
Committee during the current session. The Sixth
Committee would meet in the afternoon of 18 February
to consider and take action on the report of the working
group. The Chairman of the Sixth Committee would be
chairman of the working group and members of the
Bureau of the Sixth Committee would serve as Friends
of the Chairman.
The decision was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote and it is my hope that the
Assembly will do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 151, “Observer status
for the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in the
General Assembly”. The relevant report of the
Committee is contained in document A/59/517, and the
draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would decide to invite the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization to participate in the sessions
and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity
of observer. It would also request the SecretaryGeneral to take the necessary action to implement the
present resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote, and I hope the Assembly
will be in a position to do the same.
I now draw the attention of the Assembly to
agenda item 152, “Observer status for the Southern
African Development Community in the General
Assembly”. The relevant report of the Committee is
contained in document A/59/518, and the draft
resolution recommended to the Assembly for adoption
is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would decide to invite the Southern African
Development Community to participate in the sessions
and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity
of observer. It would also request the SecretaryGeneral to take the necessary action to implement the
present resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote, and I hope the Assembly
will act likewise.
I now invite your attention to agenda item 157,
“Observer status for the Collective Security Treaty

6

Organization in the General Assembly”. The relevant
report of the Committee is contained in document
A/59/519, and the draft resolution recommended to the
Assembly for adoption is found in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would decide to invite the Collective
Security Treaty Organization to participate in the
sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the
capacity of observer. It would also request the
Secretary-General to take the necessary action to
implement the present resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote, and I hope that the
Assembly will do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 159, “Observer status
for the Economic Community of West African States in
the General Assembly”. The relevant report of the
Committee is contained in document A/59/520, and the
draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would decide to invite the Economic
Community of West African States to participate in the
sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the
capacity of observer. It would also request the
Secretary-General to take the necessary action to
implement the present resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote, and I hope that the
Assembly will do the same.
I now draw your attention to agenda item 160,
“Observer status for the Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States in the General Assembly”. The
relevant report of the Committee is contained in
document A/59/521, and the draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would decide to invite the Organisation of
Eastern Caribbean States to participate in the sessions
and the work of the Assembly in the capacity of
observer. It would also request the Secretary-General
to take all the necessary action to implement the
present resolution.

A/59/PV.65

The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote, and I hope the Assembly
will act likewise.
Finally, I turn to agenda item 162, “Observer
status for the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation in the General Assembly”. The relevant
report of the Committee is contained in document
A/59/544, and the draft resolution recommended to the
Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7
thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would decide to invite the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation to participate in
the sessions and the work of the Assembly in the
capacity of observer. It would also request the
Secretary-General to take the necessary action to
implement the present resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote, and I hope the Assembly
will be in a position to do the same.
This concludes my introduction to the reports of
the Sixth Committee. I would like to take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to the Chairman of
the Sixth Committee, Ambassador Mohamed
Bennouna, for his hard work and knowledgeable
leadership provided to the Committee throughout this
session. I also wish to thank the other members of the
Bureau, Mr. Ram Babu Dhakal, Mr. Carlos Fernando
Díaz Paniagua and Mr. Csaba Simon for their
cooperation. Furthermore, I wish to extend my
gratitude to Mr. Václav Mikulka, Secretary of the
Committee, as well as to Ms. Mahnoush Arsanjani and
Ms. Anne Fosty, Deputy Secretaries of the Committee,
for the invaluable advice and assistance that they gave
me, and for their pleasant company at the podium.
Finally, gratitude and deep appreciation are due
to all delegates and colleagues for their indispensable
contributions to the success of the session.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Sixth Committee which are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.

The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes — that is the absolute
maximum — and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Sixth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance.
I therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Sixth Committee.
Agenda item 138
Nationality of natural persons in relation to the
succession of States
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/504)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/34).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 138?

7

A/59/PV.65

It was so decided.
Agenda item 139
Responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts

Agenda item 141
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/507)

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/505)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/35).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 139?

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/37).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 141?
It was so decided.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 142
Agenda item 140
Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts

Convention on jurisdictional immunities of States
and their property
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/508)

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on that draft resolution, entitled
“United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional
Immunities of States and Their Property”.

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/36).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/38).

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 140?

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 142?

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/506)

It was so decided.

8

It was so decided.

A/59/PV.65

Agenda item 143
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its thirtyseventh session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/509)

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 144?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 145

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirty-seventh session”. The
Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution I without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 59/39).
Draft resolution II is entitled “Legislative Guide
on Insolvency Law of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law”. The Sixth Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
59/40).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 143?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 144
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-sixth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/510)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/41).

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/511)

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/42).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 145?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 146
International Criminal Court
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/512)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/43).
The Acting President: Two delegations have
asked to speak in explanation of vote on the resolution
just adopted.
Ms. Moore (United States of America): For
reasons well known to this body, the United States

9

A/59/PV.65

must disassociate itself from the consensus on this
resolution.
Mr. Van den Berg (Netherlands): I speak on
behalf of the European Union. The candidate countries
Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and Croatia, the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Serbia and Montenegro, and the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries Liechtenstein
and Norway, members of the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this declaration.
The European Union welcomes the adoption of
the draft resolution on the International Criminal Court
(ICC) by the Sixth Committee without a vote and
welcomes its adoption by the General Assembly in the
same manner. We consider it essential that the ICC
remain on the agenda of the General Assembly,
certainly now that the Relationship Agreement between
the United Nations and the ICC has entered into force.
The Relationship Agreement must now be translated
into practical cooperation, the process of which the
European Union will promote and closely follow.
We also support the continuing exchange of
information between the Court and the General
Assembly. That exchange will also happen through
annual reports on the Court’s activities, which will be
submitted to the regular session of the Assembly. Also,
it is important to note that the Court will participate, as
an observer, in the work of the General Assembly,
including in the debates on the reports. The resolution
reaffirms the observer status of the ICC to the General
Assembly.
The European Union has relentlessly defended
the integrity of the Rome Statute and will continue to
do so. The ICC is beyond doubt the most significant
recent development in the long struggle to advance the
cause of justice and rule of law, thereby eradicating
impunity. The European Union reaffirms its
determination to obtain the widest possible
international support for the ICC, inter alia, by
widening adherence to the Rome Statute — whose
signatories now comprise more than half of the United
Nations membership — and to the Agreement on the
Privileges and Immunities of the ICC.
At times, concerns about the Court are still
voiced. Those concerns are unfounded; the Rome
Statute provides all necessary safeguards against the
use of the Court for politically motivated purposes. The
Rome Statute contains the most comprehensive list of

10

due process protections which has thus far been
promulgated. Its prosecutors and judges are selected by
and from countries committed to justice, human rights
and democracy.
The Rome Statute, together with the Elements of
Crime, defines the crimes falling under the Court’s
jurisdiction — genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity — with an amount of clarity and precision
unmatched by the statute of any other tribunal. The
Court’s jurisdiction is only complementary to national
criminal jurisdictions, and the Rome Statute limits the
ICC to the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community as a whole. The Court may
assume jurisdiction only when a State is unable or
unwilling to do so. The European Union is satisfied
that the ICC establishes the highest standards of
competence, fairness, due process and international
justice and will continue to endeavour to secure those
standards.
Among others, the European Union has
developed a set of principles to serve as guidelines for
Member States when drafting bilateral agreements
defining the conditions under which persons will be
surrendered to the Court. The European Union will
continue to draw attention to those guiding principles.
The guidelines provide, inter alia, for the following.
First, given the scope of existing international
agreements, such as the status-of-forces agreements
and agreements on legal cooperation on criminal
matters, including extradition, new agreements often
serve no legal purpose. This should be taken into
account.
Secondly, the agreements that were presented to
us as drafted by the United States are inconsistent with
obligations of States parties to the ICC with regard to
the ICC Statute, and possibly also with regard to other
international agreements to which ICC States parties
are also parties.
Thirdly, the scope of persons covered by such
agreements must not be excessive. It must be limited to
persons who have actually been sent by a State on
official business. That means that no private business
people or mere tourists would be subject to
adjudication.
Fourthly, agreements should contain a sunset
clause.

A/59/PV.65

Last and most importantly, such agreements
should not result in impunity.
The European Union, in line with its Council
Common Position on the International Criminal Court
and its Action Plan, stands ready to help those States
that might need assistance in ensuring that crimes
falling within the jurisdiction of the Court do not enjoy
impunity.
The European Union expresses the hope that the
United States will continue to work together with its
allies and partners in developing effective and
impartial international justice. To that end, the
European Union remains available to develop a broader
dialogue on all matters relating to the ICC, including
future relations between the United States and the
Court.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 146.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 147?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 148
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/514)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 59/46).

Agenda item 147

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 148.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization

Agenda item 149

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/513)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled,
“Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization”. The Sixth Committee adopted draft
resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 59/44).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled, “Implementation of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations related to assistance to
third States affected by the application of sanctions”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I again take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

Scope of legal protection under the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/515 and
Corr.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 59/47).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 149?
It was so decided.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 59/45).

11

A/59/PV.65

Agenda item 150
International convention against the reproductive
cloning of human beings
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/516)
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that action on the draft decision
recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 11
of its report is postponed to a later date to allow time
for the review of its programme budget implications by
the Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action on
the draft decision as soon as the report of the Fifth
Committee on its programme budget implications is
available.
Agenda item 151
Observer status for the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/517)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/48).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 151?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 152
Observer status for the Southern African
Development Community in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/518)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.

12

I give the floor to the representative of the
Seychelles on a point of order.
Mr. Bonnelame (Seychelles): It has just come to
my attention that Seychelles is listed in paragraph 1 as
a member of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). This must be an error, as
Seychelles is no longer a member of SADC. I wanted
to bring this matter to the attention of the Assembly.
The Acting President: I assure the Permanent
Representative of Seychelles that the error will be
corrected.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/49).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 152?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 157
Observer status for the Collective Security Treaty
Organization in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/519)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/50).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 157?
It was so decided.

A/59/PV.65

Agenda item 159

Agenda item 162

Observer status for the Economic Community of
West African States in the General Assembly

Observer status for the South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation in the General Assembly

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/520)

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/544)

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/51).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/53).

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 159?

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 162?

It was so decided.

It was so decided.

Agenda item 160

Agenda item 161

Observer status for the Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States in the General Assembly

Andean Zone of Peace
Draft resolution (A/59/L.20/Rev.1)

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/521)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/52).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 160?
It was so decided.

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Peru to introduce draft resolution
A/59/L.20/Rev.1.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to address the General Assembly on behalf
of the member States of the Andean Community —
Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela — in
order to submit for consideration by the plenary draft
resolution A/59/L.20/Rev.1, entitled “Andean Zone of
Peace”.
The Andean Zone of Peace was established by
the presidential Declaration of San Francisco de Quito
on 12 July 2004 and covers the territories, airspace and
waters under the sovereignty of the Andean countries.
It is the result of one of the most advanced processes
aimed at bringing about a genuine area of peace and
security on the American continent.

13

A/59/PV.65

The Andean Zone of Peace is the culmination of
important processes aimed at strengthening security in
the Andean subregion, such as the Lima Commitment
of 17 June 2002 on the limitation, control and
transparency of expenditures related to conventional
weapons; the “Andean Plan to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects” of June 2003; and decision
587 of July 2004, containing the Andean Common
External Security Policy Guidelines.
The main objectives of the Andean Zone of Peace
are the following: first, to prohibit weapons of mass
destruction and their transit through the subregion, as
well as the definitive eradication of anti-personnel
landmines; secondly, to design and implement an
Andean programme aimed at confidence-building and
strengthening security; thirdly, to promote the
participation of Andean countries in United Nations
peacekeeping
operations;
fourthly,
to
ensure
compliance with the prohibition of the use or threat of
use of force between Member States; and, fifthly, to
promote the prevention and the peaceful resolution of
conflicts, whatever their nature.
The draft resolution is the outcome of
negotiations among the five Andean countries and
those delegations that have made suggestions in order
to improve the text.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
make a slight oral amendment to the text of the draft
resolution. It has to do with a mistake that was made in
the translation into English of the original Spanish text.
In the fifth preambular paragraph in the English
version, in the third line, we should include the word
“overcoming” before the word “poverty” and then
delete the word “eradication”, so the sentence would
then read “Overcoming poverty, social exclusion and
inequity”.
Having said this, given that the new zone of
peace coincides fully with the principles and objectives
that form the very foundation of the Charter of the
United Nations, I would ask the General Assembly, on
behalf of the Andean countries, to recognize this peace
initiative and to approve it by consensus.
Ms. Holguín (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for me to address the plenary at the fiftyninth session of the General Assembly with regard to
agenda item 161, whose inclusion in the agenda was
requested by Peru.

14

My country, along with Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru
and Venezuela, is a sponsor of draft resolution
A/59/L.20/Rev.1 which welcomes the Declaration of
San Francisco de Quito on the Establishment and
Development on the Andean Zone of Peace, signed on
12 July 2004. In this Declaration, our Presidents agreed
to establish a zone of peace in the Andean Community
with precise objectives and concrete guidelines.
The Declaration recognizes that peace, security,
the full force of democracy and the rule of law are
necessary conditions to reach higher levels of political,
economic and social development in our countries.
Therefore agreements such as the Andean Common
External Security Policy are fundamental parts of our
integration process. We are also committed to
designing and implementing an Andean Programme for
Security and Confidence-Building.
Colombia welcomes the definitive solution to
territorial disputes among the countries of our
subregion, which has allowed us to make the
Declaration on the Andean Zone of Peace.
Nevertheless, our democratic stability and the integrity
of the political, economic and social structures of our
countries still face grave threats like the illicit drugs
problem; terrorism, corruption and extreme poverty.
That is why we are working together to strengthen our
democracies with the ongoing promotion and defence
of the rule of law, human rights and the sustainable and
equitable development of our peoples. Together, we
will be able to achieve success in the struggle against
transnational threats.
Among the objectives of the Andean Zone of
Peace that we hope the General Assembly will
welcome today, we included the ban on the use or
threat to use force between member States, as well as
the consolidation of a democratic, cooperative and
non-offensive conception of security in our subregion.
For the Government of Colombia, committed to the
implementation of a democratic security and defence
strategy to fight terrorism and the world illicit drug
problem that finance it, cooperation from the
international community and the Andean subregion is
fundamental. That is why we underline the
Declaration’s commitment to develop and strengthen
legal, judicial and police cooperation with the goal of
contributing to create a common space for citizens’
security and justice.

A/59/PV.65

Colombia contributes to the Andean Zone of
Peace with a democratic defence and national security
strategy that aims to consolidate the rule of law and to
guarantee the human rights of all Colombians. This
includes our farmers, so that they are not forcefully
displaced from their land; our businessmen, so that
they are not victims of kidnapping; our journalists, so
that they are not threatened; our labour leaders, so that
they can exercise their action freely; and our human
rights defenders, so that they can work without
intimidation. The democratic security policy protects
all citizens of a pluralist nation, open to fraternal and
creative debate, that counts on the solidarity of its
Andean brothers in its fight against violence and
terrorism.
Today we welcome the Andean Zone of Peace as
a firm commitment in the fight against threats to the
security of our States, as well as the consolidation of
the fraternal and cooperative relations that exist among
our peoples and governments — a commitment for
action, coordination, and concerted common strategies
in order to face serious threats to the security of our
countries and the stability of our region together.
Therefore, I would like to conclude this speech
by underlining the fundamental role that regional and
subregional organizations can play in maintaining
international peace and security, as well as in achieving
the economic and social development of the peoples of
the world. Today, when many doubt the effectiveness
of multilateralism to face the threats and challenges of
the twenty-first century it is enough to take a look at
regional and subregional organizations around the
globe to see that multilateralism maintains its full force
and that States’ commitment in strengthening it should
be progressively stronger.
I call upon the United Nations to recognize and
make use of regional and subregional organizations’
exceptional capacity to contribute to building a more
pacific and just international scenario, where security
and development are achieved to face successfully
threats and challenges of today’s world. Regional and
subregional organizations, taking into account the spirit
of harmony and understanding among their member
States, their geographic proximity and common values,
are exceptional forums for widening and strengthening
cooperation, solving conflicts and mobilizing regional
solidarity on fundamental topics. The Organization of
American States (OAS) and the Andean Community

are good examples in our hemisphere of the potential
of regional and subregional organizations.
Ms. Núñez de Odremán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The fifteenth Andean
Presidential Council, which brought together
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and my country, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, instructed the
Foreign Ministers of our countries, through the
mandate of the Declaration of San Francisco de Quito,
to include an additional subject on the agenda of the
fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly, namely,
the Andean Zone of Peace. The progress in this peace
process between our countries is a further link in our
path towards reciprocal peace and security, which
strengthens the harmonious development of the
community and protects us from threats to our security
and vulnerability to our territories and peoples.
In this respect, it also represents a contribution to
overcoming poverty. It promotes social inclusion and
therefore constitutes an adequate environment to
overcome social injustices. Likewise, it also helps to
promote trust between our peoples, to improve
coordination of activities and it will facilitate the
adoption of specific measures to solve subregional
conflicts, whatever be their nature or cause.
We consider that this initiative of the Andean
Zone of Peace is part of a complementary process to
the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as well as other important
disarmament measures to which Venezuela is a party
and which have as their basis the Charter of the United
Nations and the Charter of the Organization of
American States.
Finally, I would like to thank the President for
having included this subject on the General Assembly
agenda. We would also like to point out that the
provisions contained in the draft resolution are only
binding on the parties involved, and we therefore hope
that the resolution can be adopted by consensus.
Mr. Araníbar Quiroga (Bolivia) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me, on the occasion of the adoption of
the draft resolution on the Andean Zone of Peace, to
refer to the Declaration of San Francisco de Quito on
the Establishment and Development of the Andean
Zone of Peace, adopted on 12 July 2004 by the
Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and
Venezuela within the framework of the fifteenth
Meeting of the Andean Presidential Council.

15

A/59/PV.65

The idea of establishing nuclear-weapon-free
zones, zones of peace and denuclearized zones has
been gaining favour among many States of the
international community and has spread to various
regions of the world. It has travelled beyond national
borders and crossed oceans and seas, taking root on
various continents, regions and subregions in a sort of
chain reaction that continues to spread until the process
is complete.
This ambition seems consonant with the goal of
general and complete disarmament, as it is guided by
the innate desire of human beings to live in genuine
peace and security, to eradicate the scourge of war and
to free up economic, intellectual and other resources
for peaceful pursuits and the needs of development.
This concern is not foreign to the American
continent. It was expressed clearly on 29 April 1963,
when Bolivia, together with Brazil, Chile, Ecuador and
Mexico, issued a declaration proclaiming their
readiness to sign a multilateral agreement establishing
a nuclear-weapon-free zone with the aim of reducing
the threat of nuclear war. Without doubt, the
subsequent adoption of the Tlatelolco Treaty in 1967,
which declared Latin America and the Caribbean to be
a nuclear-weapon-free zone, constituted the first link in
the chain. In that context, we note with satisfaction that
its message has spread. Nuclear-weapon-free zones,
zones of peace and denuclearized zones, although they
have different specific strategic meanings, are all
aimed at achieving similar objectives and respond to an
issue of great interest in the prevailing world situation.
It is useful to note the opinion of United Nations
experts responsible for studying this question, who
have said that the establishment of zones of peace and
nuclear-weapon-free zones should not be considered an
end in itself; rather, it should be seen as ways of
achieving the objective of general and complete
disarmament in order to ensure genuine peace and
international security. Our new, multidimensional
concept of security should guide us, within the
framework of respect for international law, the
protection of human rights and the defence of
democracy, which are enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and the charter of the Organization of
American States.
A clear threat to the legally elected Governments
of our region is posed by disturbing phenomena
characteristic of the international situation today,

16

namely, the increase in armed conflicts, terrorist acts
and trafficking in human beings and arms, as well as
the increase in transnational organized crime, drug
trafficking and money laundering.
In that context, the establishment of the Andean
Zone of Peace marks an important milestone in the
strengthening and the deepening of Andean and South
American integration and reflects the common will of
Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela to
prohibit not only nuclear, chemical, biological and
toxin weapons and their transit through the airspace
and the waters under their respective sovereignty and
jurisdiction, but also to carry out the total eradication
of anti-personnel mines.
The Andean Zone of Peace represents the
consolidation of initiatives previously undertaken in the
area of security, such as the 1989 Galapagos Declaration,
the 2002 Lima Commitment, the Andean Plan to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in all its Aspects of June 2003 and
Decision 587 of July 2004, containing the Andean
Common External Policy guidelines. The countries of the
Andean Zone of Peace will continue their efforts to
prevent and combat threats to security, strengthen and
revitalize democracy, enhance cooperation for integrated
development and continuously seek a more just and
equitable international order.
Bolivia, from a perspective of integration
consistent with its peace-oriented foreign policy
guidelines, has sought to unite its efforts with those of
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela to establish
the Andean Zone of Peace, convinced that peace,
democratic stability and collective security will have a
positive impact on the entire process of South
American integration.
We believe it important to make progress in
education for peace and disarmament and in the
promotion of a democratic culture, with the aim of
creating conditions that will help us achieve our
historical aspirations and thus overcome problems that
continue to negatively impact the comprehensive
development of the subregion and the establishment of
true multilateralism.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that in
order to effectively consolidate the Andean Zone of
Peace, it is absolutely necessary to make progress in
overcoming poverty and inequality and to find peaceful
solutions to disputes, demonstrating through our

A/59/PV.65

actions that peace and security are an essential part of
the process of subregional integration and, from the
broader perspective of a renewed and emerging reality,
of South American integration.
My country therefore urges the General Assembly
to adopt by consensus draft resolution A/59/L.20/Rev.1,
introduced by the member States of the Andean
Community.
Mr. Calderón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to take this occasion to refer to
the Declaration of San Francisco de Quito on the
Establishment and Development of the Andean Zone of
Peace, adopted in the city of Quito, Ecuador, on
12 July 2004, by the heads of State of the member
countries of the Andean Community within the
framework of the fifteenth Meeting of the Andean
Presidential Council. We stress the importance that
Ecuador attaches to the zone of peace that the
Declaration created in the sovereign areas of Bolivia,
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela.
It is evident that the Andean countries, conscious
of their common history and the similar challenges
they face in the current situation of the international
community, and in a clear demonstration of their firm
belief that peace and security constitute the
foundations for development, stability and the rule of
law, deem it essential to further strengthen the South
American zone of peace and cooperation approved by
the Presidents of South America at their second
meeting, in Guayaquil, Ecuador on 27 July 2002,
which was subsequently welcomed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 57/13 of 14 November 2002.
Ecuador is convinced that the Andean nations
will be able to contribute to the economic development
and the overall well-being of their peoples on the basis
of a clear political will to work with one accord to
strengthen the climate of mutual trust and to
consolidate a zone of peace free of weapons of mass
destruction, that prohibits transit of those weapons
through the region, a zone free of anti-personnel mines.
We will work to achieve transparency and the gradual
limitation in the acquisition of weapons.
Ecuador is allied with those nations that cherish
peace and international law. Its foreign policy is guided
by the principles laid down in article 4 of its
Constitution, among which I note those pertaining to
the legal equality of States, the condemnation of the
use or the threat of the use of force as a means of

resolving conflicts, the disavowal of claiming a legal
basis for the spoils of war, the recognition that
international law constitutes a standard of conduct for
relations among States, the promotion of the settlement
of disputes by legal and peaceful means, and peace and
cooperation as the basis of coexistence among nations.
Conscious of its responsibilities as a member of
the United Nations, the Organization of American
States and the Andean Community, Ecuador stands
ready, with profound conviction and determination, to
contribute to the best of its ability to the maintenance
of peace and security in the Andean subregion, in
South America and throughout the world.
As the heads of State of the Rio Group declared on
5 November at the conclusion of the summit of Rio de
Janeiro, only a multilateral approach to global problems
and threats to international peace and security and full
respect for international law will enable us, with a new
spirit of international cooperation, to achieve peace,
development and social inclusion.
Draft resolution A/59/L.20/Rev.1, submitted
today for consideration, stresses in its preambular part
the progress that the members of the Andean
Community of nations have achieved in matters of
security, peace and confidence-building, as reflected in
Decision 587 of the Andean Council of Foreign Affairs
Ministers, entitled, the “Andean Common External
Security Policy Guidelines”, and in decision 552,
comprising the “Andean plan to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects”. As stressed in the eighth
preambular
paragraph
of
draft
resolution
A/59/L.20/Rev.1, this is the first binding subregional
instrument derived from the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All its Aspects, adopted in 2001.
My country is convinced that the Andean Zone of
Peace, as stated in the sixth preambular paragraph of
the draft resolution, represents efforts aimed at
“promoting
growing
commonality
among
Governments, public opinion, political parties
and civil society with regard to widely shared
objectives and values”,
and it will help to promote a broadening of the already
very many possibilities existing in the different areas
of cooperation between the Andean nations. On the

17

A/59/PV.65

basis of mutual trust and respect, it will enable us to
join efforts to face the challenges of development in an
increasingly interdependent and globalized world, and
it will assure our peoples of a present and a future that
is full of well-being and prosperity.
Likewise, we feel that the Andean Zone of Peace
will help us to promote the principles and norms of
international law enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and in the Charter of the Organization of
American States.
That is why, given my country’s deeply felt
peaceful vocation and as a firm defender of the Charter
of this world Organization, we will do everything
possible to strengthen the Andean Zone of Peace and to
firmly contribute to the preservation of peace, security
and trust, not only in the Andean region, but also at the
regional, hemispheric and global levels.
In conclusion, my delegation, true to the steadfast
principles that govern our relations with other States,
would like to reiterate our support and renew our
commitment to the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
We call upon United Nations Member States to
support and adopt draft resolution A/59/L.20/Rev.1. on
the Andean Zone of Peace, submitted for the
consideration of delegations today, so that they can
contribute to and cooperate with the objectives
established in the Declaration of San Francisco de
Quito on the Establishment and Development of the
Andean Zone of Peace, adopted in Quito, on 12 July
2004.
Mr. Garza (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the aim of the Andean States
to establish an Andean Zone of Peace to promote their
peaceful coexistence, their self-determination and their
freedom. We recognize the principles outlined in the
Declaration of San Francisco de Quito as a first step
towards establishing the parameters of this Zone of
Peace.
We understand that an Andean Zone of Peace
would be fully consistent with the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Treaty of Tlatelolco, to which all
prospective Andean Zone of Peace members are
parties, other applicable international agreements and
international law, particularly customary international
law of the sea.

18

I wish to commend all the Missions involved in
putting together this draft resolution and the
exceptional work and coordination they have done to
reach a consensus.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/59/L.20/Rev.1, as orally revised.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.20/Rev.1, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/59/L.20/Rev.1, as orally revised,
was adopted (resolution 59/54).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 161?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will resume its consideration of agenda item 12,
entitled “Report of the Economic and Social Council”.
Members will recall that the Assembly held a debate
on this agenda item, together with agenda item 41, at
its 41st plenary meeting on 26 October 2004.
In connection with this item, the General
Assembly has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/59/L.27/Rev.1.
I give the floor to the representative of Honduras
to introduce draft resolution A/59/L.27/Rev.1.
Mr. Suazo (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): I
speak before this Assembly on behalf of the sponsors
of the draft resolution contained in document
A/59/L.27/Rev.1, entitled “Public administration and
development” under agenda item 12. The draft
resolution has been prepared taking into account the
report presented to the Assembly by the SecretaryGeneral in document A/59/346.
The sponsors believe that good administration of
public services, an efficient public administration that
is modern and able to use the benefits of existing
information technology — in fact, using them for the
good of the people today — is an essential tool for

A/59/PV.65

development and for the achievement
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

of

the

Bearing this in mind, the draft resolution
traditionally would have been prepared and considered
in the General Assembly’s Second Committee.
However, in bringing the report of the Economic and
Social Council to the General Assembly for
consideration in plenary, this and another subject were
left out of the Second Committee’s programme of
work. Moreover, the Secretary-General’s report was
submitted to the Assembly.
This is a draft resolution that is traditionally
adopted by consensus by Member States in the Second
Committee, and we hope that on this occasion the text
presented will be approved in the same way in plenary.
With a view to reaching consensus, I would like to tell
Members that we have at the last minute made two
slight editorial changes to the text of the draft
resolution contained in A/59/L.27/Rev.1. The first
change refers to operative paragraph 7: insert the word
“and” after “23 July 2004” and delete everything
following “resolution 58/231”.
In operative paragraph 8, we are going to make
three deletions. First at the start, delete “comprehensive”
where it appears before “report”. Then, in the last clause,
with regard to the phrase “to ensure that the major
findings of that report” delete the words “major” and “of
that report”.
The corrected paragraphs would then read as
follows. Operative paragraph 7 would read:
“Also requests the Secretary-General to
focus the work on public administration along the
lines of Economic and Social Council decision
2004/302 of 23 July 2004 and General Assembly
resolution 58/231,”.
Operative paragraph 8 would read:
“Further requests the Secretary-General to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session on progress made in Member
States by revitalizing public administration
during the last ten years, since the resumed
fiftieth session of the General Assembly, on
public administration and development, and to
ensure that the findings are brought to the
attention of Member States on the occasion of the
special event in 2005”.

The sponsors hope that the draft resolution can be
adopted by consensus. That would enable us to follow
up on the recommendations of the Secretary-General to
prepare to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
resumed fiftieth session of the General Assembly, on
public administration and development, in keeping
with the principles agreed at that session.
I am pleased to announce that the delegation of
Chile has joined the list of sponsors of this draft
resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/59/L.27/Rev.1,
entitled “Public administration and development”, as
orally revised.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.27/Rev.1, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/59/L.27/Rev.1, as
revised, was adopted (resolution 59/55).

orally

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 12.
Agenda item 39 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(c) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Draft resolution (A/59/L.24)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly already held the debate on agenda item
39 and its sub-items (a) and (c) at its 51st and 52nd
plenary meetings, on 11 November 2004.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands to introduce draft resolution A/59/L.24.
Mr. Van Loosdrecht (Netherlands): Before
introducing draft resolution A/59/L.24, I should like to
announce that, since the publication of the draft
resolution, the following countries have joined the list
of sponsors: Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cuba, Iceland,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Mali, New Zealand, Norway, the
Russian Federation, South Africa and the United States
of America.

19

A/59/PV.65

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union and to introduce the draft resolution
entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”. Under
this draft resolution, Member States, international
financial institutions and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations would be urged to extend
economic and social assistance to the Palestinian
people as rapidly as possible. Moreover, by adopting
this draft resolution, the Assembly would express its
appreciation for the work of the Secretary-General and
his staff in the field of humanitarian assistance and in
the Middle East peace process.
As the drafter of this document, the European
Union inadvertently deleted a paragraph that we would
like to see reintroduced. Therefore, I would like to
make the following revision to the draft resolution.
After operative paragraph 1, we would like to
reintroduce a paragraph that appeared last year. The
paragraph reads:
“Also takes note of the report of the
Personal Humanitarian Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on the humanitarian conditions and needs
of the Palestinian people;”.
Apart from that, the European Union has no other
revisions to this text.
It is our sincere hope that this draft resolution can
be adopted unanimously, as it has been several times in
the past.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/59/L.24, as orally
revised.
May I take that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.24, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/59/L.24, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 59/56).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of position are strictly
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Cohen (Israel): Israel voted in favour of the
draft resolution as a demonstration of its continued
support for humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people. In exceedingly difficult security conditions,
Israel continues to do all that it can to help the

20

Palestinian people meet their humanitarian needs.
While difficulties remain, we have consistently worked
to permit the flow of food, medicine, humanitarian
assistance and other necessities to Palestinian areas to
the greatest extent possible.
We are pleased to say that this year, revenues
have been transferred from Israel to the Palestinian
Authority on schedule each month and account for $50
million monthly. Israel is developing a much more
efficient working relationship with humanitarian
organizations and with relevant Palestinian authorities
on the ground. The number of roadblocks has been
considerably reduced, and new operating procedures
have been instituted to speed the transfer of
humanitarian shipments and ambulances as well as the
movement of people and goods. In addition, the
implementation
of
the
Israeli
Government
disengagement plan will help stabilize and improve the
security and humanitarian situation for both peoples
and, it is to be hoped, will jump-start the peace
process.
Helping to end suffering and working to improve
the security, welfare and prosperity of all peoples in the
Middle East are crucial components of successful
peace initiatives and primary objectives of the Israeli
Government. Israel welcomes the efforts by Member
States and international agencies to ease the hardship
of innocent civilians and endeavours to facilitate
humanitarian work to improve the living conditions of
Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. At
the same time, for such humanitarian work to be
effective, it is important that it be properly coordinated
with the relevant authorities and that organizations not
operate without a clear mandate and agreed terms of
reference.
We would reaffirm the importance of recognizing
that terrorist activity by Palestinian groups endangers
both Israeli and Palestinian civilians and has a direct
negative impact on humanitarian assistance and on the
capacity of humanitarian workers to do their job
effectively and safely. Israeli security measures are
made necessary by that ongoing terrorist activity, and
the humanitarian situation cannot be properly
considered without an appreciation of the context that
has compelled Israel to adopt those defensive
measures. We also believe that the issue of
humanitarian assistance is one that should be devoid of
selectivity and politicization.

A/59/PV.65

Israel’s decision to join the consensus on this
resolution is a reflection of its support for humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people. It should not be
construed as implying an endorsement of certain terms
that appear in the text that are not consistent with the
language used in the agreements between the parties or
their spirit. We would also stress the need to
acknowledge the fact that civilians on both sides,
Israeli and Palestinian, are suffering, and the
importance of working to ensure that both sides live in
security and dignity, free from violence and fear.

draft resolution A/59/L.38, entitled “A Fair
Globalization: Creating Opportunities for All; report of
the World Commission on the Social Dimension of
Globalization”. Since the publication of the draft
resolution, the following countries have joined the list
of sponsors: Algeria, Brazil, Croatia, the Gambia,
Iceland, Lebanon, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco, Nepal,
Norway, Peru, Romania, Switzerland, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay, Zambia and the countries of
the European Union. We wish to thank all countries for
their support.

Ultimately, the well-being of both Palestinian and
Israeli civilians will come from the mutual
implementation
of
obligations,
from
mutual
recognition and from mutual compromise in
accordance with the road map process. As recognized
by many States over the past few days in this Hall,
there is now a window of opportunity in the Middle
East. We are hopeful that with responsible leadership,
effective institutions and a commitment to end violence
and terrorism and promote peaceful coexistence,
Israelis and Palestinians can work together to ensure
peace and security and bring better living conditions to
both our peoples.

The World Commission on the Social Dimension
of Globalization was co-chaired by the President of
Finland, Her Excellency Tarja Halonen, and the
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, His
Excellency Benjamin William Mkapa, and facilitated
by the International Labour Organization. It may be
recalled that the report was launched by the two
Presidents here at the United Nations on 20 September
2004. The Governments of Finland and the United
Republic of Tanzania and the other sponsors decided to
table this draft resolution in order to ensure that the
proposals and recommendations contained in the report
of the World Commission will enjoy continued
discussion and implementation in United Nations
organs and bodies, the United Nations system of
organizations, Member States and the international
community as a whole.

The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote. May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda
item 39?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 55 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/59/L.38)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held its debate on this agenda
item, together with agenda item 45, at the 58th to 60th
plenary meetings, on 22 and 23 October 2004. In
connection with this item, the Assembly has before it a
draft resolution, issued as document A/59/L.38. I give
the floor to the representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania to introduce draft resolution A/59/L.38.
Mr. Ng’ongolo (United Republic of Tanzania): I
have the honour, on behalf of the Governments of
Finland and the United Republic of Tanzania, as the
main sponsors, to introduce to the General Assembly

The preambular paragraphs of the draft resolution
recall and reaffirm the commitment in the Millennium
Declaration to ensure that globalization benefits the
entire world, and that there is greater policy coherence
and better cooperation between the United Nations, its
agencies, the Bretton Woods institutions and other
multilateral bodies. The preambular paragraphs further
recognize the contribution of the implementation of the
commitments agreed in the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
eradication of poverty, achieving sustained economic
growth and promoting sustainable development, as
well as in advancing towards a fully inclusive and
equitable globalization.
In the operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
takes note of the World Commission’s report as a
contribution towards achieving an inclusive and
equitable process of globalization. Essentially, it
decides to consider the report within the framework of
the follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit and the integrated and coordinated follow-up

21

A/59/PV.65

to the major United Nations conferences and summits
in economic and social fields.
Furthermore, the draft resolution calls on all
United Nations organs and bodies, organizations of the
United Nations system and all Member States to
consider the report of the World Commission. It invites
the organizations of the United Nations system and
other relevant multilateral bodies to provide
information to the Secretary-General on their activities
to promote an inclusive and equitable globalization in
line with the Millennium Declaration.
Finally, the draft resolution requests the
Secretary-General to take the report of the World
Commission into account in his comprehensive report
for the 2005 review of the Millennium Summit and to
present it at the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly.
Once again, on behalf of the Governments of
Finland and the United Republic of Tanzania, and on
my own behalf, we wish to express our sincere and
heartfelt gratitude to all delegations that participated
constructively in the process of negotiation. Their
cooperation and forward-looking attitudes have made it
possible for this draft resolution to be tabled before this
body.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/59/L.38, entitled
“A Fair Globalization: Creating Opportunities for All;
report of the World Commission on the Social
Dimension of Globalization”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/59/L.38?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/57).

22

The Acting President: Before giving the vote to
the speaker in explanation of position after adoption,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
strictly limited to ten minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Núñez de Odremán (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela would like to be part of the
consensus on draft resolution A/59/L.38, entitled “A
Fair Globalization: Creating Opportunities for All;
report of the World Commission on the Social
Dimension of Globalization”. However, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela considers that globalization to
date, rather than providing opportunities to develop
economies or improve the living standards in
developing countries, has contributed to the
polarization between rich and poor countries and to the
intensifying of social exclusion, and the consequent
poverty and hunger, of the people.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position after the vote. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 55.
Programme of work
The Acting President: Before concluding our
meeting, I would like to inform Members that
consideration of agenda item 156, “Multilingualism”,
which was originally scheduled for Monday afternoon,
6 December 2004, has been postponed to a later date.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.
