TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 9/ 10 NOVEMBER 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
1
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1373) . . . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . .
1
. . . , , . , . . . . . . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . , . . .
Adoptionoftheagenda
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8226) . . . . . . . . . . . ,.,.,,.........,....,..,,....,....

1

SlPV.1373

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND

SEVENTY-THIRD

MEETING

N&I in New York on Thursday, 9 November 196’7, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Mamadou Boubacar KANTE

(Mali).

4. THE PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call upon
the representative of the United States on a point of order.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

5. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Before I
proceed with my point of order I should like to inquire of
you, Mr. President, what the proposed order of speakers is.
6. THE PRESIDENT (translated from French): At the
request of the United States representative, I shall read out
the list of speakers in the order in which their names were
inscribed: the United Arab Republic, India, Nigeria, the
Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States,
Israel, Ethiopia, Canada, Denmark, France, Japan and
Argentina.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 373)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8226).

7. Mr. GOLDBERG
(United States of America): Mr.
President, you have given me the information I requested,
which I appreciate, so that I can appropriately address
myself to the Council on a point of order.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

8. Under the established practice of the Council the
members of the Council speak first and non-members
subsequently. But it is a well-established tradition of the
Council that the Council has agreed to hear the parties first.
There is no practice and no equity in allowing one party at
interest in the first instance to speak and to deny the
privilege to another party at interest to be heard before the
members of the Security Council are heard. The precedents
on this are very many> and I could refer to many of them,
but I will not take the time of the Council,

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressedto
the President of the Security Council (S/8226)

1. THE PRESIDENT
(translated from
French):
In
accordance with the Council’s rules of procedure, I propose, if there is no objection, to invite the representative of
the United Arab Republic to take a place at the Council
table in order to participate without vote in the discussion.

9. At the 893rd meeting, on 8 September 1960, ‘the
President, then the representative of Italy, stated:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahmoud Riad
(United Arab Republic) took a place at the Council table.

“I am aware that the usual practice in the circumstances
would be for members of the Council to speak
first . . .“.l

2. THE PRESIDENT (translated from French): In a letter
dated 8 November [S/8,232/ the representative of Israel has
requested that he be invited to participate without vote in
the Council’s meeting. If there is no objection, I shall invite
him to take a place at the Council table.

Then where this question has arisen our Repertoire shows
us what we have frequently done. The Repertoire o.f the
Practice of the Security Council, 19462951 states:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel)
took a place at the Council table.

“The representative of the USSR proposed that the
Council hear first the representatives of the parties
concerned.“2

3. THE PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have also
received a letter dated 9 November [S/8234]
from the
representative of Jordan, requesting that he be invited to
participate without vote in the Council’s discussions. If
there is no objection, I shall invite the representative of
Jordan to take a place at the Council table.

1 See Repertoire of the Prmtice of the Security Council,
Supplenzent 1959-1963, chap. III, part III, case 12 (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 65.VlI.l), p. 79.
2 Ibid., 1946-1951, chap. III, part III, case 95 (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 1954.VII.l), p. 133.

At the invitation, of the President, Mr. A. M. Rifa’i
(Jordan) took a place at the Council table.

1

16. This is my delegation’s position. I could not, however /I
waive the right of other delegations which had inscribe; 1
their names before Israel.

10. In the light of the established practice of the Council,
I therefore now move that the parties to the dispute who
have asked to speak, that is, the United Arab Republic and
Israel, be invited to speak prior to the members of the
Council.

17. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist &pub. \
tics) (translated from Russian): I have taken. the floor I
to remind the Council that according to the rules of
procedure and the established practice, representativeswho
are invited to a meeting of the Security Council to take part
in the discussion on a particular item but who are not
members of the Security Council-these representativesare
not entitled to take part in discussions on the rules of i
procedure. In mentioning this, I should say that I consider 1
that we should strictly adhere to this rule in the present /
case.

11. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation
had not intended to speak on the question of procedure. It
considered that this question was perfectly clear, that it
could be settled by the President, and that it wasnot worth
spending time on it when we have such an important and
serious item to deal with. However, since the representative
of the United States of America has mentioned the
question of procedure, our delegation would also like to
refer to it.

18. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Witi
great respect for the distinguished Deputy Foreign Minister
of the Soviet Union, Mr. Kuznetsov, I wish to point oat
that he entirely misconceives the rules of the Security
Council, and I should like to demonstrate that verysimply,

12. I should like, first, to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the fact that the initiative for
the consideration of the item before us came from the
delegation of the United Arab Republic. Moreover, this
item is not a new one on our agenda, and it is not one on
which the parties concerned have not yet stated their views.
As you know, in recent times the Security Council hashad
this item before it on several occasions. This problem is
perhaps new to the representative of the United States of
America, but I am sure that it is not new to all the other
members of the Council.

19. Rule 27, on which he relies, says:
“The President shall call upon representatives in the
order in which they signify their desire to speak.”
The representatives which are referred to in that rule are
clearly the members of the Security Council. Thereare
several indications and confirmations of that in other@es :
of the Security Council. For example, rule 30 states:

13. The representative of the United States has referred to
past precedents. I should like to reply that, in the present
case, since the item is not being considered for the first
time, his reference to precedents is unfounded and cannot
be applied to the present case.

“If a representative raises a point of order, the President
shall immediately state his ruling.”
The only person authorized to raise a point of orderbefore
the Security Council is a representative on the Security
Council. No one else may raise a point of order in the
proceedings of the Security Council. The same termsare
used there as are used in rule 27.

14. As we see it, the President of the Security Council is
obliged to act in conformity with the rules of procedure
which have been adopted for the Security Council. I should
like to remind the Council of rule 27 of its provisional rules
of procedure, contained in chapter VI entitled “Conduct of
Business”; it reads:
“The President shall call upon representatives in the
order in which they signify their desire to speak.”

20. AS a matter of fact, in looking at the rules, various
other terms are used when dealing with a Member of the
United Nations which is not a member of & Security
Council. That is covered in rules 37 and 38. And thoseare
the rules that govern a Member of the United Natiorls
which is not a ‘nember of the Security Council.

This is such a precise and clear directive that it needs no
interpretation.
Our delegation proposes that this rule
should be strictly adhered to.
15. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): I regret to have to
intervene in our proceedings at this stage, but I should like
to make the position of my delegation clear. You will
recall, Mr. President, that my delegation was inscribed as
the second speaker for this afternoon, immediately after
the delegation of the United Arab Republic. We were then
informed that the representative of Israel had expressedhis
desire to be the second speaker in our place. When you
approached me about this question I agreed to yield my
place to the representative of Israel asa matter of courtesy,
even though my delegation had priority by virtue of earlier
inscription. I made only one reservation: that is, that it
would not be proper for the representative of Israel to
make any reference to the three-Power draft resolution
dated 7 November [S/8227] before its formal introduction
in the Council.

21. It is very clear under the rules-and the practicehits
invariably confirmed this-that rule 27 refers to membersl~f
the Security Council. Rule 30 also refers to membersoftile
Security Council; the same language is used in rule 31, flke
same language is used in rule 32, and we do not get‘10
non-members until we reach rule 37, This has beentile
invariable practice of the Security Council from the
beginning as far as I can determine. All Presidentsand;]’
members ‘have acted in accordance with this. This is a
simple procedure, in accordance not only with the rulesbut
with ordinary plain sense, with a sense of fair Playafld
fairness which dictates it. Therefore, I put my motion.
22. Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): It is with very great hasltation
and understandably with some trepidation that 1 iatelYede
in &is dialogue. Bu; I feel that as the representativeOfa
2

member of the Security Council, even though it is a - I shall now put to the Council the Nigerian representative’s
non-permanent member &d a relatively small country, it is
motion-namely,
that the meeting be suspended for the
rely duty to make this statement.
purpose of consultations in the hope of arriving at a
solution to this procedural problem.
23. I v&y much regret that we should be starting our
Proceedings today with a controversy of this kind. I do not
30. May I remind you that in cases of this kind the
claim the knowledge or the experience commanded by
Council has to take a decision without debate. If there is no
either the representative of the Soviet Union or the
objection, I shall consider the proposal adopted and the
representative of the United States in this matter. Nigeria
meeting will be suspended for half an hour.
hasbeen on the Security Council for only a short time and
will soon disappear from it.
The meeting was suspended at 4.45 p.m. and resumed at
7.10p.m.

24, In my experience, my very short experience, it has

always been left to the President to call upon representatives in the order in which they signify their desire to speak,
and I had always thought that that action was governed by
the provisions of rule 27,

3 1. THE PRESIDENT (translated from Fbench): Tile fact
that we have been faced today with this incident, which has
somewhat delayed our work, was certainly not due to any
intention on the part of the President. We would have
preferred to have settled the incident before the meeting.
However, since both parties referred to the practice and
tradition of the United Nations, the President was obliged
to bow to the law. Thus, the list gf speakers read out by the
President was drawn up in accordance with rule 27 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure-that is to
say, in chronological order of inscription.

25. It is also the case that whenever there has been any

subject of controversy-when one person who has alleged
something against another has spoken-customarily,
the
person against whom any allegation is made has been given
the opportunity to speak in reply.
26. During the time that I was President of the Council
there was no difficulty about this because in the case that
came before the Council at that time the representatives of
the parties were properly inscribed in due time one after
the other, It may be that if that had not been the case I
would have been-like you, Mr. President-in
the very
awkward position in which you seem to be placed this
afternoon. I am very anxious that our President should be
savedfrom this awkward position.

32. I should like to thank the Nigerian representative for
asking for a suspension of the meeting to give all parties
time for reflection and understanding which might enable
us to reach agreement. The President addressed himself to
the task with all the will and perseverance demanded by his
heavy responsibiIities and by the confidence you have
placed in him by electing him to preside over you.

27. There has been a rule in this Council-whether
between representatives who are members of the Council or
between members who are only invited to speak without
voting-that if there should be any desire on the part of any
speaker to take a place in advance of that to which he is
entitled according to the order of his inscription on the list,
that representative has always done what I believe was done
in this case; he has gone to the person inscribed in the
position in question and has asked if he might speak out of
his turn.

,

)n
ne
‘a

33. I regret to say that we have been unable to bring about
agreement between the parties. We shall therefore be
obliged to refer the matter to the inembers of the Council
so that we may decide upon a form of procedure and
continue with our work,
34. If there is no objection, I shall read out the motion
submitted by the United States representative at the
beginning of this meeting[paru, IO]. This is the text of the
motion he presented:
“I therefore now move that the parties to the dispute
who have asked to speak, that is, the United Arab
Republc and Israel, be invited to speak prior to the
members of the Council.”

28. It seems to me that we ought to have followed that
procedure in this case and I would respectfully suggest,
therefore, that if my colleagues see no objection we should
have a short suspension so that if possible this matter may
be resolved amicably by consultations between our President and those who are directly concerned in this procedural wrangle. Some of us here are very anxious to proceed as
soon as possible with the substance of our debate and it is
for that reason that I suggest that there should be a short
suspension so that the necessary consultations may be
undertaken and the parties may have an opportunity to
review the position and spare the President what I believe
to be an awkward situation. On the other hand, it may be
that the President is not in an awkward position ‘md can
give his verdict immediately. That is why I say that, subject
to the President’s concurrence and that of my colleagues,
we might have this short suspension so that this problem
may be amicably resolved.

35. Mr. KUZNETSOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated porn Rzrssinn): Mr. President, I have
taken the floor on a point ci clarification, to make sure
whether we understand correcily the proposal which has
just been read out. At the beginning of the meeting, the
President read out a list of speakers. In that list, the first
speaker was the representative of the United Arab Republic
and we all understood that there was no question or
discussion about the United Arab Republic and that the
proposal was merely that we should consider the question
of Israel, which was sixth or seventh on the list; and it was
the representative of Israel that the United States representative was talking about.

29. THE PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with rule 33 of the provisional rules of procedure,

36. I should like to make it clear that the motion
introduced by the representative of the United States
3

Secondly, if I understand him correctly, and’ as we
understand the question, if the United States motion is not
adopted by the Security Council, then the list read out by
the President at the beginning of the meeting still stands.
On this understanding, we consider that a vote on the
United States motion, if the motion is not adopted, will not
in any way alter the fact that the first speaker on the List
will be the representative of the United Arab Republic.

related only to Israel. Now, if we understand you correctly,
there is some question about the United Arab Republic as
well. This is not in line with the proposal which wasmade
orally by the representative of the United States, and in this
form it is a different proposal which we llave not heard
before and which is quite new.
37. As we understand it the issue to be decided is when
the representative of Israel should speak and it has nothing
to do with the United Arab Republic.

43. THE PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
representative of the Soviet Union has just asked this
question: if the motion by the United States representative
is not accepted by the Council, does that mean that tile
United Arab Republic will remain first on the list of
speakers? I should like to ask the United States representative to be good enough to reply to that question.

38. Mr, GOLDBERG (United States): Mr. President, I
wish to say to you that I greatly appreciate the efforts
which you have made to settle the problem which I raised
initially when the meeting opened. I should take this
occasion, perhaps, to make it quite clear for the record that
the background to the motion I made was as follows. When
we arrived at the Council chamber this afternoon we were
advised by the Secretariat, as I am sure the other members
of the Council were, that the first two speakers would be
the United Arab Republic and Israel, in that order. Shortly
before the meeting began, maybe a few minutes, we were
advised that the order had been changed owing to circumstances which had arisen; not because of any fault of yours,
Mr. President. Then I made a motion.

44. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): In
accordance with the practice and rules of the Council I
would have the right, as a member of the Council, aswould
any’ titimber of the Council, to speak first, before any of
the parties, However, I am not asking to exercise that right.
I have put a motion and I am satisfied to abide by the
results of the vote-which, of course, I hope will be i
favourable-following
which the representative of the
I
United Arab Republic could speak first.

39. With due respect to my friend, Deputy Minister
Kuznetsov, I made the motion and handed it to you, and
the motion that I made was the motion that you read, in
precisely those words. That is the motion that I put before
.the meeting. I should make it clear to everybody, however,
that I mentioned the United Arab Republic first in the way
I put it-the United Arab Republic and then Israel.
40.

45. THE PRESIDENT (translated from French): I shall
now put to the vote the motion by the United States
representative.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

1r1 favour: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
Japan, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): The motion we are discussing, whether it is
presented in the form in which we have just heard it, or in
the form in which it was previously submitted by the
representative of the United States, or again according to
the interpretation given to it by the representative of the
Soviet Union, is in fact a proposat to the effect that, after
we have heard the order of speakers as read out to us by the
President, Israel’s position on the list of speakers should be
moved up from number six or seven to number two. This is
what the motion amounts to and this is the point to which
I wish to draw attention because, both at the beginning of
the meeting and just now, Mr. President, when you confirmed it, a list of speakers was presented to you; and it is
perfectly obvious that the explanations given by the United
States representative cannot change the order of speakers
on your list. I repeat, therefore, that the motion we are
discussing is intended to change Israel’s position on that
list.

Against: None.
Abstaining:
Bulgaria, Ethiopia, France, India, Maii,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The result of the vote was 8 in favour, none against, with
7 abstentions.
X4e motion wasnot adopted, having failed to obtaifl lhe
affirmative votes of nine members.

46. The PRESIDENT (transZatedfram French): We shall
now continue the meeting, The second item on the agenda
is the consideration of the situation in the Middle East.
47. Before we start our work I should like to draw
attention to the two draft resolutions which have been
submitted; the first, submitted by India, Mali and Nigeria
(S/8227] and the second, submitted by the United States
of America [S/8229].

41. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We are sorry to have to
spend so much time on a procedural question. But since
this question has now taken a form such that it extends in
fact beyond the framework of a procedural question, I
should like to say a few words in connexion with the
statement by the representative of the United States.

48. The first speaker on my list is the representative of the
United Arab Republic, on whom I now call.
49. Mr. Mahmoud RIAD (United Arab Republic): Five
months have already elapsed since Israel launched its war 01
aggression against my country, Syria and Jordan. The

42. First of all, I should like to say that the representative
of the United States did not read out any text to me.
4

aggressive Israel forces continue to OCCUPY parts of the
United Arab Republic’s territory and territory under
United Arab Republic administration, as well as parts of
Syria and Jordan. The Israel aggression and its subsequent
military occupation pose the most serious challenge to this
Organization and its Charter. The responsibility of the
Council in meeting that challenge remains unfulfilled; it is a
responsibility which under no circumstances should be
evaded or surrendered.

of the territory of one State by another is totally
inadmissible. Absolute support of this principle was the
common denominator which emerged in the deliberations
of the emergency session. However, for reasons which my
delegation and others have expounded before, and which
have been common knowledge inside and outside this
Organization, the General Assembly was unable to translate
into a resolution its sacred commitment to this principle.
This failure of the General Assembly was the second
setback for the international Organization in the current
crisis as well as for the principles, purposes and values ii
stands for.

50. Aside from the obvious fact that the Council has the
primary responsibility for the suppression of aggression,
there exist other fundamental factors which make the
Council’s responsibility greater than ever, for Israel’s
aggression constitutes not only a most serious violation of
its obligations under the Charter but equally a violation of
its solemn obligations under the General Armistice Agreements which Israel signed along with the Arab States under
the auspicesof the Security Council.

55. As a result of the Assembly’s inability to take a firm
and meaningful stand the Israel forces felt free to launch
further aggression. Intoxicated with the results of their
earlier aggressions, and encouraged by the failure of the
United Nations to act, they embarked upon a series of
actions designed to bring about further destruction to the
Suez Canal and to the Canal’s installations, as well as the
destruction of vital industrial civilian establishments in the
United Arab Republic. This policy of terror and destruction
resulted in the death of large numbers of civilians in the
Suez Canal area, a matter which led my Government to
evacuate the civilian inhabitants, totalling more than
300,000 persons. Hand in hand with this new policy of
piecemeal war, Israel has been waging in effect a war against
the United Nations. Israel has openly expressed its defiance
of the resolutions adopted unanimously by the General
Assembly at its fifth emergency special session on Jerusalem L22.53 (ES- V), 2254 (ES- V,J] and the return of the new
refugees to their homes r22.52 (ES-V)]. Israel today
demands that the United Nations abandon and wash its
hands of the whole question of its aggression against the
Arab States.

51. Furthermore, the present occupation of Arab territories by the aggressive Israel forces has created a situation
which is fraught with danger to peace and security in the
area. Israel’s latest aggression against the United Arab
Republic on 24 October 1967, which caused considerable
loss of civilian life and set aflame the United Arab Republic
oil refineries at Suez and also destroyed other vital civilian
factories and industrial plants, leaves no doubt as to the
grave nature of the present situation. By any measure of
judgement, and for whatever reason, be they political,
constitutional, historical or legal, this international Organization is in no position to continue to allow itself to remain
in a state of inaction in the face of the Israel aggression.
With every single sign of hesitation or delay in action by
this Organization Israel grows more arrogant and defiant.
The wild public statements by the Israel officials, together
with their actions and policies, evident now to the entire
world, clearly indicate that Israel today is operating totally
outside the realm of law.

53. From the moment the Israel aggression took place on
5 June, the duty of the Council has been clear: to condemn
the aggression, order Israel to withdraw forthwith its forces
to the positions they held on 4 June, and to determine
Israel’s responsibility for the damages and losses it inflicted
uPon the Arab countries and peoples.

56. Last August, the leaders of the Arab world held a
summit meeting in Khartoum at which they decided to
pursue political action on international and diplomatic
levels in order to eliminate the consequences of aggression
and secure the withdrawal of Israel forces from occupied
territories. That decision, taken at the highest responsible
level in the Arab world, must be understood in its true
dimension. It was a decision for peace, but not surrender. It
was a decision for a political solution to the crisis, and not a
decision for national suicide in the name of a political
solution. Within that mandate, my Arab colleagues and I
decided to avail ourselves of the opportunity presented by
the international gathering in the General Assembly at its
twenty-second session. We realized that there existed
certain misconceptions regarding the Arab position and, to
the best of our ability, we sought in our addresses in the
general debate to correct those misconceptions.

54. Regrettably, the Council failed to follow that course
of action and was able only to issue cease-fire orders. That
wasthe first setback for the international Organization in
the current crisis. Due to the Council’s failure to take a
positive stand on the substance of the question, the General
Assembly was convened in an emergency special session
UPon a request from the Soviet Union. The deliberations in
the emergency session revealed a unanimous sense of
commitment on the part of Member States to the most
fundamental principle that military occupation of any part

57. In my statement on 29 September 1967, at the
1573rd meeting of the General Assembly, I explained the
developments which took place before 5 June, the day
Israel launched its treacherous aggression. I equally set
forth our position on the fundamental issues facing our
region. On the other hand, for the past six weeks, together
with other Arab colleagues, we have held consultations with
a wide range of representatives from other countries. Our
aim has been to point out the dangers inherent in the
present situation and in the continuation of the Israel

52. On the other hand the Israel aggression has continued
to present to this Organization the gravest crisis of its life,
and we believe that the United Nations cannot afford to
fail. Its failure in the present situation would plant the
seeds of its ultimate total paralysis in the field of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

5

against any attempt to solve international
through force or aggression.

occupation. We have emphasized that we seek a peaceful
and just solution, and that the cornerstone of that political
solution, as we have said before, is naturally the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of the aggressive forces to
the positions they occupied prior to 5 June. That is a basic
requirement which emanates from every essential provision
of the Charter. We were encouraged in our effort by the
universal support of this position as expressed by many
leaders from Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe in
their speeches in the fifth emergency special session, as Well
as in the general debate of the present twenty-second
session of the General Assembly.

ouestiens

65. Members of the Security Council are entitled, however, to ask about the origin of the state of tension and
instability that has engulfed our region for decades.l,,
answering this question one single fact imposes itself: the
expulsion by force of the people of Palestine from their
homes. As this single fact has led to the most abncrrrral
consequences and conditions in our part of the world, it
equally remains the central issue the solution of which n,,,st
naturally bring about peace and justice. The President ef
the United States recognized this essential fact in his speech
of 19 June 1967, when he referred to the question of the
Palestinian people and when, according to The New York
Times of 20 June 1967, he said: “There will be a0
peace . . . for any party in .the Middle East unless ai,
problem is attacked”.

58. This commitment, which is the essenceof our Charter,
is equally reflected in various basic international instruments. Article 17 of the Charter of the Organization Of
American States provides that:
“The territory of a State is inviolable; it may not be the
object, even temporarily, of military occupation or Of
other measures of force taken by another State, directly
or indirectly, on any grounds whatever. No territorial
acquisitions or special advantages obtained either by force
or by other means of coercion shall be recognized.“s

66. This is a problem the solution to which lies withi the
framework of this Organization. On no other question has
the United Nations assumed or borne greater responsibility,
This Organization is the successor to the League of Nations
to whose Mandate the territory and people of Palestine
were entrusted. In addition, the United Nations adopted
resolutions which resulted in the birth of Israel. Whetherby
action or by inaction, this international Organization has
borne the historic, constitutional, legal and moral re.
sponsibility for the people of Palestine. The United Nations
remains the only valid framework for finding the appropri.
ate means to enable the people of Palestine to exercisetheir
inherent and established right to self-determination, for this
is the essence of the resolutions consistently adopted by
this Organization on the rights of the people of Palestine.

59. On the other hand, the deliberations in the emergency
session as well as in the general debate of the present
session of the General Assembly revealed the concern of a
number of delegations over the general state of affairs in
our region.
60. Indeed, the peoples of our part of the world can in no
way benefit from a state of war, belligerency and tension.
What they need is a state of security and stability in which
they can devote their resourcesto the challenges of progress
and development.

67. In the introduction to his latest annull report, tlie
Secretary-General referred to the rights of the peopleof
Palestine in these words: “people everywhere, and this
certainly applies to the Palestinian refugees, have a natural
right to be in their homeland and to have a future”.4 l%s
remains to be fulfilled by our Organization.

61. The Security Council has therefore the duty fully to
apply the Charter, to eliminate the present aggression
against the Arab territories, and to initiate a course that will
bring about normalcy in the area through the appropriate
and faithful application of the Charter.

68. What is immediately before the Council today, hew
ever, is an open aggression against ?hree Member States.Ihe
rules of the Charter are categorically firm and the duty of
the Council is absolutely clear.

62. Peace should be the target of this Council; hut peace is
made up of deeds, not words.
63. Israel’s massive wars of aggression-almost one every
ten years-and its policy of territorial expansion, clearly
evident to the entire world at present; its policy of
unilateral abrogation of its international obligations; its
total defiance of the authority of this Organization; and its
continued armed attacks against the civilian inhabitants are
policies which constantly prove to us that for Israel war is a
fascinating ideology and a national policy,
64. The history of the Palestine question is a history half a
century old. The abnormalities that have resulted from it
can in no way be adjusted by aggression. They can be
adjusted only by peaceful and appropriate application of
the Charter. The Security Council is duty bound to stand

69. Israel’s aggression against the Arab countries oa 5 June
must be considered in its grave dimensions. Israel’s ebb
gations under the Charter of the United Nations, sswsllas
under the General Armistice Agreements which it has
signed, are inescapable. The binding character
. of7..these
8.
Agreements is stated in their very provisions. III 1.116
introduction to his annual report the SecretaryGeneral
correctly referred to this fact when he stated that “TherefS
no provision in them for unilateral termination Of thee
application”5
Surely the Council cannot subscribete the
proposition that any State may violate its obligations and
thereafter allege that it is no more bound by these
obligations.

3 SeeUnited Nations, 7’?-eut~Series, vol. 119 (lg.V), No. 1609,
p. 56.

Session,Supplement No. IA, para. 49.
5 Ibid., para. 43.

4 Official

6

Records of the General Assembly, TWWeroad

70. Furthermore, some basic provisions of the General
Armistice Agreements, namely, the principles related to the
aon.use of force, the right of every party to its security and
other basic principles, cannot be revised even by mutual
consent. This is natural for these obligations flow from the
provisions of the Charter, which we have all solemnly
undertaken to apply and observe.
71, May I refer here to the statement made by the
president of the United States on 23 May 1967, in which he
said:
“We call upon all concerned to observe in a spirit of
restraint their solemn responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations and the General Armistice Agreements. These provide an honourable means of preventing
hostilities until, through the efforts of the international
community, a peace with justice and honour can be
achieved.”
72. Throughout the past few weeks we have been in
constant contact with all members of the Security Council.
During this time, we have emphasized one essential point,
namely, that the Charter prescribes that the aggressiveIsrael
forcesmust withdraw immediately to the positions they
held before 5 June. Concerted and determined efforts
should begin, and begin with sincerity, justice and legality,
to find solutions for the other aspects of the Palestine
question.
73. In these consultations, we travelled a long way in an
effort to meet all the points raised by those who were
sincerelylabouring to find a just and reasonable formula.
But we could not agree to a theory designed to surrender
the role of the Council, so specifically laid down by the
Charter,to the whims of an aggressor. Nor could we agree
to another theory designed to balance the interests of
aggressionwith the interests of the victims of aggression.
For the Charter envisaged enforcement actions against the
aggressor.It certainly did not envisage that the aggressor
would receive assistance-whether military, political or
economic.

now, and the inabilitv of the international Organization to
put into effect the piovisions of the Charter~iimeeting the
aggression committed by Israel, has only encouraged Israel
to further acts of war and greater defiance of the will of
this Organization and the expressed commitments of the
international community. This position cannot continue.
This international Organization, particularly the Security
Council which has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and the suppression of aggression,
must now act and discharge its responsibility long overdue.
76. It is obvious that the present situation, which finds the
Israel forces continuing to occupy parts of Arab territories,
is a situation which is untenable. It is equally obvious that
this situation falls into the most serious category of
breaches of the peace which require the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities and apply the provisions’of the
Charter. These provisions are clear. They call for the
strongest condemnation of aggression such as Israel’s, and
in the event Israel should refuse to withdraw its forces
promptly to the positions they had occupied before the
aggression, the Council must apply the enforcement measures. This is the rule of the Charter; this is why the Charter
was adopted and proclaimed as the highest law of the
international community; this is the reason the United
Nations came into existence; and this is the basic function
of the Security Council.
77. The gravity of the present situation and the potential
danger to international peace and security inherent in it,
however, have impressed upon us the need to continue in
the search for the possible avenues of action still open to
the Council. The minimum measuresrequiring adoption by
the Council would be a resolution demanding that Israel
immediately withdraw its aggressiveforces to the positions
held on 4 June. Indeed, the Security Council cannot afford
not to meet this minimum requirement. The withdrawal of
Israel forces to their original positions is not only the rule
of the Charter and a fulfilment of the universal commitment by all Member States of this Organization; it is also
the essential prerequisite for initiation of a course towards
peace in our part of the world. Peacecannot be imposed by
aggression.

74. Since 5 June Israel has occupied the unique position
of an outlaw in the international community. Its aggression,
its continued occupation of the Arab territories, its
expansionist policy, as evidenced by its annexation of
Jerusalem and the reference by its Prime Minister a few
daysago to the occupied Arab territories as part of “greater
Israel”, its refusal to allow neither the old nor the new
refugeesto return to their homes, its constant raids against
the civilian inhabitants in the Suez Canal area, and its
Policy bent on bringing further destruction to the Suez
Canaland its installations, are all outlawed policies which
require and call for the most determined opposition by the
entire international community. It is for this, and in the
interest of peace in the Middle East, for the sake of the
Charter, and even for the sake of future relations among
nations and peoples that we urge that military, political and
economic assistance to Israel be withheld until Israel
complieswith the Charter and its obligations and withdraws
its aggressiveforces from all the territories it has occupied
asa result of its aggression,

79. Three decades ago the world witnessed an outrageous
war against law and order. The militarist and expansionist
rhgimes of fascism and nazism carried out one aggression
after the other. The international order, based then on the
Covenant of the League of Nations, failed to stand against
aggression. The League of Nations followed a policy of
inaction, timidity, hesitation and appeasement in the face
of aggression. The catastrophic suffering, destruction, havoc
and loss of life of many millions of people that ensued was
only the result of an international order incapable of
carrying out the very provisions and rules it proclaimed.

75u I have already pointed out that the inaction of the
SecuritYCouncil, which has continued for some months

80. The present international order which emerged from
the experience of the 30’s and the 40’s has equipped itself

78. The Security Council, indeed the United Nations in its
entirety, as the embodiment of the present international
order, is facing an historic responsibility. We urge that-this
Organization be in fuII awareness of the grave situation
created by the Israel aggression.

with the authority, institutions and sanctions to stand
against aggression, to protect the territorial integrity and
political independence of States. On no other occasion,
since the Charter came into force, has this Organization
been made to face such a crisis as it is facing today. On no
other occasion has the United Nations been rendered
incapable of following its cease-fire orders with specific
instructions for the withdrawal of aggressiveforces to their
original positions. Any compromise with this principle
would be a compromise with a most fundamental provision
of the Charter; indeed, and in fact, it would be a
compromise with the Charter itself, and a compromise of
the entire international order which is based on the Charter.
The Security Council, which is responsible for the suppression of aggression, cannot accept aggression. In all sincerity,
we believe that the international Organization and its
Members cannot afford, for the sake of peace and for the
sake of every member of the international community, be it
large or small, to allow such a disastrous result to be
reached.
81. The Arab people are in the process of fulfilment of
their national aspirations. These aspirations are for peace,
justice, freedom and progress with a deep commitment and
a determination to share in the universal task of meeting
the great human challenges of our age.
82. Israel’s aggression on S June has presented us with a
setback, But the history of nations is made up of victories
and setbacks. The course of Arab history is no different.
The people of Egypt, throughout the thousands of years of
their history, have faced destructive waves of invasion and
aggression, But our people, through their resolution and
perseverence, have always been able to defend their
fatherland and overcome aggression. We have not the
slightest doubt that we shall overcome the present aggression as well. This is not unique with our people. I can point
to various countries around this table which suffered
military setbacks as a result of wars of aggression. They
have all been victims of aggression and treacherous armed
attack in recent history, Yet all these peoples were able to
overcome their setbacks because they refused to accept
aggression. The Arab people also refuse to accept aggression. Indeed, no country present here should expect our
people to live with aggression on our land. In an unshakable
faith in our history, the nobility of our present struggle,
and our future, our people, who have made sacrifices in the
past and in the present, shall not under any circumstances
accept the aggression. What is at stake is so great and
fundamental to us, and, therefore, every sacrifice would be
offered with no hesitation. We are committed to peace, but,
equally, we are committed to overcoming aggression.
83. We consider that the Security Council has the authority, and indeed the duty, to suppress the Israel aggression
and to force the aggressive Israel forces to return to the
positions held before 5 June. Our conviction is derived
from our faith in the Charter, and for this reason we have
asked the Security Council to meet and to resume its
consideration of the Israel aggression; for we believe that a
fair and impartial effort by this Council would indeed
secure the application of the principles and purposes of our
Charter.

84. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Mr. president, 1
should first of all like to extend my delegation’s sincere
felicitations t0 YOU On your assumption of the office cf
President of the Security Council for this month. We feel
assured that YOU will preside over our Council with the
same probity, wisdom and impartiality which have marked
your guidance of the informal consultations among all
members of the Council during the past few days, It is cur
earnest hope that under your leadership the Council will
break the unfortunate stalemate on West Asia and mcve
forward towards a peaceful settlement.
85. It is now over five months since the Securjty Council
first took up consideration of the dangerous &aticn ii,
West Asia. As we all remember, in the months of June and
July, the Council adopted several unanimous resolutions
demanding a cease-fir,e and the cessation of all military
activities in the area. It was also the unanimous agreement
of the members of the Council that a cease-fire wastc be
only the first step in the direction of creating conditions for
permanent peace and stability in West Asia. Some of us
earnestly urged that, having taken the first step in ordering
a cease-fire, the Security Council should take the further
steps of securing the withdrawal of Israel forces from all
occupied territories and in bringing about peace sad
security to the area. These two steps were, in our view,
necessary to prevent the emergence of graver threats to
peace and security in the future.
86. During the last few months, the General Assembly also
has expressed its views on this grave situation first, in the
fifth emergency special session, and then during the general
debate at the twenty-second regular session. Although these
deliberations of the General Assembly have been inconclu.
sive on the vital questions concerning the maintenance of
peace and security, nevertheless they have underlined the
deep concern of Member States at the crisis, and have
revealed certain fundamental areas of agreement which
could pave the way towards finding definitive solutions.
87. First, withdrawal of Israel forces to the positions they
occupied before the outbreak of hostilities, that is, tc the
positions held on 4 June 1967. Second, withdrawal should
not result once again in the situation of part peace and pad
war. Therefore, there should be an end to the state of
belligerency as it existed before the outbreak of hostilities
on 5 June. Further, it should be possible for all States1s
the area-indeed it is the right of all States-to live in Peace
and complete security free from threats or acts cf wars
Third, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, all States in the area must respect the Political
independence and territorial integrity of one ai&er*
Fourth, there must be a just settlement of the long-deferred
problem of the Palestinian refugees. Fifth, there shouldbe
not only freedom of navigation through international
waterways in the area, but there should be a guaranteeOf
such freedom.
88. By its resolution 2256 (ES-V), the GeneralAssemblyl
bearing in mind the resolutions adopted and the PrcPosak
considered during the fifth emergency special sessionj
requested the Secretary-General to forward the recordsOf
that session to the Security Council in order tc facilitate
the resumption by the Council of its consideration Ofthe

tensesituation in West Asia. The Secretary-General complied with this request of the General Assembly through a
letter dated 21 July 1967, addressed to the President of the
$curity Council [S/8088].
89. Among the important proposals considered by the
, (janera Assembly at its emergency session was a revised
tlraft resolution sponsored by twenty Latin American
tlelegations[A/L..523/Rev. 11. I should like to request that
lhis draft resolution be circulated as a Security Council
d0cument.6
)o, During the last three to four weeks, the Afro-Asian
,0d Latin American delegations members of this Council
ravebeen engaged in intensive and extensive consultations
0 regardto the most appropriate course to be followed by
;he Security Council. Individually
or collectively, we
:xamined all the proposals, formal and informal, which
Mereput forward during the months of June and July when
\ha General Assembly was meeting in emergency session.
fle had before us the non-aligned draft, the Latin American
iraft and the papers which were produced as a result of
ikcussions between the Soviet Union and the United
States.We also had the benefit of the valuable passages
‘ram the Secretary-General’s introduction to his annual
deportto the General Assembly’s twenty-second session. We
tookall these proposals into account and tried to produce a
pairand balanced paper for the consideration of the
SecurityCouncil. Needless to say, we also had in mind the
viewsof the other members of the Council and of the
partiesconcerned.
91. I am sure my Latin American and Afro-Asian coleagueswill bear me out when I say that in finalizing the
three-Powerdraft we had the Latin American draft as the
jasic document of reference. The draft resolution which
ias now been distributed to the members of the Council
‘S/8227] and which I have the honour to introduce here
todayon behalf of Mali, Nigeria and India, closely parallels
theLatin American draft sponsored by twenty delegations
ia the General Assembly. The draft resolution reads as
allows:
‘The Security Council,
“‘Expressing its continuing
situation in the Middle East,

concern with the grave

‘Recalling its resolution 233 (1967) of 6 June 1967 on
the outbreak of fighting which called for, as a first step,
aaimmediate cease-fire and for a cessation of all military
activitiesin the area,
“Recalling

further

General

Assembly

resolution

2256(ES-V),
“Emphasizing the urgency of reducing tensions, restoringpeaceand bringing about normalcy in the area,

“1. &%irms that a just and lasting peace in the Middle
Eastmust be achieved within the framework of the
%ntlY

circulated asdocument S/8235.

Charter of the United Nations and more particularly of
the following principles:
“(i) Occupation or acquisition of territory by military
conquest is inadmissible under the Charter of the United
Nations and consequently Israel’s armed forces should
withdraw from all the territories occupied as a result of
the recent conflict;
“(ii) Likewise, every State has the right to live in peace
and complete security free from threats or acts of war
and consequently all States in the area should terminate
the state or claim of belligerency and settle their
international disputes by peaceful means;
“(iii) Likewise, every State of the area has the right to
be secure within its borders and it is obligatory on all
Member States of the area to respect the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of one
another;
“2. Affirms further:

“(i) There should be a just settlement of the question
of Palestine refugees;
“(ii) There should be guarantee of freedom of navigation in accordance with international law through
international waterwaysin the area;
“3. Requests the Secretary-General to dispatch a
special representative to the area who would contact the
States concerned in order to co-ordinate efforts to
achieve the purposes of this resolution and to submit a
report to the Council within thirty days.”
92. There is no need for me to explain the preambular
paragraphs of the draft resolution. So far as the operative
paragraphs are concerned, they are also clear and unambiguous. Our endeavour has been not only to state each
principle in clear terms but also to link it to the others so as
to give equal validity to each and to ensure equality of
obligations. But there are a few points which need to be
explained. The first operative paragraph begins by affirming
what is obvious to all of us and it is that peace and stability
can be brought to West Asia only within the framework of
the Charter of the United Nations. We do not attempt to
pinpoint any particular provision of the Charter because, in
our view, the entire Charter should be the framework. In
sub-paragraph 1, the basic point of operative paragraph 2 of
the Latin American draft is brought in, namely, the
inadmissibility of occupation or acquisition of territory by
military conquest. The second half of the same sub-paragraph in regard to withdrawal useslanguage identical, word
for word, to operative paragraph 1 (a) of the Latin American draft. Sub-paragraph (ii) of our draft goes farther than
operative paragraph 1 (b) of the Latin draft. It is somewhat
more comprehensive because it not only calls for the
termination of the state of belligerency but also of any
claim of belligerency. Sub-paragraph (iii) of our draft takes
up the question of territorial inviolability and political
independence which was referred to in operative paragraph 3 (c) of the Latin draft. Here again, our draft
resolution is somewhat more comprehensive because it

-

continue to be our effort to narrow down these differences
I should like to emphasize once again, that the coreofou;
guide-lines for a&on lies within the framework of the
Charter of the F)ed Nations and particularly of its a,ost
fundamental prmclples. It 1s our view that the council
should lay down. in clear and unambiguous languagethe
principles it considers to be appropriate to the solution,,f
the problems of the area. The three-power draft initiate
the process of peaceful settlement of the West Asiaacdis,
Members of the Council will note that the draft resolution
provides for the adoption Of all peaceful means to settlethe
disputes. As we see it, the mission of the special representa.
tive and his contacts with the parties may open upvarious
possibilities of the means of peaceful settlement withinthe
framework of this resolution.

clearly states, borrowing the language of our distinguished
Secretary-General, that every State of the area has the right
to be secure within its borders-1 emphasize “wjthin its
borders”. There are two other points mentioned in operative paragraph 3 (c) of the Latin draft. They are: the
problem of refugees and the establishment of demilitarized
zones. As far as the question of refugees is concerned, this
is provided for in our operative paragraph 2 (i). However, I
must make it quite clear that in our view the question of
refugees comprehends only the Palestinian refugees and not
those who have acquired that status as a result of the
conflict in June of this year, In our view, as soon as Israel
withdraws from all the territories she has occupied as,a
result of that conflict, the problem of the so-called new
refugees would automatically cease to exist. Insofar as the
establishment of demilitarized zones is concerned, sub-paragraph (ii) of our operative paragraph 1 refers to the right of
every State to live in peace and complete security free from
threats or acts of war. If the establishment of demilitarized
zones is found to be necessary in the light of the special
representative’s report, that could be taken care of in
conformity with sub-paragraph (ii). Of course, it is clear to
all of us that demilitarized zones must be established only
with the consent of the States concerned.

96, Our deliberations, consultations and consideration,,f
the West Asian crisis have reached a crucial stage;thetime
is now ripe for the Security Council to dischargeits pdmav
responsibility for maintenance of peace and security,The
Council cannot allow itself to be bogged down anyfurther
in endless controversy. All of USaround this table share
the
common objective of the restoration of peace andsecurity
to all the nations and peoples of West Asia. Wemust,
therefore, look forward to the day when all Statesofthe
area through the genuine implementation of the provisions
of our resolution will be able to close an ‘unhappy chapter
of the past and start a new era of good-neighbourly
relations. It is in this spirit and with this objective thatwe
have presented this resolution and we would requestour
colleagues to give it their earnest consi,leration.

93. Now we come to the question of freedom of navigation which is mentioned in operative paragraph 3 (b) of
the Latin American draft, and finds a place in our draft in
sub-paragraph (ii) of operative paragraph 2. Our draft talks
of the guarantee of freedom of navigation in accordance
with international law. Most international waterways have
their own particular r6gimes. In the caseof the Suez Canal,
the Constantinople Convention of 1888 is applicable. If,
however, no particular r6gime exists, then the waterway,
such as the Gulf of Aqaba, is regulated by customary
international law. We have been told in informal consultations that the reference to international law merely selves
to confuse the issues, to promote prolonged litigation, etc.
My delegation is not convinced that this is so. However, we
are prepared to examine very carefully any arguments that
might be advanced in the Council in respect of the words
“in accordance with international law”.

97. THE PRESIDENT (translated Porn French): I should
like to thank the representative of India for the flattering
remarks he has just made about me.
98. Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): This is the first opportunity
that I have had to say how much pleasure it givesto my
country to find you, Mr. President, in the Chair thatyou
now occupy. The record that has been set by your country
in all organs of the United Nations is a very commendable
one. It is not only one of which your country shouldbe
proud, but also one of which all of us in Africaareproud,
We are very glad that you have been appointed to followin
that tradition and that already you are showingthecalibre
that we have been accustomed to find in representativesof
your country. Having regard to the relations betweenour
two countries, I do not have to assureyou that weofthe
Nigerian delegation will do all that is in our powerto make
your occupancy of that Chair as little uncomfortable8s
possible.

94. Operative paragraph 3 of our draft needs to be
explained only in one detail. We request the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report to the Council within thirty
days of the adoption of this resolution, It is not, of course,
our contention that the work of the special representative
of the Secretary-General would be over in thirty days.
Nevertheless, it is important to receive a report in the very
near future because of the urgency of the problem. If the
period of thirty days is considered too short, the sponsors
of the draft resolution would be quite willing to consider
other suggestions in this regard.

99. I should also like to say one word aboutYour
predecessor in that Chair, the representative of Japan+
He
did not have to face some of the problems that YOU!
Mr. President, have had to face today. He did not have@
preside over so many official meetings of the COuflcil~
Nevertheless, we had plenty of opportunity to r&zewhat
useful experience he brought to the United Natioasafldof
what value that experience is going to prove to USin Ihir
Organization.

95. The sponsors of the draft resolution which I have just
introduced have tried very hard and sincerely to present a
fair and balanced formulation of all the principles and
problems germane to the situation in West Asia. We know
that some of the provisions of our draft are not in
accordance with the wishesof the parties concerned. We are
keenly aware that there are differences within the Council
and between the parties on what should be the basic
approach at this stage. It has been our endeavour and will

100. When I intervened in the last debate that wehadon
the Middle East situation I took the opportun@ *oremind
10

the Council of the general position of my Country,
a
which
W;IS explicitly
stated, by the Commissioner
of External Affairs of Nigeria m hn contribution to the
1 genersl
debate in the plenary Assembly. With your pemcs.
aion,and that of my colleagues, I should like to quote it
again,becauseit is most pertinent TO what will now follow.
ourCommissioner of External Affairs stated:

restored in the Middle East was the Latin American draft
resolution which wasrejected at the emergency session, but
which nevertheless was supported by quite a substantial
number of Member States in the General Assembly. We
entered into informal consultations “without prejudice”, as
the lawyers say. That is to say, we knew and recognized
that all those who were participating in our informal
discussion had their own positions and the positions of
their Countries in regard to the Middle East situation,

position

“It is now generally agreed that no country should be
&wed to achieve territorial gains by military conquest,
lt is also agreed that we must help create a political
climatein the Middle East in which all the inhabitants in
that ares of .the world will live hereafter in reasonable
peaceand security.“‘]

105. But we felt that all of us shared one thing in
common, that what was important wasnot the position of
India or Nigeria or Canada or the Soviet Union or the
United States but the real interests of the peoples of the
Middle East, and we felt that on the basis of that draft we
could produce something that would achieve a consensus
and would have the effect that I have indicated, The Latin
American draft had many merits. Nevertheless we sought to
improve upon the merits it had, and my colleagues, if they
examine our draft resolution carefully, will find provisions
there that are a definite improvement upon the Latin
American draft. But essentially and in substance we
committed ourselves to following the Latin American draft
as closely aspossible.

101.In point of fact there is nothing really new in that
position;it is a position which ws echoed by most Member
Statesof the United Nations in the plenary meetings of our
Assembly.
If Nigeria can claim any credit for that position,
it is only in respect of the consistency with which it has
held to that position, It has held consistently to that
positionin spite of pressures from both sides of this
controversy.
I have been spokesman for my country in the
SecurityCouncil on occasions when I have pleased one side
anddispleasedthe other side, only to displease the first and
please
the secondat a subsequent meeting. That is the price
thatwehavehad to pay for consistency.

106. Having done that, we assumed that our difficulties
would be with those who did not subscribe to the Latin
American draft resolution when it wasproposed at the fifth
emergency special sessionof the General Assembly. Therefore we consulted a good number of such countries and we
got the impression that so far asthey were concerned, if we
were able to produce a consensuson the basis of the Latin
American draft, they would be prepared, iti spite of the
positions that their countries had taken before, to subscribe
to the kind of solution that we proposed. I am not
suggesting that I speak for all those who, at the emergency
session, did not support the Latin American draft, but I
have the impression that most of them will be prepared to
subscribe to the kind of decision that we are recommending
to the Security Council today.

102,On the other hand, Nigeria can claim that it did
warn-asdid many other members of the Council-that the
MiddleEast situation was not one that could be allowed to
besettledmerely by the cffluxion of time; that the Middle
Eastsituation was one that the Council should tackle, and
tackleenergetically, not on the basis of taking partial
decisions-thatis to say, decisions partial to one side or the
other-but by taking decisions courageously which, in our
opinion,are calculated to create real peace in that disturbed
areaof the world,
103, Consistentwith that position, the Nigerian delegation
hasneverfelt that the position before 5 June 1957 was a
goodone, either for the Arabs or for the Israelis; it was at
besta condition of precarious peace. How tenuous WBS that
peacewasdemonstrated by the explosion that occurred
Onlya fewmonths ago.

107., We assumed that those who had subscribed to the
Latin American draft, either by co-sponsoring it or by
voting for it, would create no problem at all. I regret to say
that we were wrong and we discovered that our effort,
instead of being praised, wasbeing criticized on the basis of
lack of realism. First of all, it was argued by some that the
General Assembly is one thing and the Security Council is
another, I am disposed to agreewith those who put forward
that argument provided th:::y x referring to decisions of
the Security Council tahei; Icnder Chapter VII of our
Charter. The effect of such decisions is certainly different
from the effect of the decisions of the General Assembly,
and consequently it follows that those who are going to
t&e such decisions in the Security Council, being very
responsiblepeople and being conscious of the nature of the
decisions they are about to take, would re-examine the
position carefully before subscribing to such a decision. But
those of US who joined in the preparation of the draft
wl&h is now before you had no intention Of putting
forward that draft as a decision to be taken under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, and in order to
disposeof any possible misunderstanding in that regard we
proceededto make certain changesin the draft. Instead of

104. So we of the Nigerian delegation do not believe that
theposition before 5 June was satisfactory. We went into
consultationwith our colleagues informally on the basis
thatwhatwe had to do in the Middle East was not merely
to restorethe status quo, but ,to create a climate in which
all of the people in that area could live in peace. How did
wegoabout doing that’! As the representative of India has
explained,we examined all the draft resolutions that were
Putto the emergency session of the General Assembly
Whichwascalled to discuss this question, We considered all
thecontributions that were made by individual countries,
Qher in that emergency session or in meetings of the
SecurityCouncil, or even in informal discussions upon this
subject.We came to the conclusion that the best basis for
achi@‘inga consensus which would enable peace to be
‘offiCial Records of the &~pyal Assembly nventwcond
Sessiont
PlenaryMeetingq 1586th meeting, para. 157.

1

quite unable to provide for that. Nor have webeeaableI(
provide in our draft for immediate bilateral talk, betwee,
the Arabs and the Israelis. I apologize to the representa,..i
of Israel; he WIH not find such a provision in cur draft,fO,
the reason that we simply do not believe that at tl,istimei,
would be a practical provision or would do a,.,ything,~
contribute to lasting peace in the Middle East,

using a certain word to which our friends who had those
reservations had objected, we used another word which
showed clearly that those of us who put forward that draft
were putting it forward for decision by the Council under
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. It may be
that at some time in the future the Security Council will
feel that the situation in the Middle East requires action
under Chapter VII, Speaking for my country, I hope that
that stage will not be reached. We hope that a decision
under Chapter VI such as we recommend will be complied
with genuinely by both parties so that there will be no
question at all of anybody asking for action under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

111. SO here we are with a draft that we how isno,
accepted bY either party as being in accordancewithi,,
position in this controversy. It is the best that urehavebes;
able to &ieVe.
We recommend it not on the basis,,,!,
either side is able today to find that it is in accerdancewhh
its position but in a different spirit, in the spirit inwhichdl
of us who prepared this draft, those of us who aresponso,s,
the other members of the non-permanent groupsf lhl
Council and the permanent members as we]],haveco+pep
ated in informal consultations over the last two aadahall
weeks. AS a person who believes in achieving a eeaserr~i~
that is possible, as a person who has sometimesbeon
blamed very severely by some colleagues for proposing
suspensions in order to try and achieve a consensus,
l ngrol
I have no apologies to make. I think that if we canachevet
consensus we should do so, because I believe that tobe1hi
best thing conducive to peace in the Middle East;brrlue
cannot continue to pursue a consensusall the time.

108. As my colleague from India has indicated, We also
had to face another criticism, and that concerned the
question of acceptability by the parties to the dispute.
Obviously, if we are operating under Chapter VI, that
acceptability is very important, and those of us who are
putting this draft before you are conscious of that
importance. But let me remind those who are looking for
that acceptability, let me remind those who talk of
reconciling the views of the parties, how difficult those
views are to reconcile. The position of the Arabs has been
clear from the outset, has been stated and restated both
here and in the General Assembly. Their position is very
simple. The aggressormust not be allowed to get away with
all the fruits of aggression. Therefore the appropriate organ
of the United Nations must order immediate unconditional
withdrawal of Israel forces, and no negotiation can take
place until that has happened. The position of the Israelis
has been made very clear also. There can be no question of
withdrawal except on the basis and as a result and
follow-up of bilateral negotiations.

112. Those of us who have put forward this draft
resolution here were wondering what we shoulddonext
when the representative of the United Arab Republicasked
that a meeting should be summoned. As an earnest
ofIhe
efforts that we have made to adjust views and toput
forward a balanced draft we are offering this drril
resolution for the consideration of the Security Council,
113. I wish to thank all our collaborators in theIiClli
group which drafted the resolution initially. 1 want10
thank in particular our Latin American colleagues,
becant
their draft was the foundation of our work and theyVCUS
all the help they could in the course of trying to bPrQ0
the draft for the purpose of achieving a consensus.
1Wish
10
thank also the other members of the non-permanentgroups
because they laboured as hard and energetically aathelitlr
group which drafted the resolution. I want to thankthe
representative of Japan, under whose PresidencywerehDld
practically all of the consultations that preceded
the
submission of this draft resolution,

109. Those of us who joined in preparing that draft felt
that one of the most constructive ways of trying to
reconcile such disparate positions was for those who are
friends of either party to get in touch with them and
persuade them to cool down, persuade them that what they
are asking for is unobtainable. Nigeria, being a small
Power-in fact, no Power at all-was not in a position to do
much of that persuasion, but we were in the happy position
of being on excellent talking terms with both parties, and I
can say honestly and frankly that throughout our deliberations I was in touch with both parties ascertaining their
views. However, I regret to say that at no time in the
negotiations was I able to persuade either party to my own
point of view, and that remains the position today.

114. I do not consider that our labours havebeeainvd’
1 know that not all of our colleagues here are-Orrveti
yesterday-in a position to tell me that they will sup@
our draft resolution. In point of fact I am awarethatOne0
the great Powers has submitted another draft resolution,’
shall say nothing to prejudice that draft reselution*‘I
want to say at this point is that criticism of Ourdraf’ii
welcome because we recognize that we are not perftctf
however hard we have laboured to achieve a balanced
drafL

110. It was not a development that surprised the representative of Nigeria, since the representatives of even the
greatest Powers have been unable to secure that measure of
consensus on both sides which would make our task so
much easier. For that reason, those of us who joined in
drafting the resolution that is now before the Council felt
that the best way to proceed wasto put forward something
which we ourselveshonestly believed in, which we ourselves
frankly believed to be fair to both parties, and that is what
we have tried to do. We have not provided in our draft for
unconditional and immediate withdrawal of Israel forces,
We have not been able to do so, and I apologize to the
Foreign Minister of the United Arab Republic and to our
other Arab fellow diplomats here for our failure. We were

115. May 1 appeal to my colleagues around thistab’e’as
well as to the general public-and especially to me!beni[
the Press, who disseminate news of our Proceedings
them-to deal fairly with the draft that we havepresented’
If you do not agree with it, say precisely whyYouS‘!~nO~
agree. I make that appeal because there havebeencr’be’sm
12

that our draft is a pro-“X” draft. Anybody who baseshis
criticism on that sort of thing is, in my opinion, admitting
the weakness of his CtlSe.

The meetingwassuspendedat 9.15 p.m. and resumedat
10.50p.m

122. THE PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): During
his statement the Indian representative requested that the
Latin American draft resolution submitted by twenty
delegations at the fifth emergency special session of the
General Assembly and circulated as document A/LS23/
Rev.1, should now be circulated as a Security Council
document. If there is no objection, I shall request the
Secretariat to circulate the text of that draft resolution as a
Security Council document. As there is no objection, this
will be done.*

116. As a result of the informal discussions that have
taken place there is more in common between us around
this table than there was at the beginning. There is a great
deal more in common, even, between the two drafts before
us (818227, S/8229]. At least those two drafts share one
great thing in common: they are both being shot at by both
sides, So if we have not been able to achieve complete
unanin$ty by our draft, nobody else has been able to do so
either. But that is cold comfort, having regard to the grave
crisisthat faces US in the Middle East.

123. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation
supports the request of the Government of the United Arab
Republic that the Security Council should, as a matter of
urgency, resume its consideration of the question of the
situation in the Middle East. We have listened with great
attention to the statement made by Mr. Riad, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Republic, and also
to the explanations given by the representatives of India
and Nigeria on the draft resolution submitted on behalf of
three Afro-Asian States [S/8227],

117. We cannot continue to labour in the hope that
irreconcilable views will be reconciled. We have to muster
enough courage to tell both parties that unless they move
they cannot have peace in the Middle East. The aim of
Nigeria is a Middle East in which there is stable peace. We
do not think that you can achieve such a Middle East if you
allow anybody to keep the fruits of military conquest. We
do not apologize for saying that. Again, we regard it as
inconsistent with the achievements of that aim of ours that
a situation should be created or recreated in the Middle
East in which either Israel or any other country feels
insecure.

124. The question of the situation in the Middle East, the
question of eliminating the consequencesof Israel’s aggression, stands inevitably at the centre of the attention of the
United Nations and, in particular, of the Security Council
on which the Charter of the United Nations has placed
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. At the end of the fifth emergency
special session and at the present twenty-second sessionof
the General Assembly, this question has been recognized by
States Members of the United Nations as being one of
primary importance and urgency.

118. The present situation in the Middle East does nobody
any good. It does very little good to those which have lost
territories; it merely increases their rancour. It does no
good to those who are in possession of occupied territory
becauseso long as they are there, so long as we do not find
a really permanent solution, they also will not know peace.
So, the present situation is not one that helps anybody. We
should not delude ourselves that it helps anybody. I would
hope, speaking on behalf of my little country, that both
parties will take heed of this warning.

125. The most important result of the fifth emergency
special session of the General Assembly was the confirmation of the principle of the inadmissibility of the use of
force to acquire territory, one of the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter upon which relations
between States should be built. The overwhelming majority
of States Members of the United Nations came to +he
conclusion at that session that the essential thing is the
withdrawal of the aggressor’sforces from the Arab lands
which they had seized. It is this which is reflected in the
documents of the emergency session which have been
transmitted to the Security Council in order to facilitate
the Council’s consideration of the tense situation in the
Middle East as a question of extreme importance and
urgency. The statements made during the general debate at
the current session of the General Assembly have shown
once again that the States Members of the United Nations
consider the withdrawal of Israel’s forces from the occupied
Arab territories 1s an important step towards a settlement
in the Middle East. This was true when the question of the
situation in the Middle East was considered in the summer
of 1967 and it is all the more true now in the light of the
situation which is developing in that part of the world.

119. We hope that this draft that we have put before the
Council will be adopted if the Council feels, after examining it, that it should be. But we have put it forward, again as
my colleague of India has pointed out, not in the spirit of
“take it or leave it” but in the firm spirit that we believe in
this draft. We believe it to be balanced. We believe it to be a
contribution to the restoration of peace in the Middle East.
But if further discussions here should indicate that the
parties have declared their agreement on a formula different
from ours, nobody will be happier than the sponsors of this
draft resolution. Until and unless such a consensusemerges,
we feel convinced that this is the most balanced draft and
we recommend it on that basis to our colleagues for their
very careful consideration.
120. THE PRESIDENT (translatedfivm French): I should
like to thank the representative of Nigeria for the tribute he
has paid to my country and to me.
121. In view of the lateness of the hour and the number of
speakers remaining on my list, I propose to suspend the
meeting for one hour. As a result of unofficial consultations
it appearsthat members of the CounciI are in agreement
with this proposal. When we resume our discussion, we shall
continue to hear the speakers on my list, If there is no
objection, I shall take it that this proposal is adopted.

8 Subsequently circulated as document S/8235.

13

130. The aggressor has blocked the Suez Canal andb
interrupted international navigation through this irnponan;
artery of world trade and. navigation, causing seriouslassto
the United Arab Repubhc and many other countries,Ihe
presence of Israel’s forces on the banks of the SuezC,,a,
deprives the United Arab Republic of the possibility ,,I
opening the Canal and restoring navigation hehveen
Europe, Asia and Africa through the Suez Canal

126. Israel not only has no intention of evacuating the
territories which it has seized in Arab countries but, judging
from all appearances, it is taking steps to consolidate its
position there as strongly as possible. In those territories it
has established a special occupation administration, and is
in fact endeavouring to colonize the Arab lands. In an
increasingly high-handed manner, the occupiers are lording
it over foreign soil and are establishing their military
settlements in the western part of Jordan, in the area of
Banias on Syrian territory, and on the coast of the Sinai
peninsula. Tel-Aviv has even drawn up its budget for the
future on the assumption that it will continue the criminal
occupation of Arab territories, the maintenance of occupation troops and the appropriation of lands belonging to the
Arabs.
127. Israel’s attempts to annex the Arab part of the city
of Jerusalem are an insolent manifestation of its aggression
and of Tel-Aviv’s desire for territorial aggrandizement. This
is a flagrant act of defiance of international law. AS
everyone will recall, the General Assembly, at its emergency
session, twice condemned the actions of the Israel authorities with regard to Jerusalem. Resolutions were adopted
on 4 and 14 July [2253 (ES- V) and 22.54 (ES-V)] in which
Israel’s claims to Arab territory in Jerusalem were completely rejected, and in which it was emphasized that the
steps being taken by the Israel Government to annex the
old part of the city had no legal force, Those decisions
concerning Jerusalem are of special significance since they
demonstrate quite definitely the non-recognition of the
results of Israel’s aggression, It should be pointed out, also,
that the Assembly expressed deep concern at the fact that
Israel had not implemented its first resolution of 4 July
concerning Jerusalem. Israel, however, continues to this day
to disregard the demands of the United Nations concerning
Jerusalem.
128. Tel-Aviv’s attitude with regard to Jerusalem and the
other Arab territories reveals the generally aggressiveand
expansionist nature of Israel’s policy. In Tel-Aviv there is
talk of creating a “greater Israel” and the annexation of
Jerusalem is considered to be a matter which is not subject
to discussion. Responsible leaders in Israel call upon Jews
from abroad to immigrate in order to settle the occupied
Arab territories. Moreover, they talk of the “benefits” of
the occupation for the Arab population in Gaza and other
areas. Such statements are now made openly not only by
such extremists as General Dayan, but also by Mr. Eshkol,
the Prime Minister of Israel, in his official statements.

131. More and more information is being receivedto
indicate that Israel’s forces are being moved up tev,sr&the
Suez Canal, and are aho being concentrated in positions
which it is difficult to consider as anything ether aan
springboards for the organization of new military setion
against Syria and Jordan. Arm are being delivered to lsrael
from abroad in ever-increasing quantities. The military
clique in Tel-Aviv is calling for a further increaseia the
strength of the armed forces. Threats directed by Tel-Aviv
against the Arab States-including, recently, I&snen+re
becoming more frequent.
132. In view of this ever-increasing tension, one cssrk,r
preclude the possibility of serious complications &V&ping
in the Middle East, the possibility that military incidents
intentionally provoked by Israel along the Suez Canaland
the Israel-Jordan and Israel-Syrian fronts will developintoa
widespread military conflict.
133. It is common knowledge that Israel’s forceshave
recently provoked new military incidents-the most serious
since the Security Council adopted its cease-fireresolutions,
The Israel destroyer Eilat had violated the territorial waters
of the United Arab Republic, and on 24 October Israel’s
armed forces carried out a piratical bombardment ofliving
quarters and industrial areas in the town of Suez,which
resulted in many casualties and considerable material
damage. This new act of aggression is clearly linked to the
defiant statements made by the Government of Israel
concerning its preparations for a renewal of military
activities against the Arab States, and it is also linked to the
policy of annexing the conquered Arab territories andthe
so-called “appropriation” of the eastern bank of the Suer
Canal, In its recent decision, the Security Council, aswe
know, condemned these actions by Israel.
134. Thus, we are faced with a long and meticulei’~Y
prepared and far-reaching plan by Israel to seizeAnb
territories by armed force. Israel is now bringing tl@rt”
the point of trying to realize its avid and unrestrained
aspirations for expansion.

129. The continuation of Israel’s occupation of territory
belonging to Arab States is creating an increasingly explosive situation and a permanent source of tension, which
constantly threatens to develop into a fresh military
outbreak that would complicate international relations as a
whole. We all know how tense the situation is in the Suez
Canal area. Israel’s armed forces, in flagrant violation of the
Security Council decisions calling for a cease-fire, are
systematically organizing provocative attacks; they are
deploying aircraft, artillery and tanks and are shelling port
installations, ships and living quarters in Arab towns located
on the west bank of the Canal, thereby causing many
victims among the peaceful civilian population and barbarously destroying valuable property.

135. The appeal to all peace-loving States and to the
United Nations as a whole contained in the recent
statement made by Mr. Eban, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, at a press conference on the eve of the Council’s
resumption of its consideration of the Middle Eastern
situation, can hardly be considered as anything but srhreaf
to the Security Council. We are astounded at the irrespo’
sibility with which the Minister for Foreign AffairsOfIsrae’
rejects proposals which have not yet been consideredbYthe
Security Council and at the impudent way ia whichhe
distorts the con&ts and spirit of the proposal by thethree
Afro-Asian countries as well as the facts relating to *’
preparation of this drift. An analysis of the statementInad’
14

by Mr. Eban shows even more Clearly
that Israel does not
wish to withdraw its troops from the occupied Arab
territories and that the main barrier to the establishment of
Peace in the Middle Fast is precisely the stubborn endeavour of the aggressor to achieve territorial gains at the
expense of the Arab countries. Israel’s leaders do not
appear to be aware of the consequences for Israel itself
which might result from their political short-sightedness.

indispensable element, the very core of a settlement in the
Middle East, and of the establishment of peace and the
normalization of relations between States in that region. It
is in the light of the solution to the main question, the
question of the withdrawal of Israel’s forces, that the Soviet
delegation approaches the draft resolutions submitted to
the Security Council,
141. From the explanations given here today by the
representatives of India and Nigeria, we know that the draft
resolution submitted by the three Afro-Asian non-aligned
countries-India, Mali and Nigetia-is the result of a long
search for a mutually acceptable solution, that it was
formulated in the course of difficult negotiations to which
the participants devoted a great deal of labour and effort.
We appreciate the efforts of those who are trying sincerely
and in a spirit of goodwill to contribute to the establishment of peace in the Middle East on the basis of the
principles of the United Nations.

136. Unfortunately, however, the question does not turn
merely upon the position of Israel. Israel’s expansionist
aspirations have been connived at and are still being
connived at by its powerful protectors, especially the
United States of America. Without their generous assistance
and support, Israel would not have dared to challenge the
Arab world and to start a military adventure against
neighbouring Arab countries. It is not acting alone at the
present time, either, when it attempts to take advantage of
the results of its criminal aggression, setting itself against alI
peace-loving States, and flagrantly flouting the Charter of
the United Nations and international law.

142. The draft submitted by the three countries contains a
clearly stated provision to the effect that occupation or
acquisition of territory by military conquest is inadmissible
under the Charter of the United Nations and that consequently Israel’s armed forces should withdraw from all the
territories occupied as a result of the recent conflict. We
consider that this demand for the withdrawal of Israel’s
forces meets the requirements of the case,since it provides
for the unconditional withdrawal of the aggressor’sforces
from all the territories which have been illegally occupied.

137. Now, as before, Israel’s protectors are continuing to
encourage the Israel extremists and to urge them to make
new and ever more far-reaching demands, and are in fact
preventing a settlement of the Middle East problem. Is it
not symbolic that on the very day when Israel’s artillery
was barbarously shelling the town of Suez, the United
States of America announced its intention of delivering a
large number of bombers to Israel?

143. The three-Power draft also includes other important
provisions designed to eliminate the causesof tension. It is
clearly stated in the draft that every State in the Middle
East area has the right to live in peace and complete
security free from threats or acts of war and that
consequently all States in the area should terminate the
state or claim of belligerency and settle their international
disputes by peaceful means, The draft also states that it is
obligatory on all States in the area to respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of one another.

138. Can one disregard the fact that this involves deliveries
of arms to Israel which, unlike the Arab countries that were
the victims of aggression, did not lose any weapons and
whosemilitary potential was, and still is, as the latest events
have shown, sufficient not only for defence but also for
attack? When, in these circumstances, people help Israel to
increasestill further its military potential, one is bound to
ask why is this being done. There should be no doubt that
it is being done in order to incite Israel to further aggression
against the Arab countries, and to strengthen the position
of the Israel extremists who have seized foreign territories.
These acts constitute direct complicity with the aggressor
and are a hostile challenge to the Arab world.

144. These provisions are in keeping with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. They are designed to
strengthen peace in the Middle East and to bring about a
political settlement of the Problems of that area which
would meet with the support of an overwhelming majority
of States. In this connexion, I should like to point out that
the Soviet Government, as it has repeatedly stated, takes
the position ,that the consequences of Israel’s aggression
must be liquidated without delay and, at the same time, a
renewal of the military conflict in that area in the near or
more distant future must be prevented.

139. All these facts and the whole development of events
in the Middle East lend force to the request by the United
Arab Republic that the Security Council should without
delay and in all seriousness consider the question and take
the necessary decision-that it should above all demand the
withdrawal of Israel forces from all the occupied territories
@f the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan to the
Positions occupied by these forces prior to 5 June 1967.
This is essential because, as long as the aggressor remains on
Arab soil, as long as Israel is making territorial and other
claims on the Arab States, it will not be possible to remove
the tension and establish a lasting peace in the Middle East.
Connivance at Israel’s territorial claims would be tantamount to a violation of the basic rules of contemporary
international law and of the fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter.

145. The Soviet Union is prepared to give strong support
to any solution which provides for the immediate withdrawal of Israel’s forces from all the Arab territories
occupied as a result of the recent conflict and which at the
same time recognizes the principle of the independent
national existence of all States in that region and their right
to live in peace and security.

140. The withdrawal of Israel forces from all the occupied
Arab territories has been and still is the most important and

146. The position taken by the Soviet Union on the
question of the settlement of the situation in the Middle
15

East is fully in keeping with the principle of the selfdetermination of peoples, which is one of the fundamental
principles of Soviet foreign policy, As Mr. Kosygin, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, said in his
statement at the fifth emergency special session of the
United Nations General Assembly:
the Soviet Union is not against Israel, but against
the aggressive policy pursued by the ruling circles of that
State.
“

.

I.

.

.

“
.

“While upholding the rights of peoples to selfdetermination, the Soviet Union just as resolutely condemns the attempts of any State to conduct an aggressive
policy in regard to other countries, a policy of conquering
foreign lands and subjugating the peoples living there.“9
147. The three-Power draft also proposes solutions to other
questions which are awaiting settlement, namely, the
question of Palestine refugees and the question of freedom
of navigation in accordance with international law through
international waterways.The Soviet Union, for its part, also
considers that these questions must be settled provided, of
course, that the main requirement is fulfilled-namely, that
the withdrawal of Israel’s forces from the occupied Arab
territories is ensured. In this connexion, we must say that,
if Israel demands that the Arab and other States should
recognize its rights, it must not at the same time refuse to
recognize the lawful rights of that part of the Arab people
of Palestine which is now living in exile, and it must respect
the many United Nations General Assembly resolutions on
that question. On examining the three-Power draft, we
cannot refrain from saying that some of its provisions do
not fully take into account the position of the Soviet
Union.
148. The Soviet Union’s position of principle in connexion with the settlement of the situation in the Middle
East has been stated on many occasions both in the
Security Council and in the General Assembly, and is well
known, The essence of this policy is as follows: the
aggression must be condemned, Israel’s forces must be
withdrawn behind the lines which they occupied prior to
5 June 1967, and the aggressormust pay compensation for
the damage it has caused to the Arab countries, and must
comply with the resolutions of the United Nations General
Assembly concerning Jerusalem.
149. However, the Soviet delegation, although it would
prefer a more radical solution, would be prepared to
support the draft submitted by India, Mali and Nigeria if, of
course, the Arab countries which are the victims of
aggression are not against it. This draft must be considered
as the first step on the way to a political settlement in the
Middle East, and to the liquidation of the consequences of
Israel’s aggression against the Arab countries.

9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergency
Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 1526thmeeting,paras.
44 and

41.

150. I should now like to dwell on another draftrub.: ,
mitted for consrderatmn by the Security Council
alternative to the proposal by the three ncn.aikz
countries. F have in mind the draft resolution Suhdtted
by the Umted States Of: America [s/8229]. mat kindof
draft is this? What are Its contents and its purpose?wh 1
has it been submitted? First of all, of course, wemusttui ’
to the most important point a+ try to seehow it proposel
to solve the qUeStlOn
Of the withdrawal of troops andwha,:
importance it gives to this question. Quite frankly, I m,,stI
say that in the United States draft this key provisionisye,
obscurely and ambiguously. worded; it is lost amongotl,e,1
questions and IS presented m such a context that it wouldI
enable the Israel aggressqrs to put obstacles in the wayofa
decision calling for the wlthdrawal of troops, and tooccupy
the Arab territories as long as Israel likes. Furthermore,the1
draft is designed to support the aggressor’sterritorial clh I
to Arab lands. It suggeststhat the essential prerequisiteand1
primary condition for the establishment of a lastingpeae
in the Middle East is not a clear and unambiguous provision
calling for the withdrawal of Israel’s forces from theAtah
lands they have occupied, but rather the sclatiei i(
whole series of other problems. This premise turnsfh
whole problem upside down. It is a fallacious approach
which merely serves Israel’s interests. Surely it k ebvioul
that, without the withdrawal of the aggressor’sarmed
forces
from the territories they have seized, there canher
solution of the other problems and no lasting peaceh d
Middle East.
1.51. The new formula in the United States draft ceacen
ing the withdrawal of troops is obviously a retreatfromoh
position taken by the United States this summer,Thisnel
formula is a step backwards compared with the corresponc
ing provision in the well-known draft resolution of th
Latin American countries, for which the United State
delegation voted at the emergency session of the Gener;
Assembly. This is the draft which, at the suggestion
ofth
Indian delegation, is now being circulated to memberso
the Security Council. In fact, while the draft resolutiono
the Latin American countries provided that Israel’sforce
should be withdrawn from all the Arab territories theyL
occupied as a result of the recent conflict, the UnitedState
draft does not mention Israel at all and doesnot contail
any provision calling for the withdrawal of troopsfrom81
the territories occupied during the recent conflict.
152. Whose troops are to be withdrawn, and whereto!
The United States draft gives no convincing andclea
answer to this fundamentally important question.lt isno1
difficult to understand that this approach is designed
lo
confuse matters and, in effect, to help Israel achievei’r
territorial aims. The absence from the United Statestextoi
any substantial clarification of what is meant bYthe
withdrawal of troops “from all” territories, andhe
exclusion of any reference to the fact that the subject
under discussion is the recent conflict, must be considered
in conjunction with the appearance in the UnitedSufes
draft of phrases such as %ecure and recognizedboun!
ries”. What boundaries does this refer to? Whatis behind
the idea of “secure and recognized boundaries”? Whoisto
decide how secure these boundaries are and Whohas‘0
recognize them’? To all these questions the UnitedSta”s
draft provides no answer but leaves the field wideOpen
“’

different interpretations and constructions, including interpretationSwhich still make it possible for Israel itself
&itrarily to establish new boundaries and to withdraw its
forcesonly to those lines which it considers appropriate.
And the interpretations by ISrael, which asserts that the
GeneralArmistice Agreements of 1949 approved by the
Securitycouncil are not binding on it, go very far. We
bow that Israel is ever asserting that it was not Israel but
theArab States which illegally occupied the Gaza Strip and
territoriesin other areas.

dangerous delays in bringing about a political settlement iii
the Middle East. The Soviet delegation expressesthe hope
that the Security Council will be able to adopt a speedy
decision which would ensure respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Arab States, would comply
with the principle of self-determination for the peoples of
the Middle East and would lead to the restoration and
strengthening of peace and security in that region. We for
our Part Will co-operate in every possible way to achieve
that end.

153, Consequently, the United States draft leaves open
the possibility that Israel’s fOrCcSmay not be withdrawn
fromall the Arab territories they have seized and that part
cf theseterritories may be kept by Israel. If this is not so,
wehope that the United States representative will give us a
clearand unambiguous explanation to the effect that the
United States supports the withdrawal of Israel’s forces
from all the occupied territories to the positions occupied
prior to 5 June 1967. The provision concerning the
withdrawalof the occupier’s troops must be formulated in
sucha way as to leave no loop-holes whatsoever for
differentinterpretations.

1%. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Since I follow
the distinguished Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet
Union, I wish to express, on behalf of all of us, our
welcome to him. We are honoured by his presence.Many of
us have had the satisfaction and advantage of discussions
with him, a man of wide experience, great ability and high
authority. I trust, having heard his speech,he wiI1 take it as
a compliment when I say that we look forward to progress
not SOmuch from his public speechesas from his private
consultations. I confidently trust he has come to New York
not to spread discord but to seek for a satisfactory and
lasting settlement.
159. To his speechand to others we have heard today,‘and
to those still to be made in this Council at this critical time,
we should, I suggest,apply one main test: do they add to
hate and hostility; do they sink deeper into entrenched
positions; do they threaten or demand or offend or
challenge; do they seek to score, to steal advantage in
debate? Or do they, on the other hand, by understanding
and restraint and readiness to meet others, open the way
towards wide agreement and thus to effective action?

154. There is yet another striking feature of the United
Statesdraft, While the wording concerning the withdrawal
of troopsis ambiguous and obscure, the provisions supporting Israel’s claims and imposing obligations on the other
partyare extremely precise and far-reaching. The fact that
the United States draft does not contain any provision to
the effectthat the occupation or acquisition of territory by
military conquest is inadmissible cannot be regarded as an
accidentalomission. No one has heard from United States
official representatives a single word of condemnation
directedagainst Israel extremists, Israel’s territorial conquestsin the Middle East or the occupation of foreign
lands.

160. I make no comparisons but perhaps, in referring. to
the statements which we have heard already, I may say that
I especially admired the speech of the representative of
Nigeria, particularly his readiness to consider with a steady
and fair judgement all proposals for making effective
progress, Certainly, it is easily understandable that intense
feelings and fears and hopes should lead to strong and
sometimes extreme, and violent or bitter statements. But.
for all of us our duty surely is clear, as the Nigerian
representative has taught us tonight: we must listen and try
to understand, in respect for the opinions of others, and
then search for common ground and seek persistently and
diligently for agreement, and to do so in mutual confidence
and with an overriding determination to succeed.What else
are we here for?

155. We cannot refrain from referring also to the provisionsof the United States draft concerning the powers of
thespecialrepresentative. The functions of this representativeamount merely to using the United Nations as a screen
for Israel’s aggression, and would mean that the United
Nationswould in effect no longer concern itself with the
considerationand solution of the question of the Middle
East.Further, unlike the draft submitted by the three
Afro-Asiancountries, the United States draft does not
containany indication as to when the special representative
should submit his report to the Security Council. A
mandateof such undetermined duration would provide
abundant grounds for procrastination and delays and
Would, as it were, Icgalize the continuation of Israel’s
occaPationfor an indefinite period.

161. There has been plenty of accusation and rnisrepresentation elsewhere,but here in the Council it is perhaps well
to remind ourselves of our obligation to seek settlements
and win agreements. Never has it been more necessary to
keep in mind our primary obligation to be a centre for
harmonking the actions of nations in the attainment Of
common ends.

156. To sum up, it may be said that the draft submitted
bYthe United States delegation is an attempt to support
theaggressorand to use the United Nations flag asa screen
for his dangerous and criminal actions, For all these
reascns,we cannot agree with the United States delegation’sdraft,

162. Perhaps those are platitudes. But platitudes are
sometimes truths which we are apt or anxious to forget.
Never was it more necessarythat those precepts should be
remembered. Every one of USknows how often they have
been forgotten.

157* The Soviet Government is firmly convinced, how
everj that there is now an objective and favourable
Possibility Of putting an end forthwith to any further

163, we have some common ground already. The elected
members of this Council have laboured for weeks to
17

discover arId to define it. We all owe them a debt of sincere
gratitude for their persistent efforts. They have reported to
us unanimous agreement among themselves on three questions of first importance.

acted in the summer instead of waiting for the winter? But
there can be no purpose in going back over the mistakes
and delays of the past. NOW all of us can be united in a
determination that we should delay no more.

164. They agree that a United Nations special representative should be appointed to go to the Middle East. They
agree that we should act within the provisions of Chapter
VI of the Charter, dealing with the pacific settlement of
disputes. They agree that the terms of reference given to
the United Nations special representative should be as
precise as possible.

170. I find on all sides a growing conviction aat ifwe fad
now the opportunity t0 set a new course which wehave
before US in the Council at present will never comeback,
We have an opportunity now which we must not miss,1fwe
continue to delay then 1 fear that we shall start a descent
on a slope to new depths of fear and hate and violence,And
when once we start on that slope we may never be ableto
recover. The time has come to act in agreement, 1t maY
never return.

165. It is true that the elected members were unable, at
present,’ to go further and that at the end of last week they
consequently invited the permanent members of the
Council to join in th: effort to draft a widely acceptable
resolution. But we should not fail to express our gratitude
for the work which they did and for giving us a base of
agreement from which to advance. We can draw satisfaction
and confidence from that limited but valuable start.

171. AS 1 Say, IlO One Of US expects that we can hereand
now finally settle all the difficult problems before US,but
the fact that what we are discussing is how we canmakea
start in the right direction need not prevent us from stating
at once what our purpose should be.

172. Peace is the prize-a durable peace, We needto brine
the unhappy history of past decades to a final end.We
would never advocate a return to uneasy hostility. Onthat
main aim there can be no question of compromise,01
hesitation, or uncertainty. That is fundamental. My Govern.
ment would never wish to be associated with any s&led
settlement which was only a continuation of a falsetruce,

166. I am bold enough to go on to say that in spite of the
recriminations and misrepresentations which persist here
there is, I am convinced, a very wide measure of general
agreement, both in this Council and in the general
membership of the United Nations, on the course we
should follow. Questions of balance, of formulation, of
presentation are difficult and important, but no impartial
observer who has spent the past few months studying first
the resolutions put to the Assembly last July and then the
various texts which have been subsequently discussed can
fail to be impressed by the extent of the common ground
which is already apparent.

173. We are convinced that the benefits which canflowto
the people of the Middle East from real peaceand securi@
will be a blessing to all. The resources and energiesof the
people of all the countries concerned will be releasedfor
productive and constructive purposes. Our aim canbenil
less than to rid all the people from the fear and thr
suffering which have bedevilled them far too long.

167. To me it is inconceivable that with such a wide
measure of general agreement we should fail to decide now
on the way to go forward. We are all very familiar with the
charge that while we in the United Nations have often
successfully intervened to stop fighting we have seldom
been able to go to the root of the trouble and proceed from
peace-keeping to peace-making, but now we have the
opportunity to achieve a permanent peace in the Middle
East.

174. A peace to be permanent must be just. It certainl!
cannot be based on force or the imposition of an)
settlement which relies for justification on conquest01
subjection, It is in this search for a just settlement thatthe
United Nations has a vital part to play.
17.5. There are those who complain about the actionsafiii
inactions of the United Nations in the past, forgettingthal
United Nations action has often been obstructed by c@
side or the other or by both. I would claim that wheretht
United Nations has been given half a chance it hasfull!
justified international action. It was the United Nationa
Emergency Force which kept the peace on the borders(T
Israel and the United Arab Republic for a decade.We&{’
pay tribute to General Bull and his observersWhohave
worked indefatigably and in circumstances of the utmosr
difficulty to stop fighting and keep the peace. weknor.
moreover, that, again in the face of great difficulties,‘&
United Nations agency for relief of the suffer& Of“’
refugees has done admirable work. Where it hasbm’
allowed to operate, international effort has undoubted]!
been valuable. 1 cannot myself believe that the Peaceful
a”
lasting settlement we wish to see can be achievedwith0”’
international assistance and international endorsement*

168. We know that we cannot quickly arrive at the final
solution on such questions as those of boundaries and
guarantees, and on the question of th,e desperate fate of the
refugees. But I claim that there is an overwhelming
agreement on the way we should start towards a final
settlement of these long-festering problems. In all the
disputes we have dealt with in the Council I cannot
remember one in which there was so much common
ground, and such a longing amongst the whole membership
of the United Nations that we should quickly find the
means to start out on the road towards a lasting solution.
169. I also feel sure that we are all now agreed on the need
for urgent, indeed for immediate, action. I have said before
that the Security Council should have met much earlier and
acted much sooner. Everything that has taken place over
recent months has fortified us in our conviction that we
have delayed much too long. What damage, what bloodshed, what suffering could have been avoided if we had

176. As to the policy of my Government 1 would‘lairn’’
the representative of Nigeria claimed earlier, that tic@
18
-d

0ut the months which followed the conflict, and indeed
before it, our policy has been clear. Indeed I would claim
c-at no country has more consistently advocated a constructive policy. For months we have urged that the
Security Council should meet and act. For months we have
been emphasizing urgency. For months we have been
recommending that the Secretary-General should be authorized to send a special representative. We have said that there
must be withdrawal from occupied territories and an end of
belligerence. On the question of secure frontiers, we have
made clear that they cannot and must not be settled by
conquest or force. From the first we have stated that
nothing should be done in Jerusalem or elsewhere to
prejudice the final outcome of the settlement we wish to
see.

question of seeking victories in the vote. We want not
victories but a success.It is a question of what resolution
we can pass with the prospect of early and effective action,
182. Consequently, I would earnestly put to the Council
the suggestion that when we have heard the opening
statements in this debate, we should allow a short period
for further urgent consultations between us all. There is, I
am sure, such a measure of agreement and common ground
between us that I cannot believe that such consultations
Will fail.
183. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States will welcome the opportunity which we
profoundly hope will emerge from this meeting of the
Security Council to take meaningful stepstowards peace in
the Middle East. Although, very frankly, we should have
preferred to have this meeting take place only after the
intensive diplomatic consultations of recent weeks had led
to advance agreement, we nevertheless will do all in our
power to make it an occasion of progress towards peace.

177. We, like other countries, are concerned that there
should be freedom of navigation through international
waterways. We wish to see the Suez Canal open for the
ships of all nations in the interests of everyone. But asmy
Foreign Secretary said in the House of Commons a day or
two ago our overriding concern is with the peace and
stability of the whole area, and we shall not allow any
narrower interests to affect the policies which we are
pursuing to that end.

184. Through the seven months of the present crisis we
have adhered consistently to the view that the Security
Council, which has been seized of this matter throughout
that period, should exercise its Charter responsibilities to
help the parties to achieve peace in the area. Action by the
Council is long overdue. The question remains as it has been
throughout our consideration of this matter: in what spirit
and in what principles should the Council act?

178. We have urged that a new and imaginative and
comprehensive policy should be undertaken to deal with
the problem of the refugees.
179. On all these issues we have openly stated the policy
which we think is right. There has been no change in those
policies. We have consistently stated them in public and in
private. While our own views have been clear and while we
believe that they are now increasingly welcomed and
accepted we have throughout been ready and anxious to
consider and take into account the views of others, always
bearing in mind that the action we wish to see in the
direction of a final settlement can best succeed if here at
the United Nations we show the widest measure of
agreement and a united determination to put our resolutions into practical effect.

185. The way to peace is not going to be opened by words
or acts of rigid partisanship or reiteration of stale charges
such as I again, regrettably, have heard tonight from the
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union. Rather, the
effective formula will be one in which all concerned, the
parties and the members of this Council as well, display
another spirit, a spirit of moderation, common senseand
magnanimity. In this affirmative spirit, my country remains
ready to do its share, and more than its share, in
contributing to the achievement of a final and durable
peace in the Middle East. To this end we have submitted a
draft resolution which now lies before the Council
(S/8229]. Let me explain both the objective and the terms
of that draft resolution, since one could scarcely recognize
it from the description of it by the representative of the
Soviet Union.

180. As soon as we have decided and formulated the
principles we wish to see applied-the framework within
which we wish to make progress towards a final settlement-we believe that the United Nations special represent.
ative will have a key role to play. Certainly he must work in
the closest consultation and co-operation with the countries
concerned and his aim must be to work for and facilitate
agreement. But we would not wish to confine and
circumscribe his functions too closely. We would wish to
see,him left free within the principles which we should
declare to use his best judgement without an attempt on
our part to prejudge in advance the methods most likely to
securelasting peace. We feel more strongly than ever that
until a United Nations special representative can go to the
Middle East and start on his work we shall seeno progress.
Once our basic decisions are taken on the principles to
guide him, it must be in the Middle East that practical
advancewill be achieved rather than in further debate here
in New York.

186. The objective of our draft resolution is to open a new
path to a state of just and lasting peace in the Middle East
in which every State in the area can live in security, justice,
honour and dignity, Neither the States of the Middle East
nor indeed the world community can any longer endure the
conditions of tension, instability and recurrent violence
that have characterized the Middle East for the past
generation. The uncertain and frequently violated armistice
of those years must be replaced by a permanent peace.
187. As for the terms of our draft resolution, they reflect
our conviction, born of the recent tragic events of last May
and June, that a durable and reliable peace in the area must
embrace certain fundamental principles. These principles
were set forth by President Johnson in his address on 19
June 1967 in which he briefly summarized them as follows:

181. It is not my purpose to deal at this stage with the
detail of resolutions, which have been circulated, Nor is it a
19
i

forth guidelines on all the political issues involved andin
language which, in our opinion, takes into account sadia
no way prejudices the positions or the vital interests ofthe
States involved. In sum, it is intended to be the framework
of the special representative’s work under which the States
concerned could co-operate with him in working cut
political solutions to the problems involved and achievings
just and durable peace.

first, the recognized right of national life; second, justice
for the refugees; third, innocent maritime passage; fourth,
limits on the wasteful and destructive arms race; and fifth,
political independence and territorial integrity for all.
188. This summary must, of course, be viewed in the
context of the full remarks which President Johnson made
on the five principles in the same address.We now reaffirm
the statement of policy in that address. The terms of our
draft resolution are founded on that policy.
189. It is of the greatest significance that the principal
parties on both sides have stated their acceptance of these
principles as the framework for a just and lasting peace. It is
this fact which has encouraged us to draw up our draft
resolution on the basis of those principles. Certainly, the
clear import of our draft resolution is that a just and lasting
peace should be achieved in the Middle East. Certainly, the
clear import is that it should embrace withdrawal of armed
forces from occupied territories, termination of claims or
states of belligerency, and mutual recognition of, and
respect for, the right of every State in the area to sovereign
existence, territorial integrity, political independence,
secure and recognized boundaries, and freedom from the
threat or use of force. Our draft resolution likewise affirms,
further, the necessity for guaranteeing freedom of navigation through international waterways in the area, for
achieving a just settlement of the refugee problem, for
guaranteeing the territorial inviolability and political independence of every State in the area through measures
including the establishment of demilitarized zones, and for
achieving a limitation of the wasteful and destructive arms
race in the area.
190. How these objectives can be achieved in practice,
what the modalities, methods and steps may be, can be
worked out only in consultations with the parties which the
special representative would undertake. In our view, all
objectives must be taken fully into account in concept and
. m
. the achievement of the common aim.
in practice
Furthermore, the text of the United States draft resolution
does not prejudice the positions of those directly concerned. In short, it is an effort to do now what can be done
now, to set in motion a diplomatic effort within the United
Nations and within the framework of the Charter, and to
establish guidelines and objectives for such a peace-making
effort.

193, The most constructive contribution the Council can
make at this stage is to affirm such principles and provide
such guidelines for the special representative, not to seekto
impose the exact ternlS Of settlement. But the peace-mskiag
process must begin. It has been too long delayed and cur
draft resolution intends that it should begin, and be&
now. The United States believes that the United Nations
representative should have been sent to the area a long time
ago. It believes that he should be sent to the ares acw,
promptly, looking towards a fundamental settlement,
194. On behalf of my Government I pledge to the
Security Council and to the parties concerned that cur
diplomatic and political influence would be exerted under
this draft resolution in support of the efforts of the United
Nations representative to achieve a fair and equitable
settlement, so that all in the area can live in peace, security
and tranquillity.
195. The tragic story of the Middle East has been oneof
failure to transform opportunities when they have occurred
into practical realities. Let us not miss such an opportunity
now when there appears to be an increased readinessto
accept concepts previously rejected. We offer our draft
resolution as an essential next step along the difficult road
to peace. We know well the deep emotions involved andthe
sufferings and wrongs that have been endured on all sides,
But we can make a start here in the Security Council at this
time. We can make the essential turn in the road, Let usdo
so by setting in motion the process which will, we devoutly
hope, lead at last to an age of peace, security and progress
in the Middle East.
196. THE PRESIDENT (translated fram blench/’ The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Israel,
However, during the suspension of the meeting, st
9.30 p.m., I was informed by the representative of Israel
that his delegation had decided not to speak at today’s
meeting. I therefore call upon the next speaker who is the
representative of Ethiopia.

191. It has long been my Government’s profound conviction, and what must be an obvious fact, that peace in the
Middle East necessarily depends primarily upon the parties
to the conflict. As President Johnson stated, sooner or later
it is they who must make a settlement in the area. We have
also equally recognized that the United Nations can greatly
help in the peace-making process.

197. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethopia): I wish to seizethin
opportunity in the Council’s present deliberations tc make
some preliminary observations by way of indicating my
Government’s attitude at this juncture of events. At the
Council’s meeting held on Tuesday, 24 October 1967~I
joined a number of members of the Council in calling for
the dispatch without delay of a special representative cf *e
Secretary-General to the Middle East, and I said ca that
occasion:
“Such a representative would, of course, haveto
operate within the context of general and comPrehens’ve
guidelines of principles which should be reaffirmed bythe
Council in the resolution authorizing the appointment Of
a representative.” [1369th meeting, para. 135.1

192. It is our conviction that our draft resolution contains
a meaningful mandate which should be acceptable within
the Council and which is sufficiently comprehensive for all
the States directly concerned so that the process of
diplomacy can be set into action. In all candour, we do not
conceive that such a mandate could be stated in terms
entirely satisfactory either to the Arab States or to Israel,
Therefore, we have attempted to state it in terms that set
20

at this stage of our mutual endeavours. For tlzis I>reseut
stage of our endeavours is the most crucial of all, n*t Only
because it is the first step and the one that counts most, but
also because it is a vital beginning
when seen in the Qht of
the urgency with which som&.ing needs to be done g%Ythe
Council in the dangerous situation of confrontation
and
stalemate existing today in that troubled area.

198. In thus urging that a special representative be sent to
the area, my delegation had in mind three very important
considerations: first, that such a representative would be
sent as a matter of great urgency so that an effective United
Nations presence may be established in the troubled region
of the Middle East; second, that the special representative
be armed with such agreed lines as would serve as a basis for
his contacts with the Governments concerned, with a view
to initiating a process which would, hopefully, establish in
the end a just and durable peace in the area; and third, and
equally important, that these guidelines should have the
backing of the Council as a whole, thus enhancing the
authority of the special representative’s mandate.

203. The work of the one to whom we are WiW
ta
entrust a high mission, that of a representative
of’ our
Organization in the area, should not begin, in our View, 0x1a
tone of division and discord, and must not be the OutCorlle
of divided counsel. Rather, it should begin
with
the
unreserved blessing and united support of all members
of
the Council and, more particularly, of the permanent
fnajor
Powers,

199. With these considerations very much in mind, my
delegation has been taking an active part in the informal
consultations that have been taking place during the past
weeks among the ten non-permanent members of the
Security Council. Moreover, in order to facilitate the task
of consultations among the ten non-pennanent members
and with the objective of assisting in evolving a consensus
on the basis of which, first, the ten non-permanent
members, and then the Council as a whole, could agree, my
delegation was happy to be associated with the elaboration
of a working paper prepared together with the delegations
of Argentina, Brazil, India, Nigeria and Mali. The delegation
of Japan was also associated with our work at a later stage.

204, This being the imperative that we face, we owe it to
ourselves and to the United Nations to continue
~~laki%
every effort in order to obtain, if possible, agreed grlidclines
for the special representative, so that he can start his
difficult task with the knowledge that he has a.ll of us
behind him. It seems to my delegation that the convening
of the Council in formal session at this particular
time
provides a unique and useful opportunity
for continuing
and intensifying the consultations we have begun,
using tall
opportunities of our formal and informal
contacts
and
bearing in mind always the need to give Lo our special
representative a happy and hopeful send-off.

200. That workin paper, the substance of which is
contained in the draft resolution of 7 November 1967
[S/8227/,
sponsored by India, Mali and Nigeria, won the
approbation of my delegation not only because we felt that
it was based on the Latin American resolution presented to
the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly, a resolution we supported at the time, but also
because the approach was, in our view, a sound one and the
principles involved were affirmed and maintained in reasonable balance. My delegation continues in its adherence to
those principles first contained in the working paper
prepared by the Afro-Asian and Latin American delegations
and now embodied in the draft resolution presented by
India, Mali and Nigeria.

205. In the spirit of this statement and in dedication
to
the cause of a just and durable peace in the area of the
Middle East, I pledge the untiring co-operation
of my
delegation, with all and every effort aimed at achieving
that
common accord which is so essential and so vital for the
starting of the process of lasting settlement
in that area. I
am convinced that if we succeed in making
such an agreed
and positive start during the present deliberations
T am
hopeful that we shall have begun turning the first leaf in the
new chapter of relations between all tile nations
of the
Middle Eastern area.
206. Mr, IGNATIEFF
(Canada): Even at this late hour,
Mr. President, I must associate my delegation
with the
deserved tributes and offers of co-operation
to you in the
very onerous task you have undertaken. You may certainly
count on the full support of my delegation,
and I should
say that you have already won our respect in the way that
you
have conducted the consultations
among
the ten
members. I should also wish to associate myself
with the
well-merited thanks to your predecessor, the representative
of Japan.

201. While thus giving our support to the set of principles
as affirmed in the aforesaid draft resolution, we find it
essential to state that we attach special importance and
significance to the manner of their adoption by the
Security Council at this particular stage in. Middle Eastern
development, My delegation was particularly happy and
greatly heartened by the similar sentiments expressed by
both of the co-sponsors of the draft resolution who have
spoken tonight. Our colleague, the representative of India,
in his brilliant speech of introduction, has made it clear that
the co-sponsors of the draft resolution would be, in his
words, “willing to consider suggestions in regard to certain
paragraphs of the draft resolution”. Our colleague, the
representative of Nigeria, in his equally able and eloquenl
explanation of the draft resolution, assured the Council
that the sponsors welcomed criticism and that they did not
present their draft in a spirit of “take it or leave it”.

207. When we last met I said that there were thee
types
of action that were essential for the United Nations
to take
in regard to the Middle East: first, to see that the cease-fire
was observed by the parties; second, to help the Secretary
General to strengthen the machinery of observance
of the
cease-fire; and third, to proceed as soon as possible,
through
a representative of the Secretary-General, to the beginning
of the establishment of peaceful conditions in fie area.

202. This attitude of conciliation and co-operation on the
part of the sponsors of the three-Power draft resolution is,
in our view, most meaningful and commendable, especially

208. We have been wrestling for many days with tile third
phase, and as the representative of Nigeria, in his remarka.
21

ble, frank and helpful speech rightly pointed out, we have
so far been unable to reach agreement. But there is, asthe
representative of the United Kingdom has said, common
ground among us that the United Nations can and must
assist in bringing about peaceful conditions in the Middle
East. It is already acting as a peace-keeper, and the
willingness to strengthen peace-keeping arrangements in the
area has indicated the clear recognition by the parties
directly concerned that the United Nations is helpful to
them. In the same way it seems to be generally recognized
that the appointment of a special representative would aIs0
be helpful, and that the United Nations can and should’%f
as a useful intermediary in the situation confronting the
parties.
209. The Canadian delegation has supported this approach
consistently-there has been a good deal of reference to
consistence tonight-since the end of the fighting in June.
Indeed, we circulated informally on 14 June, before the
Council adjourned to enable the General Assembly to meet
in emergency session, a draft of a resolution which
proposed that the Secretary-General be asked to appoint a
special representative to go out to the area to help establish
and maintain contacts among the parties in order to reduce
tensions and bring about peaceful conditions in the area.
210. We were hopeful that action of this kind might be
taken by the Council earlier rather than later. It is
understandable that the countries in the area wished fully
to record their views both at the emergency session and in
the general debate at this session. But sooner or later the
questions arise: How can the recurrence of hostilities in the
Middle East be prevented? How can tensions be reduced’?
How can peaceful conditions be established?
211. There has been a great deal of talk before the Council
on principles: the principle particularly of withdrawal, the
principle of non-acquisition of territory by force, There are
differences of interpretation among us as to the language of
the Charter on these points. But one thing is certain, that
under Article 2 of the Charter all Members have undertaken
solemnly to: “settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security, and justice”-1 repeat, justice-“are not endangered.” Likewise, all Members have assumed the obligation
to refrain in their international relations “from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any state”. That is common ground among
us because we are all committed to the Charter.
212. In the lengthy private consultations, to which a
number of my colleagues have referred, we have found
common ground also, I believe, on the necessity of a
peaceful settlement, or, as it is sometimes called, a political
solution, and of the Security Council recommending
procedures for the settlement of all aspects of the dispute,
including the question of withdrawal, the guaranteeing of
freedom of navigation through international waterways,
and, of course, the just settlement of the all-important
refugee question, under Chapter VI of the Charter.
213. What we have not been able to agree upon completely is the mandate under which a special representative
should operate, The important consideration for the Cana-

dian delegation, is that the special representative must’be
able to help Fg about the agreement of the pities, We
suggested earher that the special representative might wish
to start discussion under a broad mandate which would
avoid contentious issues. But if it is easier for bin, to start
these discussions on the basis of precise guide]ines oI
principles of action, we would be perfectly happy to agree
on condition that SUCK guidelines or principles are balanced
and equitable.
214. I do not mean by this that the parties must approve
what we do. Clearly the members of the Council havet,,
accept their responsibilities under the Charter to take
practical steps leading to a just solution. But in the context
of what is admittedly a diplomatic initiative, not an
imposed solution, this means that the acquiescenceof the
States directly concerned is essential. The mandate givento
the special representative therefore requires that it entailan
equitable balance of obligations on all parties,
215. In our discussions emphasis has been placedon
withdrawal and on the context in which it shouldtake
place. This indeed, I suggest, is the main question &id@
us at the present time. Some have argued that withdrawal
h
the prior condition required for a settlement: fiat we
should resurrect a situation which existed before host&s
broke out in June. We believe this is both unrealisticand
undesirable. Withdrawal is indeed a crucial element,but it
cannot stand in isolation and we must at all costsavoid
re-creating the circumstances which led to the outbreakof
hostilities in June 1967; and we must ensure that those
circumstances do not recur.
216. In brief, our aim should be to move from a stateof
war to a state of peace-a just peace. If our aim is to bring
about a settlement or a political solution, there mustbe
withdrawal to secure and recognized borders, or borders
which are respected and acknowledged, as we saidin
working drafts which Canada and Denmark discussedwith
other Council members in recent days in our informal
consultations. These drafts have all included a provisionfor
withdrawal. Our contribution to the negotiating processof
the past several weeks has been to try to suggestthe
definition of the nature of the equilibrium required ia order
to bring the process of peaceful settlement into cperaQon.
217. We regret that the draft resolution offered in the
name of India, Nigeria and Mali does not seemtcuslil@
to have the effect that we desire of beginning the Processof
peaceful settlement. We prefer the United Statesdraft
because it more fully meets the criteria of equilibrium
which I have mentioned. Our aim, however, is not-and’
agree in this with the representative of Ethiopia-to enter
into competition and contention but to seek agreement
among us and the earliest possible action by the Council
that would be of help to the parties in the disputeandthe
suffering peoples of the Middle East.
218. Canada is for withdrawal-yes, withdrawal which
leads to peaceful conditions and not to a return tc the state
of affairs which led to the recent conflict and whichWas
brought to this Council by Denmark and ourselvesOn24
May 1967 /1341st meeting].
219. The time for moving to a peaceful sett1ement
9’
political solution is long overdue and we urge the Count’

sot to lose heart but to continue all efforts to try to reach
agreementon a text which will achieve this goal.

226. Taking a retrospective view, it is perhaps easier now
to understand why it was not feasible to start such a
development at that time. A cooling-off period was
apparently necessary to create an atmosphere congenial to
progress in the political field.

220. In conclusion, I would say-and I agree entirely with
the representative of the United Kingdom on this-that the

Council should not, it dare not, let this opportunity slip to
bring the healing influence of a United Nations intermediary to bear upon the troubled scene in the Middle East, and
thus begin the process Of reconciliation, reconciliation
amongthe States of the Middle East.

227. From that starting point we then entered into the
consultations and discussions among the non-permanent
members of this Council nearly four weeks abo, and I think
that at that time we all shared a feeling of cautious
optimism. We thought that the realities of the situation
were now so clear that the prerequisites for progress
towards solutions should be obvious.

221, Mr. BORCH (Denmark): Several months have already
passed since this Council last met in open session to discuss
the over-all political situation in the Middle East. We met in
the wake of a war which had upset the whole picture of the
Middle East and evoked emotions which were not conduciveto a peaceful political settlement. In the meantime, the
dust has had time to settle and we have a clear picture of
the problems facing US.

228. It will be well known that during his stay in New
York in October my Foreign Minister took an active part in
the work of the non-permanent members, and that as a
result of conversations with the main parties involved and
with all members of the Council, we produced, together
with Canada, a working paper which we hoped might have
been useful as a basis for the drafting of a resolution to be
adopted by this Council.

222. Ever since the

middle of May, when a sharp
deterioration occurred in the situation in the Middle East,
the delegation of Denmark has endeavoured to pursue a
consistent line of policy based upon the following main
considerations.

229. Other members also produced working papers and,
under your wise guidance, Mr. President, and, earlier under
that of the distinguished representative of Japan, extensive
efforts were made to find common ground. In this processa
number of points were clarified and minor disagreements
removed through amendments of the various texts. However, as things worked out, we found at the end of our
negotiations in the group of non-permanent members that
agreement could not be reached, particularly on one
important point, namely the formula for the withdrawal of
troops and the context in which it should take place.

223. It is essential that whatever decision the Security
Council takes in the exercise of its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security should be
practicable and workable and aim at reducing tensions and
the step-by-step seeking of peaceful solutions to the many
andcomplex problems in the area.
224. In the period when the crisis was building up, we
consideredthat the best thing the Council could do would
be to request all States in the area to show restraint and
refrain from any steps which would tend to aggravate the
situation. We formed this view in the light of developments
which my predecessor, the present Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Denmark, in a statement on 24 May 1967 in this
Council, described as follows:

230. In this respect, I should like to recall my Government’s policy, as expressed on more than one occasion. In
his speech to the General Assembly on 21 June, Mr. Krag,
the Danish Prime Minister and then Minister for Foreign
Affairs, said:
“I therefore suggest that the problem of withdrawal
cannot be envisaged as an isolated step. The problem of
the withdrawal of troops is closely connected with some
of the most burning and sensitive political problems, such
as the final settlement of the borders in the area and the
claim of Israel, and indeed of all States in the area, for the
safeguarding of their territorial and political integrity.“1 0

“There has’been a military build-up along the borders
of Israel and the United Arab Republic, and there is no
way of denying that the stage is set for a major military
clash.” [1341st meeting,para. 69.1
We can only regret that, although some delegations shared
cur views, there was not sufficient support in this Council
for a preventive move like the one we suggested.

231. Furthermore, Mr. Krag in his speech in the General
Assembly on 21 September 1967 said: “territorial gains
should not be based upon military action . . , all Member
States have a fundamental right to peaceful existence.“11

225. When the war broke out we endeavoured to have the
Council adopt-even on the very first day of fighting-a
resolution calling for an immediate cease-fire. To our regret
we and those who shared our views did not succeed
immediately in this either. Agreement on this was not
reached until thirty-six hours later. Many things would
perhaps have looked different, and sacrifices might have
been avoided, if agreement had been reached at an earlier
stage.When the war then had been brought to an end, we
would have preferred this Council to tackle the Middle East
Political problems forthwith to effect a real move away
from Conditions which had created ceaseless tension Over
nearlYtwenty years and resulted in three wars.

232. Mr. Tabor, my Minister for Foreign Affairs, in a
public statement of 19 October 1967 went on to say:
‘(As we see it, the full implementation of these
principles would include the withdrawal of Israel troops;
the safeguarding of the territorial and political integrity
10 aid., 1529th meeting,para.73.
~lrbid., Twenty-second Session, Plenary Meetings,1562nd
meeting, para.53.

23

239. Mr. BERARD

233. I hope that there is general agreement around this
table about the validity of these principles but I know, of
course, that difficulties arise when it comes to deciding how
the different elements should be interrelated and balanced
against one another.

(France). @anslated from &enc~,j
During the four months in which the Council hasaothel;
any further meetings to consider the Middle Eastcrisisasa
whole, no progress has been made towards a solution,tie
situation on the spot is still fraught with danger,tie
. Its
. .mevltable
.
occupation of territory, with
consequences
and the confrontation of armed forces, which arestfl1on;
war footing, are bound to provoke fresh incidentsaod
maintain the feeling of insecurity throughout the redo,,
The torpedoing of the Eilat and the bombing of SueIand
its refineries have provided dramatic proof of this.

234, We have been of the opinion, and we still are, that
with respect to the fundamental political problems no
solution will be useful or workable unless both sides feel
that they can live with it. At the same time there must be a
scrupulous balance between the claims on both sides. In the
final analysis this indicates that the balance must be found
at a rather low level or, in other words, that the common
denominator for the framework of a political solution is
rather small.

240. As the French Government stated on severa1
,,cM.
sions, even before the operations began, war by itself
cannot solve anything. The risks it causesthreaten acton1y
the region concerned but the international communityasa
whole. The only possibility is a political solution, andby
this I mean a solution that is not imposed by force,Onlya
political solution can enable peoples which haveno
alternative but coexistence, and which must finally reacha
mutual understanding, to live side by side with oneanother,

235. At the conclusion of the recent negotiations among
the nonpermanent members of the Council there was at
least agreement on three points mentioned before in this
discussion, namely, that at this stage we are operating under
Chapter VI of the Charter, that a special representative of
the United Nations ought to proceed to the area and that
guidelines should be given for the work of that special
representative.

241. Is it realistic to think or say that, in order to achieve
this goal, direct negotiations must be started between
[he
Government of Israel and the Arab Governments?To
quote the views expressed by the French ForeignMinister
in his statement to the General Assembly on 22 June,this
would imply in advance that the problem had alreadybeen
solved. In that statement, the Foreign Minister said:

of all St&es in the area, including a final settlement of the
borders in the area; the right to free passagethrough the
Suez Canal and the Strait of Tiran; limitation on arms
shipments into the Middle East; and last but not least, a
settlement of the refugee problem.”

“How can it be expected that these Arab countries,
which for twenty years have refused to negotiatewilh
Israel-however great the shock they sufferedor possibl)
even because of that shock-would be any morereadyt(1
negotiate today than they were yesterday? It has,Idari:
say, never been more difficult to envisage‘eventhe
minimum of dialogue.“’ 2

236. It is, of course, the formulation of these guidelines
that lies at the root of the present stalemate. However, does
not the fact that there is broad agreement on these three
points impose an obligation on us all to try again to reach a
solution which can command the support of all members of
this Council, and in whose implementation the parties may
be expected to co-operate? My delegation for one believes
so and we are prepared to continue to play our modest role
in any effort with this aim in view.

242. In the opinion of my Government, therefore,it
would seem that outside assistance-in other words,inter.
national action-will be required in order to starta nevi
trend and allow it to develop favourably, SuchactionC~II
be undertaken now, within the framework of the United
Nations. In this connexion, we believe that international
opinion, as it can be expressed in the General Assembly,
can play a useful role in urging the parties to reconciletheir
views and in showing them something of the various
reactions which their attitude provokes; however,wehave
always felt that it is for the Security Council to pointthe
way to a solution of the problem as a whole. This ObvjouQ
calls for agreement between the great Powers,which2~
bound to become more and more clearly awareof their
responsibilities. If this agreement is lacking, the Midd1eEai’
crisis is doomed to continue.

237. There is a structural difference between resolutions
of the General Assembly which take the form of recommendations and which as such can be regarded as expressions of world opinion, and resolutions bf the Security
Council which are to form the basis of action. In the caseof
the latter, the active co-operation of both parties to a
conflict is of paramount importance. This, to us, seems
especially true in a case like the ‘one before us where our
aim exactly is to send off a special representative to the
Middle East to assist the parties concerned in finding a
solution. But, I want once again to underline that we hope
it will be possible to avoid a confrontation and that the
Council instead will continue its search for agreement,
238. In June of this year the Council was able to act
unanimously and resolutely in the face of war. In our
opinion there is no doubt that the Council would serve the
cause of peace in the Middle East to the benefit of all the
peoples in the area, and to the credit of the United Nations,
if we now-although we are, and happily so, not under the
threat of an actual war-could decide in unanimity on the
course to be followed towards the solution of the many and
complex problems in this severely tried part of the world.

243. Therefore once again we appeal today act oQ’,tD
the parties concerned, but to all members of the ,Qw”Y
Council, for efforts to create the conditions neceW fora
peaceful solution.

12 Ibid., Fifth Emergency Special Sessions pli.gury Meef@ ,
1531st meeting, para. 101.
1

24
-1

244, Furthermore, if the Arab States are to accept such a
solution, they must be able to do SO in complete freedomethat is, freedom from the pressure created by the
Presence
of foreign troops on their soil. After the fighting
hadended,the French Government declared:

easing of tension which would precede and prepare the way
for friendly co-operation in the near or distant future.

“]t is obvious that no On-the-Spot
fait accompli
regardingterritorial limits and the status of citizens of the
Statesconcerned can be considered as final.”

249. We would like this conflict, which we tried to
Prevent and which we have witnessed with deep sorrow, to
become in spite of all a source of hope for the establishment of a true peace, based on a just and reasonable
settlement with the minimum possible vestigesof bitterness
and rancour.

~~my Minister Mr. Couve de Murville recalled before the
FrenchNational Assembly 011 ‘7 November, that is still my
country’s
position. My country believes that the withdrawal
,,f Israel’sforces from the territories occupied as a result of
the recent conflict is an essential prerequisite for a
settlementof the problems.

250. We have said before, and we repeat, that Arabs and
Israelis, Jews and Moslems must be able to live together in
the Middle East in peace, tolerance and mutual respect.
This is what France desires.This is the consideration which
will guide the French delegation in the position it adopts
during the present meetings.

245, It being understood from the outset that each of the
Statesconcerned has the right to exist and to have its safety
assured,these problems appear manifold. First and foremost among them is the problem of the refugees, whose
plight hasbeen given a new and tragic dimension as a result
ofthe war.Some problems, such as that of navigation, must
be settled. Other problems have also arisen, including the
most serious of all, the fate of Jerusalem, on which the
GeneralAssembly has already adopted two resolutions.

‘2.51. Mr. TSURUOKA (Japan): First of all, I should like
to expressmy deep gratitude to the representatives for their
kind words with reference to what I did, or at least what I
tried to do, during the period of my Presidency last month.
252. The situation in the Middle East remains very grave.
Five months have passed since the outbreak of open
warfare and the United Nations is not yet in the position of
being able to play a positive and helpful role in bringing
about a just and lasting peace in the area. However, we
refuse to be discouraged and we feel it is still too early to
admit defeat.

246. The non-permanent members of the Council have
suggestedthat a special rcprcscntative of the Secretary
Generalshould be appointed to lend his assistance on the
spot in the implementation
of the principles to be
establishedby the Council. We believe this suggestion
warrantsserious consideration, and we gladly give it our
support.It is obvious, however, that it will not be enough
to sendan emissary of this kind to the Middle East with
onlythe Charter as his viaticum. He would have no chance
of renderingany useful service unless the principles he is to
follow in his work arc established by the Council with
sufficientclarity.

253. At the closing stage of the 1371st meeting of the
Security Council on 25 October, when the necessity for a
strict observanceof the cease-fireresolutions of the Council
was reaffirmed, it wasunderstood that we would continue
to engage in intensive consultations in the efforts to find a
common basis, particularly on the question of sending a
special representative of the Secretary-General to the area.
Since that time, as all are aware, strenuous efforts have
been made in consultations among Council members to
achieve a formula for a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. Today the Council is meeting once again at the
request of the United Arab Republic to consider the
problem, Two draft resolutions have been submitted to the
Council: one sponsored by India, Mali and Nigeria
[S/8227] and the other proposed by the United States
[S/8229/.

247. At this stage of the debate, I do not think there is
anypoint in discussing these principles in detail. I shall
merelystressonce again that security in that part of the
world cannot be achieved by measures which merely
Provokerancour, nourish resentment and stir up hatred, It
canbe achieved only in an atmosphere of equity and
moderationwhich will inspire confidence, It is a dangerous,
a fata] temptation for a conqueror to try to draw the
maximum possible advantages from his gains, and history
hastaught us that such an attitude invariably rebounds on
thosewho at first appear to profit from it,

2.54. It is not the purpose of my present intervention to
discuss the substance of those proposals. Suffice it to say
that I find merit, if not complete satisfaction, in both of
them. But it does appear that neither of those draft texts
adequately reflects a consensusof the Council. Despite
recent disappointment my delegation is still hopeful that
further consultations might very well lead to compromise
and a consensus that all members of the Council could
support. We attach great importance to this objective, and
we have some thoughts of our own on the subject.

248. The representatives of Israel have declared on several
ocessions,
and sometimes at this very table, that they are
]oek& hopefully towards a future in which there will be
fraitfal co-operation between the States of the region
without distinction as to race, religion or system of
government. France, a traditional
enemy of racism,
was-Perhapsmore than any other nation-filled
with
indigaatiOn and synipathy for the Jewish people in its
tribalations throughout the centuries and its martyrdom
duriag the Second World War. Thus such co-operation
wouldbe in keeping with our wishes. However, it is clear
that sucha development is possible only on the basis of an

255. I have listened very carefully to the preceding
speakersand I do not seethat there is anything constructive
to be gained at this stage by pressing matters
to a
showdown. I, for my part-and I imagine that other
members may very well share my view-would like more
the to consider the two draft resolutions which ark before
25

us, to engage in further consultations and to try once more
to achieve a consensus, Given the continuing gravity of the
situation in the Middle East, I do not think that is too
much to ask. It goes without saying that my delegation will
also be ready and willing to contribute its share and to
co-operate with other delegations in the common quest for
a consensus solution that can be adopted unanimously.
256. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (translated from Spanish):
Since the problem of the Middle East became acute in the
middle of May, as a result of the withdrawal of the troops
of the United Nations Emergency Force, my country has
taken upon itself ; definite obligation to do everything in
its power to restore the peace which had existed, albeit
precariously, for almost ten years. In this connexion, our
work in the Council and later in the General Assembly has
always been guided by equanimity and inspired by the
desire to find solutibns that might serve to settle the
controversy within the framework of the Charter of the
United Nations.
257. On 5 June 1967, the very day of the outbreak of
hostilities, my Government stated that it
“ . will have to be calm, in order to weigh the reasons
for-the conflict and the aspirations of the parties, it will
have to retain an impartial and independent judgement
and, above all, it will have to strive to be fair in its
statements and to act accordingly, believing that in this
way the higher interests of peace and world order, and
the legitimate long-term interests of the Republic itself
will be best served”.
258. At that time my delegation supported resolution
233 (1967) of 6 June, which called upon the Governments
concerned, “as a first step”, to take all measures for an
immediate cease-fire and for a cessation of all military
activities in the area. We voted on that occasion in full
awarenessof the fact that the efforts of the Council could
not end with a mere cease-fire, and that this body would
have to go on striving for the achievement of world peace.

Council and later in the emergency session, aswell asla the
general debate during the twenty-second sessioncf tl,e
General Assembly.
262. As we have pointed out on other occasiens,my
delegation, concerned as it iS to strive for peace basedon
justice and on the application of the principles of the
Charter, believes that a settlement of this problem mustbe
sought by peaceful means. This is in the interests aotonly
of the parties themselves but also of all Members cf the
United Nations which have a permanent interest la peace,
This conflict is practically as old as the United Nationsand
has, from the outset, given rise to differences of opinion
with regard to the effectiveness of the Organizatien sad0f
the principles on which it is based.
263. The Argentine Republic, although geographically
distant from the theatre of events, is neverthelesslinked1s
the parties by ties of friendship, and it believes lt ha aa
inescapable duty to do everything in its power te ensure
that the Middle East can be transformed into an areawhere
life can develop in an orderly and stable fashion, asthe
representative of Nigeria has said today.
264. We know that passions have been violent and thatit
is not easy to erase in one day twenty years of conflict.On
the other hand, in our view, the only solution is for all to
respect and apply the legal norms governing relations
between States, and particularly the principles laid downin
the Charter of the United Nations. We have not asked
anyone to forgo his legitimate interests, nor shall wedoso;
at the same time, however, we believe that there mustbea
clear balance of mutual concessions and that the peaceful
solution must be achieved in a context in which the free
will of the parties may be frankly expressed.
265. From the same seat, during the 1360th meetinguf
the Security Council on 14 June, my delegation spokeas
follows-and I ask to be forgiven for quoting in c~tertis,
but I feel that I must do so in order to clarify the basisof
our views and the way in which we have maintainedOur
position:
“For all these reasons, my delegation is firmly convia@d
that at this stage it is the Council’s duty to seek10
establish conditions whereby no one will negotiateunder
the threat of coercion. We believe that these ceadltioai~
cannot be attained unless on the one hand, trccPsaJt
withdrawn and on the other, free passagethrc@
internatioial shipping lanes is assured. In a word)this
means abandoning a belligerent spirit and establish@
spiritual conditions conducive to peace. We believethat
both parties should be placed in a position wherefiey
can express their wishes freely. Consequently, wecannot
support operative paragraph 2 of the Soviet draft reso’
lution. Although we believe that the withdrawalcftroop!’
is one of the basic conditions for peace, neitherPart!’
should be subject to pressure. Furthermore, we bslle~~:
that the Middle East problem can be solved enly by
peaceful means and that the first step to be takenorth”
first method t’o be used should be the creationOf”
climate of understanding, which would facilitate agreP;
ment between the parties. 73[136&h meeting, para.7A

259. When the Soviet Union proposed the convening of
the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly, my delegation did not support that request,
although it did participate, in a spirit of co-operation, in the
discussions. We did not agree with the idea of convening the
Assembly because we felt then, and still feel, that the
Security Council had not exhausted its effectiveness and
that it has sufficient authority and the necessarymachinery
to carry this processthrough to a satisfactory solution.
260. We believe today, on returning to the Security
Council under the same conditions as existed in June, that
time has shown us to be right. We still have no definition,
by any United Nations body, of the crisis in the Middle
East. On the other hand, we cannot fail to recognize that
the extensive debate which took place during the emergency session clarified the positions of the Members of the
United Nations regarding this matter.
261. My delegation is, therefore, taking part once again in
this debate with a very simple mandate from its Government-to restate the position which we took in the Security

266. The basis of our position was explained in gre$
detail by our Minister for Foreign Affairs whenhe sP ”
26

duringthe General Assembly’s fifth emergency special
SeSSion,
at the 1537th meeting on 27 June 1967. On that
occasioa
he explained, very clearly we believe, the basis of
Argentina’s
position, which I will summarize as follows:

when describing recent events in the Middle East, while
others-who at that time were critical-are now supporting
us. This draft resolution is well known to all members of
the Council, and my delegation, without repeating the
arguments advanced at the time of its submission, reiterates
its support for the ideas contained in the draft,

(1) The General Assembly shoufd fraw the attention of
thepartiesto the purposes and prmclples of the Charter as
statedill Chapter I, partiCdady
in’pnragraphs
3 and 4 of
Article2, and to the principles expressed in paragraphs I
and2 of Article 33.
(2) The Security Council
situatioaand the immediate

269. In the recent general debate during the present
twenty-second session of the General Assembly, at the
1569th meeting held on 27 September, my Government
supported the position taken by the Latin American group,
stating that it had: “acted calmly and objectively and did
not ask either of the parties to make any undue concessions, nor did it make any demands of them that were not
consistent with the norma requirements for post-war
settlements.”

should study the present
and remote causes of the

conflict.

(3) The Security Council might entrust a person, or a
groupof persons, “with the task of maintaining contact
withthe parties, hearing their claims, getting to know their
viewsand striving to bring about a real rapprochement
amongthem”, so that it would be able to discharge more
effectivelythe task of studying the present situation and
theimmediate and remote causes of the conflict.

270. On that occasion the Argentine Foreign Minister
stated once again that “it would be possible to achieve
peace, starting with the withdrawal of troops from the
occupied zones and the termination of the state of
belligerency”, and that this would be the first step on the
road towards a final peace,

(4) My delegation took the view that the mere withdrawalof forces would not, of itself, bring about peace.
Afterstating this, the Minister added that “such a withdrawalmust be accompanied simultaneously by the terminationof the state of belligerency, if it is to have a truly
logicalmeaning and a sound legal basis. The parties would
thusbe able to seek.solutions free from any constraint, and
to agreespontaneously to any commitments they might
make.”On that occasion our Foreign Minister referred to
the precedent established in article 2 of the Anti-War
Treatyof Non-Aggression and Conciliation signed at Rio de
Janeiroon 10 October 1933, which was initiated by our
countryand in particular by the then Chancellor, Don
CarlosSaavedra Lamas. With regard to the state of
belligerency,which in my country’s view should be
terminatedforthwith, the Argentine Foreign Minister stated
that:“the state of belligerency cannot be invoked in order
to acceptonly part of the logical consequences stemming
fromthe principles governing it. If it is invoked in order to
providelegal justification for certain circumstantial and
specificlimitations of general principles, then all its
Consequences
must also bc accepted.”

271 fi As I said a few moments ago, at this stage of the new
debate in the Security Council my delegation merely wishes
to restate the position which my country has maintained
since June. We do this with a view to serving the interests of
peace. I do not believe that any one in the Council can have
any do’ubts about this intention of ours. We maintain that
the solution which we regarded as the correct one three
months ago is still the correct one today. We have paid due
attention to the criticisms addressed to us by certain
delegations in the Genera1assembly, and we shall also take
into account any criticisms that may be made today; but
the one point we can repeat, as the basis of our position, is
that we are not serving the particular interests of anyone,
and we hope that no one will take advantage of this conflict
for his own political ends.
272. We respectfully invite the parties to enter this new

stage in an atmosphere of understanding and calm. Only in
such an atmosphere will it be possible for US to arrive at
solutions based on the principles of the Charter.

(5) It is essential to study other problems of major
importance in regard to Article 1, paragraph 3, of the
Charter,namely, the situation of the refugees, the wounded
and the prisoners of war. The Foreign Minister then
referredto the position adopted by my Government with
regardto the city of Jerusalem.

273. Our main concern is that the Security Council should
adopt
a resolution which will enable the United Nations to
play
a part in ending this crisis. If we do this, we shall have
responded
to one of the most important COntemPOrarY
challenges that the United Nations Organization has had to
face.

267~The over-all position of my Government, which I
havejust summarized, was reflected very explicitly in the
draftsponsoredby twenty Latin American countries which
apPears
in document A/L,523/Rev.l,
This draft was voted
on’iathe General Assembly last July, and received 57 votes
infave,ur,with 43 against and 20 abstentions.

274. THE PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): 1 have
no further speakers on my list, but I have two suggestions I
wish to put to the Council.
275. First, in the light of the work we have accomplished
this evening
and as a result of the informal consultations I
have l&l, members of the Council seem to be in agreement
that tomorrow morning’s meeting on the complaint of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be postponed
until tomorrow afternoon at 3.30. If there is no objection, I
shall consider this proposal adopted.

*@. Now, in the month of November, in the course of the
Presentdebate, we are faced with the paradox that some of
thoseMembers who supported and voted for the Latin
Americanformula apparently prefer to overlook that fact
27

i

/
I

276. The second suggestion is as follows. I have also held
informal consultations which indicate that members of the
Council agree that the next meeting on the situation in the
Middle East should be held on Monday morning at 10.30. If

there is no objection, I shall consider that this propas
also adopted.

77x2meeting rose on Friday, 10 November, at 1,IS QL

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
puhlicotionr.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obfoined
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Nations,
Soles
Section,

throughout

New

York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

ler
publications
des
ddporifaires
du monde

Nations
entier.

Notions

Unier,

der

KAK

IlOllYVMTb

Section

DES NATIONS

Unier
sent
Informex-vow

venter,

M3AAHMA

New

York

UNIES

en veote
dons
ler
librairier
auprir
de votre librairie

et

ICI

ogences

ou adrersez-vour

b:

ou Genbve.

OPrAHM3AlJklM

06bEAHHEHHblX

HAUtlh

~~~l~l~lllIll O~I~IIIIIIMI\IIII O~hl’~ll~~CllllILX
IIal[llfi
MOiliIlO IiyIlllTb
II lillll;lilil~lS
>1UlXl1111~X
II
i~PCIIT(‘TIIllS 110 lll!CY 1Kli Ol LlX
~lll[‘“.
~hllO~IlTC
L!U~XHll;ll
06 ll:l~llllllilX
1, l Ll l C31
lillllil~llO~
M&~XlllIIC
Il.711 IIIIIllIITC
II0 ll,7$OCJ’:
O~~~IIIIXII~IIII
~hC~llll~lllllzlX
Ihl{llfi,
cClil~llll
110
IlpO~ZliliC
ll3~illlIlil,
IILKbllOpI(
n.in Xellenlt.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

Los publicocioner
de tos Naciones
Unidor
erlhn
en todor
partes
del mundo.
Conrulte
q EU librero
Ventor,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S. 1.50

(or

equivalent

en venta

UNIDAS
en

o dirijora

in other

librerior
a: Naciones

currencies)

y cosos dirtribuidoros
Unidar,
Secci6n

de

3S729-January

1971-2~100
