S/PRST/2000/14

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 May 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4134th meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 May 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the outbreak of
violence in Sierra Leone in recent days. It condemns in the strongest terms the
armed attacks perpetrated by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) against the
forces of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and their
continued detention of a large number of United Nations and other
international personnel. The Council expresses its outrage at the killing of a
number of United Nations peacekeepers of the Kenyan battalion and its deep
concern for the UNAMSIL troops who have been wounded or remain
unaccounted for.
“The Security Council demands that the RUF end its hostile actions,
release immediately and unharmed all detained United Nations and other
international personnel, cooperate in establishing the whereabouts of those
unaccounted for, and comply fully with the terms of the Lomé Peace
Agreement (S/1999/777).
“The Security Council considers Mr. Foday Sankoh, as leader of the
RUF, to be responsible for these actions, which are unacceptable and in clear
violation of their obligations under the Lomé Agreement. The Council
condemns the fact that Mr. Sankoh has deliberately failed to fulfil his
responsibility to cooperate with UNAMSIL in bringing these incidents to an
end. The Council believes that he must be held accountable, together with the
perpetrators, for their actions.
“The Security Council commends UNAMSIL forces and the Force
Commander for the courage, resolve and sacrifice they have shown in
attempting to bring this situation under control. It expresses its full support for
their continued efforts to this end, and for the overall fulfilment of their
mandate. It calls upon all States in a position to do so to assist the Mission in
this regard. The Council also expresses its support for the regional and other
international efforts under way to resolve the crisis, including by the Economic
Community of West African States.
“The Security Council will continue to monitor the situation closely and
consider further actions, as necessary.”

00-41777 (E) 040500
`````````
