Reaolutions adopted on the reporh of the Second Committee

ing the economic development of under-developed countries, and will further the aims and objectives of such
a Fund.
553rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1955.
ANNEX

11

ernment of Libya, could furnish additional assistance
to the United Kingdom of Libya with a view to fmancing its fundamental and urgent programmes of economic
and social development, giving consideration to the possibility of opening a special account of voluntary contributions to that end, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its seventh session,

1. What, in the expectation of your Government, will be the
role of a Special Fund in the economic development of your
country?
2. What is. the opinion of your Government as regards the
nature of contributions to the operational budget of the Special
Fund?

Recalling further its resolution 529 (VI) of 29 January 1952 on the -problem of war damages in Libya,

3. What is the opinion of your Government as to the initial
sum which should be collected before the Special Fund starts
its operations?

Having noted the communication18 dated 1 September 1955 from the Prime Minister of Libya, addressed
to the Secretary-General,

4. What does your Government think as to the Special Fund
making grants-in-aid and loans and under what terms and
conditions?
5. What is the opinion of your Government about the relationships between the Special Fund on the one hand and the
United Nations and the specialized agencies on the other?
6. What, in the opinion of your Government, should be the
structure (governing bodies and management) of the Special
Fund?

7. What, in the opinion of your Government, should be the
methods and mechanism for the appraisal of projects submitted
by Governments?
8. Any other suggestions your Government may have regarding the structure and functions of the Special Fund.

*

*

*

At the 553rd plenary meeting on 9 December 1955,
after the adoption of the resolution, the President proposed the following States Members to be represented
on the Ad Hoe Committee: CANADA, CHILE, COLOMBIA,
CUBA, EGYPT, FRANCE, INDIA, INDONESIA, NETHERLANDS, NORWAY, PAKISTAN,"POLAND, UNION OF SOVIET
SocIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA and YUGOSLAVIA. The General Assembly

agreed to this proposal.
924 (X). Question of assistance to Libya

The General Assembly,
Recalling the part played by the United Nations in
the creation of the independent State of the United
Kingdom of Libya, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949 recommending that Libya, comprising Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and the Fezzan, should be constituted as an independent and sovereign State, and that this independence
was achieved on 24 December 1951, in accordance with
that resolution,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 515 (VI) of
1 February 1952 by which the Assembly requested the
Economic and Social Council to study, in consultation
with the Government of the United Kingdom of Libya,
ways and means by which the United Nations, with the
co-operation of all Governments and the competent
specialized agencies, and upon the request of the Gov-

Recalling its resolution 398 (V) of 17 November
1950 which recognizes the special responsibility assumed
by the United Nations for the future of Libya,

Having noted the reportu of the Secretary-General
on the question of assistance to Libya,
Noting with satisfaction the technical assistance given
to Libya under the United Nations technical assistance
programmes, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 726 (VIII) of 8 December 1953,
Noting that there has been no material response to
the invitation in paragraph 1 of resolution 726 (VIII),

1. Invites anew all Governments willing and in a position to do so to provide financial assistance to the United
Kingdom of Libya through the appropriate mechanisms
within th~ United Nations Organization available for
receiving voluntary contributions, in order to assist
Libya in the financing of its fundamental and urgent
programmes of reconstruction and of economic and
social development ;
2. Recommends that, if and when further means
become available for assisting in the financing of the
development of under-developed areas, due consideration be given by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies to the specific development needs of Libya;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies concerned to continue to waive local costs
and to give all possible favourable consideration to the
requests of Libya for technical assistance, taking into
account t~ special needs of Libya and the principles
of the tedmical assistance programmes of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies enumerated in
Economic and Social Council resolution 222 (IX) of
15 August 1949;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of the Governments of
Member States and to take the necessary measures to
facilitate the implementation of paragraph 1 above;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make a special
report on the question of United Nations assistance•
to Libya in time to be placed on the provisional agenda
of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly.
553rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1955.
13
lbid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document
A/l969.
14 Ibid., document A/2968.
