VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rights", the question of the indivisibility and interdependence of economic, social, cultural, civil and political
rights.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/103.

International Covenants on Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/51 of 14 December 1978,
34/45 of 23 November 1979, 35/132 of 11 December
1980, 36/58 of25 November 1981, 37/191 of 18 December 1982, 38/116 and 38/117 of 16 December 1983,
39/136 and 39/138 of 14 December 1984, 40/115 and
40/116 of 13 December 1985, 41/32 of3 November 1986
and 41/119 and 41/121 of 4 December 1986,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General92 on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 13 the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights 13 and the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 13
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol thereto,
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Welcoming the establishment, pursuant to Economic
and Social Council resolution 1985/17 of28 May 1985, of
the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
to oversee the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Welcoming the submission to the General Assembly of
the annual report of the Human Rights Committee93 and
the first report ofthe Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,91
Noting with concern the critica! situation with regard to
overdue reports from States parties to the International
Covenants on Human Rights,
1. Takes note with appreciation ofthe report ofthe Human Rights Committee on its twenty-ninth and thirtieth
sessions,93 and expresses its satisfaction with the serious
and constructive manner in which the Committee is continuing to carry out its functions;
2. Further takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
including the suggestions and recommendations of a general nature approved by the Committee;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that
have submitted their reports to the Human Rights Committee under article 40 of the Covenant and urges States
parties that have not yet done so to submit their reports as
speedily as possible;
4. Urges those States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that have been requested by the Human Rights Committee to provide additional information to comply with the request;

92 A/42/450.

93 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-second Session,
Supplement No. 40 (A/42/40).

203

5. Commends the States parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that
have submitted their reports under article 16 ofthe Covenant and urges States parties that have not yet done so to
submit their reports as soon as possible;
6. Notes with satisfaction that the majority of States
parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, andan increasing number of States parties to
the lnternational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, have been represented by experts in the presentation of their reports, thereby assisting the respective
monitoring bodies in their work, and hopes that ali States
parties to both Covenants will arrange such representation
in the future;
7. Again urges all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the lnternational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and to consider
acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
8. Invites the States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the
declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
9. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, where applicable, the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
10. Stresses the importance of avoiding the erosion of
human rights by derogation, and underlines the necessity
of strict observance of the agreed conditions and procedures for derogation under article 4 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, bearing in mind
the need for States parties to provide the fullest possible information during states of emergency, so that the justification for and appropriateness of measures taken in these
circumstances can be assessed;
11. Appeals to States parties to review whether any
reservation made in respect of the provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights should be upheld;
12. Urges all States parties to pay active attention to
the protection and promotion of civil and political rights,
as well as economic, social and cultural rights;
13. Urges States parties to the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the specialized
agencies and other relevant United Nations bodies to extend their full support and co-operation to the Committee
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights informed of the relevant activities of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Commission on Human Rights, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Wornen, the newly established Committee against
Torture and, where appropriate, other functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council and the specialized agencies, and also to transmit the annual reports of
the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to those bodies;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-third session a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic, So-

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

204

cial and Cultural Rights, the lnternational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the
lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to ensure that the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights are able to hold the necessary sessions and are provided with administrative support and summary records;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat etfectively assists the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in the implementation of their respective mandates;
18. Again urges the Secretary-General, taking into account the suggestions ofthe Human Rights Committee, to
take determined steps, within existing resources, to give
more publicity to the work of that Committee and, similarly, to the work of the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights;
19. Invites the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to
explore further ways of expediting consideration of periodie reports;
20. Welcomes the publication of the first volumes of
the official public records of the Human Rights Committee and looks forward to the early publication of further
volumes;
21. Encourages all Governments to publish the texts of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in as many
languages as possible and to distribute them and make
them known as widely as possible in their territories.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/104.

International Literacy Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/ 118 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/80 of 8 July 1987, in which the Council recommended that the General Assembly proclaim 1990 as International Literacy Year,
Recalling that in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 2 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 13 the inalienable right of everyone to education is recognized,
Mindful of the fact that the eradication of illiteracy is
one of the paramount objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,94
Recognizing that the elimination of illiteracy constitutes
a prerequisite for ensuring the right to education,
Emphasizing that widespread illiteracy, especially in
many developing countries, seriously hinders the process
of economic and social development and cultural and
spiritual advancement,
Emphasizing further that this situation is utterly incompatible with what is required by the great advances in the

94 See resolution 35/56, annex.

scientific and technical revolution that mankind is witnessing,
Convinced that the process of education can make an indispensable contribution to the achievement of social progress, mutual understanding and co-operation among nations,
Mindful ofthe fact that the eradication ofilliteracy calls
for world-wide co-operation and joint efforts,
Considering that the complete elimination of illiteracy in
all regions of the world should be recognized as a priority
objective of the international community,
Convinced that the elaboration of a global strategy for
the eradication of illiteracy and the organization of a
world-wide literacy campaign will promote deeper understanding by people throughout the world ofthe various aspects of the problem of illiteracy and help to intensify efforts to spread literacy and education,
Taking note with appreciation of the programme for lnternational Literacy Year submitted by the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 95
Taking into account the guidelines for international
years and anniversaries adopted by the General Assembly
in its decision 35/424 of 5 December 1980,
1. Proclaims 1990 as lnternational Literacy Year;
2. Invites ali States to ensure adequate nation-wide
preparation for International Literacy Year;
3. Recommends that the specialized agencies, regional
commissions and other organizations of the United Nations system consider in their respective forums the contributions that they could make to the success of International Literacy Year;
4. Invites interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to exert etforts in their respective fields to contribute adequately to the preparation and
implementation of national and international programmes
for International Literacy Year;
5. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to assume the role of lead organization for International Literacy Year;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session an ítem entitled "Preparation and organization of International Literacy Year".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/105.

Reporting obligations of States parties to
United Nations instruments on human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/121 of 4 December 1986 and
other relevant resolutions,
Reiterating the fundamental importance it attaches to
the fulfilment of reporting obligations under international
instruments on human rights,
Recognizing that etfective periodic reporting by States
parties to relevant treaty bodies not only enhances international accountability in relation to the protection and promotion of human rights, but also provides States parties
with a valuable opportunity to review policies and programmes affecting the protection and promotion of human rights and to make any appropriate adjustments,
95 See E/1987 /111
