TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

1

NEW

12 MAY 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l537)

, , . .. . , . . , . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

of the agenda . . . . , . , . . . , . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794) * , . , , ( , , , . , . . . . . ( , , , . . , * , . , . , . , * . * * . . . . . * * . . . . . . * . * * . . * * * ’

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795) . , , , . , , . * . . . . . * . . * . , , . , . . , * . * . *. * , * . . . * . . I * . . . . . . . . * . . . . . I 1

SlPV.1537

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security CounciI (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security ‘Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

I

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 12 May 1970, at 11 a.m.
Presidenr:

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

Mr. Jacques KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France).

Prese,?t: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

(S/9794)

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l537)

(S/9795)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794).

3. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpwtation fkonz ~Frenclz):
I have received communications from the representative of Lebanon [S/9796] and the Permanent Representative of Israel [s/9797] in which they request to be
allowed to participate, without right of vote, in the
discussion of the question now before the Council.

3.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795).

4. In accordance with the usual practice and if there
are no objections, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to
participate without the right to vote in the debate of
the Council, in accordance with the rules of procedure
and with practice.

Adoption of the agenda
1. The PRESIDENT

(interpretation

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghowa
(Lebanon) rind Mr. Y. Tekonh (Isrnel) took places at
the Security Council table.

j?o/~z French):

Early this morning I was notified by the Ambassador

of Lebanon that Israeli troops had attacked southern
Lebanon. Consequently the Government of Lebanon
submitted a complaint to the Security Council and
requested the urgent convening of the Council. Accordingly, I decided immediately to convene this urgent
meeting of the Security Council, As was my duty, I
then notified the Ambassador of Israel of the complaint
made against his country. The Ambassador of Israel
informed me that he also requested a meeting of the
Security Council and that he was submitting a countercomplaint. I decided to include this Israeli request also
on the agenda of the Security Council.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation ~FOI?ZFrench):
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The first speaker on my
list is the Secretary-General
of the United Nations,
U Thant, on whom I now call.
6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
With regard to
the matter now under discussion in the Council, I have
received from the Acting Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO)
thus far only the following information. The Lebanese
delegation to the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice
Commission (ILMAC) reported to the Acting Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission at 0830 hours
local time today that an Israeli armoured attack was
launched in the early hours of 12 May into Lebanese
territory in the general area of Mount Hermon, The
Acting Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission
has also reported to the Acting Chief of Staff information given to him by a Lebanese representative to the
Israel-Lebanon Mixed Armistice Commission who had
gone to the border point of Rosh Hanikra for a tele-

2. The agenda before the Council thus reflects the
actual sequence of events as well as logic, Moreover,
it takes account of the practice of the Council and,
in particular, of the agenda adopted on the occasion
of the 1498th meeting of the Council, which was held
on 13 August 1969. Therefore, if there are no objections, I shall take it that the agenda is adopted.
The agenda was adopted.
1

phone conversation with the senior Israeli representative. According to this information, the senior Israeli
representative stated that the present action going on
in the El Arqoub area, east of the Hasbani River, was
aimed only at the destruction offc&yeen commandos,
and that it was not the intention of Israeli troops to
act against the Lebanese army or population provided
that the Lebanese army and population did not support
the fe&yeen.

the defensive positions of the Lebanese army. Our
armed forces have been engaged since this morning
in heavy fighting with the invading aggressor. There
is vast destruction, and there have been many
casualties.

7. It was understood at the time of this report to
the Acting Chairman of ILMAC that the Israeli ground
troops had reached El Khraibe (MR 21053047) and
were supported by artillery and air forces. There was
no detailed information about strength, but apparently
forty Israeli tanks were participating. The action was
still in progress.

1.5. This aggression has come in the wake of several
threats made by Israeli officials against Lebanon in
the last few months. Notable among them is the threat
which I duly relayed to the Secretary-General and communicated to the Security Council in my letter of 7
March 1970, from which I quote the following paragraph:
“Israel, which is to be held solely responsible for
this developing tension, has not ceased to proffer
her threats against Lebanon, Only today, press
reports referred to Israeli threats to turn a six-mile
stretch of southern Lebanon into scorched earth
desert.” [S/9683.]

14. At this stage we do not have full details, but ample
information will be communicated to the Council as
it is received from the field.

8. As members of the Council will be aware, I have
for long sought to increase substantially the number
of United Nations observers on both sides in this area,
but without success. This accounts for the fact, among
other things, that I cannot have detailed information
of actions such as that now in progress in this area.
9. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&ion fron2
I now call on the representative of Lebanon.

16. As a matter of fact-to set the record straight
here and now-that threat was conveyed to the Lebanese Government through various channels and it was
a matter of more than mere press reports.

French):

10. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, allow
me first to express my thanks to you for your prompt
action in convening this urgent meeting of the Security
Council. My thanks go also to the other members of
the Council for responding to your urgent call. I should
have preferred other circumstances in which to convey
to you the warm congratulations of the Lebanese
delegation on the assumption of your duties as the
representative of France to the United Nations and
as President of the Security Council, and to pay you
the tribute due to you for the excellent qualities of
leadership which had another expression here in the
debate of the Council yesterday. It is needless for me
to dwell now on the bonds of friendship and cooperation which have existed between France and
Lebanon for a great many years.

17. Note must be taken of the official calculating
thinking of the sinister planners of aggression in Israel.
More sinister still have been the latest threats by the
Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of Defence of Israel, the Chief of Staff and other
Israeli officials. One of those threats promised to turn
southern Lebanon and the towns and villages therein
into an area comparable to the area of the Suez Canal
zone and its cities, where Israeli acts of aggression
are constantly threatening the peace in the Middle East,
The Israeli acts of aggression have turned this area
into an area of death, destruction and dislocation. Since
28 December 1968, Israel has set in motion a cycle
of murderous and wanton attacks against peaceful and
peace-loving Lebanon. I do not have to remind the
Council of the treacherous and cowardly attack by the
Israel air force against the open, defenceless .international airport of Beirut. The Security Council strongly
condemned Israel for that attack in its resolution 262
(1968) of 3 1 December 1968, in which it issued a solemn
warning to Israel that if such acts were to be repeated
the Council would have to consider further steps to
give effect to its decisions.

11. Yesterday was a happy occasion in the Council:
there was unanimity and positive action; there were
even cheers and poetry. The aspirations of the people
and
of Bahrain for independence were fulfilled
endorsed by the Council; we all rejoiced,
12. Today we witness an anticlimax. For that matter,
it is an ominous one. for a large-scale aggression against
Lebanon has been launched by Israel today. At 4.45
this morning, Beirut local time, Isrneli armoured and
infantry units crossed the Lebanese border into areas
in the southern and eastern parts of the district of El
Aryoub, situated in the south-eastern part of Lebanon.
The Israeli air force and heavy artillery have, since
then, been bombarding civilian towns and villages in
the districts of El Arqoub, Marjayourl, and Nabatiye.

18. As I was entering the Council chamber I received
the following ‘information from the Lebanese Government. It is the text in French of a note delivered this
morning by the Lebanese Government to the ambassadors of the four great Powers, members of the Security Council, which have special responsibility for the
maintenance of peace in the world. I shall read it Out:’
“On Tuesday morning at 0430 hours Israeli
armoured troops supported by aircraft began an invasion of Lebanon on the pretext of putting an end

13. The main thrust of the israeli ground forces is
directed against heavily populated agglomerations and
2

I
to acts of resistance carried out by Palestinians on
Lebanese territory with the aim of carrying out
reprisals against Lebanon, which was permitting
these acts of resistance.
“First, the whole world is very well aware from
experience which history has recorded in all
countries and at all times that resistance simply
increases in proportion to the violence used to meet
it. Israel cannot afford to disregard this when in all
the Arab countries, including the occupied territories, it is meeting with fresh outbreaks of resistance in direct proportion to the force used in putting
down such resistance.
“Secondly, the whole world is aware also that
it is not Lebanon but Israel which should be held
responsible for the presence and activity in Lebanese
territory of those very people whom Israel is trying
to drive out of their country.
“Thirdly,
ever since the act of aggression against
the Beirut airport in 1968, the whole world has been
aware that Israel, which today is invoking its complaints connected with recent events as reasons for
attacking our country, hardly bothers to find pretexts
for encroaching upon the territorial integrity of Lebanon and the Lebanese people. It is not enough to
realize that no country in the Arab Middle East can
enjoy a return to tranquillity without the return of
justice throughout the region. The whole world must
understand that the dimensions of the conflict are
bound, by an unlimited chain reaction, to become
world-wide in scope economically,
politically and
militarily.
“While we are doing everything in our power to
exercise our right of self-defence, we request the
Security Council-and
particularly the four great
Powers which bear permanent responsibilities in
it-not only to condemn and halt Israeli aggression
against Lebanon but also to find sufficient reason
in this act of aggression to impose upon Israel respect
for international law, for the United Nations, for
its Charter and for its decisions and for the requirements ofjustice in the interests of world peace, which
is threatened more gravely every day.:”

we try to use our resources for the betterment of our
people: to raise their standard of living, their standard
of culture; to promote the relations of Lebanon in
friendship and co-operation with the United Nations
and with all the nations of the world. We have no
apologies to make. On the contrary, we are proud of
the fact that Lebanon enjoys esteem in the world
because we follow a path of friendship, co-operation,
peace and moderation.
21. But all this has been constantly menaced by the
many threats of Israel and its action against our towns,
against our villages, against the peace of our nation.
I might recall here that a French general, after the
invasion of France, mentioned to Mr. Churchill that
EngIand would surrender, would be completely
destroyed, would have her neck wrung like a chicken.
And Churchill replied: “Some chicken! Some neck!”
22, If Israel thinks that because we are peaceful,
because we are a people of good will in the world,
we are like a chicken whose neck could be wrung,
it is very badly mistaken. It is not the strength of arrogant arms, Phantoms, Skyhawks and tanks-the arrogance of power-that
makes a nation. It is not the
use of that arrogant power against Syria, Jordan and
the United Arab Republic and against the people of
Palestine that makes a nation. It is how much a nation
can muster in the way of respect, dignity, tolerance
and moderation in international affairs.
23. We come here to the Security Council not as
usual. We would like to set the record straight from
the beginning. To go into long deliberations and consultations about a resolution which in one form or another
condemns, deplores the actions of Israel and at the
same time tries to find a certain balance in order to
preserve unity in the Council-this
is not the method
that we are seeking. What we are seeking is action
by the Council, and we have every right, as a small
nation, as a founding Member of the United Nations,
to come to the Council for this action.
24. The action we seek is the immediate withdrawal
of all Israeli troops from Lebanese territory, a strong
condemnation of Israel and the application of Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter. If we do this, then,
after twenty-two years of beating around the bush on
the question of Palestine, we will be taking an action
on the level of justice, to be expected from the United
Nations and its Charter, especially since this year we
are celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Organization.

19, At this stage I should like to say only this. We
have come to the Council on many occasions seeking
justice, seeking redress, seeking action to stop the acts
of aggression of Israel against Lebanon and against
the Arab States. Now, for three years, since June 1967,
international
diplomacy has been dilly-dallying with
semantics to find a solution to the problem of the Middle
East. While our people suffer, while our towns are
destroyed and while our peace is constantly threatened
on the international level we always find excuses to
disagree about the meanings of sentences and words.
It is high time, we believe, that this Council should
take positive, decisive action against the aggression
of Israel.

25. This is the kind of anniversary that Israel is trying
to celebrate. This is the kind of manifestation that Israel
is trying to lead the world into to commemorate the
anniversary of this wonderful Organization and the
wonderful and lofty objectives and principles of its
Charter, This pastsunday we watched Zionists moving
on the streets of New York. Commemorating
what?
The twenty-second anniversary of the birth of Israel
rooted in 4,000 years of history, rooted in 4,000 acts
of aggression. While those people were marching, wav-

20. Israel thinks that Lebanon is a small country with
a small army, that by nature we are peaceful. So we
are. We have no apology to make about the fact that
’ Quoted in French by the speaker,

3

Shalom, Adamit, Yiftah, Kerem Ben Zimra, Ma’yan
Baruhh, Bet Hillel. The town of Qiryat Shemona was
shelled five times in this period by Katyusha rockets,
Three of these attacks occurred in the course of the
last week. In the last ten days alone seven Israelis
were killed and eighteen wounded.

ing Israeli flags, headed by American politicians and
callingfor peace, the Israeli mititary hawks were hatching in darkness their sinister plan of attacking Lebanon.
26. Those are my remarks for today. I reserve the
right to’speak at a later stage.

33. This is not a matter of statistics, however, The
endless armed attacks from Lebanon have turned the
life of the Israeli border population into a constant
struggle against violence and death. The inhabitants
of the border villages and towns have become the main
targets of murderous assaults. With diabolical blood
lust the attackers perpetrate their crimes on innocent
civilians asleep in their homes, on workers in the fields,
on children at play.

27. The PRESIDENT
(interprelntim
J?om
Fw~zch
1:
I have just received letters from the representatives
of Morocco [S/9799] and Saudi Arabia [S/9798] asking
to be allowed to participate in the debate in the Security
Council on the question before us. If there are no objections, I shall take it that the Council agrees to invite
the representatives of Morocco and Saudi Arabia to
take part in this debate, without the right of vote, in
accordance with the rules ofprocedure and the practice
of the Council.

34. Time and again Israel has called on the Government of Lebanon to abide by its international obligations, to observe the cease-fire and to put an end to
these attacks. Time and again Israel has requested
organs of the United Nations and Governments of
Member States to apprise Lebanon of the gravity of
the situation created by the continuation of warfare
from its territory. The acts of aggression have not
ended, however. On the contrary, they have grown
in number and scope, compelling Israel to act in selfdefence.

28. Because of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I shall, as customary, invite the
representatives of Morocco and Saudi Arabia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, it being understood that they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when their turn
comes to speak.

29. The PRESIDENT
(intqmvnticm
f,~m
I now call on the representative of Israel.

35. This morning Israel defence forces took action
against the bases of aggression situated in Lebanon.
This action is directed solely against the concentration
of the terror organizations in south-east Lebanon. The
following leaflet was distributed by the Israel defence
forces in Lebanese territory:

Ftmd~):

30. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): I should like, an behalf
of my delegation, to express to you, Mr. President,
our highest respects and the hope that your term of
office will be a fruitful one.

“One who sows thorns does not pick grapes, and
one who ignites fire may be burned by fire. To the
inhabitants of the area:

3 I, On instructions from my Government I requested
you this morning to convene an urgent meeting of the
Security Council to consider the acts of armed attack,
shelling, incursion, murder and violence perpetrated
from Lebanese territory against the territory and population of Israel, in flagrant violation of the cease-fire
and the United Nations Charter. Particulars of these
acts of aggression are contained in my letters to the
President of the Security Council of 5 January 1970
lS/9621], 27 February 1970 [S/9670], 4 March 1970
[S/9678], 10 March 1970 [S/9691] and 10 May 1970
1s /9790].

“More than a year has passed since your villages,
houses and fields were turned into nests and bases
for saboteurs, for their comings and goings and for
their firing positions.
“Out of consideration for the decades of tranquillity and good neighbourhood, the Israel authorities
have done all in their power to refrain from applying
all of the available means.
“The Israel defence forces have restricted themselves to limited warnings, in the hope that YOUwould
understand that there is an end to patience. There
comes an end to patience when the terrorists of darkness penetrate to sabotage the homes of civilians
in Israel and to shoot at women and the elderly.

32. During recent months Israel has repeatedly drawn
the Security Council’s attention to the intensification
of aggression from Lebanon. In the letters addressed
to the President of the Security Council I described
how Lebanese territory has become a base from which
continuous attacks were being carried out against
Israeli towns and villages and their civilian population.
Since 1 April 1970 alone, there have been sixty-one
such acts of aggression; twenty-two Israeli villages and
towns have come under attack: Misgav’Am,
Metulla,
Zar’it, Kfar Ajur, El-Wazani,’ Dan, Dafna, She’ar
Yashuv, Avivim,
Qiryat Shemona,
Margaliyyot,
Manara, Dovev, Malkiyya,
Yir’on, Yuval, Ramat

“We did not come to hurt peaceful civilians. We
come to warn you that if you do not cease to attack
us and our population there will be no tranquillity
within your borders.
“Draw a lesson from what happened in Jordan
to the inhabitants of the areas in which saboteurs
found shelter and endorsement of their aggressive
acts. Chase away the teirorists and you will live
in peace and security.”
4

36. The Israel forces are operating in the area of
south-east Lebanon, east of the Hasbani River, in
which irregular forces engaged in terror warfare against
Israd are concentrated. The purpose of the action is
to comb the area for terrorist squads, and Israel defence
forces will leave the area on completion of their mission .

ese Parliament, the Minister of the Interior, Kamal
Jumblatt, said, on 6 January 1970:
“A year and a half ago, we knew that fedayeen
activities would be transferred to the south of Lebanon because it borders on Upper Galilee and Israel
has fortified its border on the Jordan River, making
it impossible for the raiders to cross. As a matter
of fact fedayeen did enter Lebanon; they are there
and cannot be ignored. Their presence is an inescapable reality which must be taken into account.”
As early as 8 August 1969, Prime Minister Karameh
declared: “The Government of Lebanon must assume
its share of responsibility for the activities of the commandos”,

37. The Lebanese Government and its representative
at the Security Council this morning have tried to
whitewash aggression and to shift responsibility from
the attacker to the defender. It is a fact, however,
that Lebanon, not Israel, has proclaimed that warfare
must continue, It is a fact that Lebanon, not Israel,
has set aside large areas as bases from which incessant
aggression is carried on. It is a fact that Lebanon
not Israel, has concluded special agreements to promote terrorist warfare against its neighbour. It is a
fact that Israeli, not Lebanese, towns and villages are
being attacked daily, that Israeli, not Lebanese, citizens are under constant threat of murder.

41. The world, of course, knows of the role played
by other Arab Governments, and‘inparticular
by Syria,
in turning Lebanon into a base of aggression against
Israel. The world knows that the irregular forces
engaged in terrorist operations, which have established
themselves on Lebanese soil, originate from Syria. It
is an established fact that Syrian regular army officers
are in command of some of these forces. Moreover,
the Syrian Government participates in their training,
financing and operational planning. No wonder, therefore, that the Syrian armed forces tried this morning
to interfere with Israel’s defence action directed against
the terror organizations. Syria’s role does not, however, absolve Lebanon from its duty to observe the
cease-fire and to maintain tranquillity on its borders.

38. The attitude of the Government of Lebanon is
in flagrant violation of the cease-fire established by
the Security Council and of the Charter of the United
Nations. Under the cease-fire and the Charter, the
Government
of Lebanon bears full responsibility for
armed attacks carried out from its territory against
Israel-whether
by regular or irregular forces. This
responsibility
is evident, in particular, in the light of
the official agreements between the Government of
Lebanon and the regular forces operating against Israel
from Lebanese territory.

42. In the course of this statement I have just received
an urgent communique
issued by an Israel army
spokesman. The operation has now been concluded
and our forces are deploying to leave the area. The
operation was carried out according to plan. After the
six villages had been surrounded, a curfew was
imposed and arrangements were made to identify terrorists and to investigate their activities. Seven Israeli
soldiers were slightly wounded. A detailed statement
of the entire operation will be issued later this evening.

39. The Lebanese Government has tried to justify
aggrr ssion against Israel by various specious claims.
No yret ext whatever can justify such aggression. Especially baseless is the argument that its continuation
is inevitable because of the presence of Palestinian
refugees in Lebanon. The Palestinian refugee problem
was created by the invasion of Israel in 1948 by Arab
States, including Lebanon. This problem has remained
unsolved because the Arab Governments, among them
that of Lebanon, have persistently for over twenty
years refused to achieve an equitable and humane solution of the question, keeping in mind international
experiences in settling refugee problems. The refugees
have lived in Lebanon for more than two decades.
During most of this time the Israel-Lebanese frontier
has remained
peaceful because the Lebanese
authorities desired it to be so. Today it is not peaceful
because the Lebanese authorities have changed their
policy and openly permit armed attacks against Israel
from Lebanese territory. It is this change in Lebanon’s
policy, which occurred recently, that is responsible
for the present violence on the cease-fire line and not
the refugee question dating back to 1948, which, as
the Lebanese Government has demonstrated in the
past, does not prevent the maintenance of tranquillity
on the frontier.

43. Experience has shown that war does not pay,
that war brings grief and suffering to both sides. Experience has shown that Israel will not acquiesce in the
continuation of war against its people, that it will defend
itself, that it will not falter under the impact of aggression in its efforts to achieve peace and security. It
is high time to end the war. It is high time to terminate
a conflict which has plagued the Middle East for
twenty-two years and to resolve the differences
between the parties, One does not do that, however,
by pursuing war, as the Arab States are doing. One
does not do it by acrimonious debates in the Security
Council or by demanding the adoption of one-sided
resolutions, The present conflict will be resolved when
all the parties to it restore the cease-fire and engage
in negotiations for peace. Israel is ready for this and
awaits an indication that Lebanon and the other Arab
States are also ready.

40. In fact, the Government of Lebanon is fully aware
of its responsibility for the acts of aggression committed
from its territory against Israel. Speaking in the Leban-

44. Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Without prejudice to my right to speak on
a later occasion to set forth the views of my delegation,
5

has requested that this proposal
immediately at this meeting.

I must say that there is-above and beyond any other
considerations brought forward by the parties in this
debate--one fact which, in the Opinion’ of mY
delegation, is of paramount importance: the military
invasion of Lebanon by Israeli armed forces.
45.

be put to the vote

51. First of all, I should like to consult the Council
to determine if anyone wishes to speak on this subject;
otherwise I shall put the proposal to the vote
immediately.

The Council will have amp1.eopportunity to adopt

the appropriate measures and to form an opinion about

52. The representative
floor.

the events that have occurred, but the contimation
of this invasion while we are meeting here cannot be
condoned no matter how many promises are made that
there will be an immediate withdrawal, for this invasion
is in flagrant violation of the Charter.

53. Mr. TOMEH

of Israel has asked for the

(Syria): Point of order.

54. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Frmdt):
I call on the representative of Syria on a point of order.

46. In the circumstances, my delegation wishes at
this meeting of the Council to put forward the following
draft resolution? for approval. We trust that it will be
distributed to’ members of the Council very shortly.
I shall now read it out:

55. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): When the representfltive
of Spain submitted his draft resolution it was on an
immediate and urgent basis. Hence we are engaged
right now in the procedural process of the debate in
the Security Council. There are two points. First, this
was put forward by the representative of Spain as an
urgent demand, and secondly, it is now a procedural
matter, so that a non-member of the Security Council
has no right to take the floor at this particular time.

“The Security Council
“De17zands
the immediate withdrawal of all Israeli
armed forces from Lebanese territory.”

It is the desire of my delegation that this draft resolution
be put to the vote as soon as it is in the hands of
all the representatives. We believe that matters have
reached a very serious pass, and we do not feel that
it is possible for the Council simply to remain indifferent to events which the parties have recognized as
having actually occurred.

56. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntiort fiorn F~-ench 1:
The Council knows that in the case of a vote the representative of a country which is not a member of
the Security Council cannot take part in the vote. But
this is a debate which has not been closed and before
proceeding to the proposal made on the actual substance of the matter, the participants in the debate
may speak. I therefore think that we should hear the
representative of Israel and then immediately
proceed
to the vote.

47. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): I have asked to speak
at this rather early stage in the debate in order to second
formally the draft resolution which has just been presented by the representative of Spain,

57. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I wish to speak on a point
of order, without going into the substance of the matter
for the present. The situation at this moment is that
the representative of Spain has submitted an urgent
proposal intended to halt the aggressor. It is quite clear
from the information given by the Secretary-General
and from the statement made by the representative
OFIsrael that the aggressor has perpetrated an attack.
To open a discussion will be to the advantage of the
aggressor. There will be a prolonged debate; after his
statement there will be one by the representative
of
Lebanon, then by the representative of the Arab
countries and finally by each member of the Security
Council-for
they all have statements prepared.

<. My delegation has listened with great interest to
2 what the parties directly concerned in this conflict have
had to say in the statements they made a few minutes
ago.

(translated from Russintz):

49. The reports emanating from the Israeli-Lebanese
border would indicate that the situation is extremely
grave. We believe that the Security Council should
do something to bring an immediate end to the senseless
10s~ of life which is currently taking place, We believe
further that this is an interim and humanitarian draft
resolution which does not in any way prejudice our
position or that of other delegations with regard to
the substantive item on our agenda. We therefore trust
that the members of this Council will be able to pronounce themselves unanimously on this draft resolution with a view to bringing to an end the ugly situation
which has developed on the Israeli-Lebanese frontier,

58. We are faced with a problem: whether to involve
the Security Council in an endless discussion and permit the aggressor to continue his bloody deeds, or to
vote forthwith on the Spanish draft resolution and then
continue the discussion.

50. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fro/n ~relzch):
The Council has heard the proposal of the Permanent
Representative of Spain, supported by the representative of Zambia. It is an interim proposal which in no
way prejudges the discussion and the continuation of
the debate. The Permanent Representative of Spain
’ Subsequelltlycirculatedasdocument S/9800.

59% I feel that, in view of the realities of the situation,
it would be more sensible and more expedient to vote
on the draft resolution before resuming our discussion.
That procedure would be sensible and would thwart
the designs of the aggressor, who hopes to employ
6

L

obstructionist

tactics in the Council in order to prolong

have to add to that? It is on the basis of the explanations
we have heard from Lebanon and Israel that the representative of Spain has submitted his proposal. Consequently, there is no justification for continuing the
discussion.

the debate and gain time as he did at the time of the

aggression perpetrated against the United Arab Republic. Oti that occasion, Israeli troops advanced 60-100
kilometres towards the Suez Canal in spite of the fact
that the Security Council had adopted a resolution calling on the aggressor to halt at a great distance from
the Canal. The same situation now exists.

66. As far as a formal proposal is concerned, as I
understand it the representative of Spain made a formal
proposal that the Council should proceed immediately
to a vote. I support this proposal and I,, for my prart,
am also making a proposal for an, immediate vote on
the draft resolution.

60. The Soviet delegation therefore requests you, Mr.
President, to take this situation into account and proceed immediately
to a vote.
61. Mr. YOST (United States of America): If the
members of the Council so desire, we are of course
ready to proceed rapidly to a vote on this draft
resolution. I wish, however, to concur in your ruling,
Mr. President, that the debate has not been terminated
and that a member of the Council or a representative
participating
in our debate therefore has every right
to be heard before the vote if he so wishes.

67. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
In the circumstances I would ask the representative
of Spain whether he insists that the Council proceed
immediately to vote on his proposal.
68. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (interpretation
jkm
Spnnish): Mr. President, my delegation will not assume
the presidency of the Security Council until next
October, and we certainly do not want to usurp your
functions.

62. This is clearly not a procedural but a substantive
draft resolution, and therefore comment upon it by
non-members is entirely appropriate. I would suggest
that the most expeditious way of dealing with this matter is to permit the representative of Israel to make
whatever statement he wishes and then to proceed to
the vote. I think the most effective way of delaying
proceedings would be to engage in a prolonged procedural debate on whether he has the right to speak
or not.

69. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I think that
we have an important decision to take. We certainly
have an important draft resolution before us. All of
us would agree that that draft resolution must be taken
urgently and there must be no undue delay, because
by its nature it requires immediate consideration. So
I believe that we would all of us around this table
wish to proceed without undue delay to vote upon
the draft resolution which has been put before us.

63. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): After the statement of the
representative of the United States it becomes quite
clear who wishes to prolong the debate and who wishes
to allow innocent civilians in Lebanon to be killed at
this moment and to allow the sophistry of the representative of Israel in coming to speak here, This draft
resolution has been submitted as an urgent one, to
stop the killing of civilians, and now the representative
of theunited States, an accomplice in the crime, wishes
to give the right to his prot&gC and lackey to prolong
the debate and speak nonsense.

70. I would also most earnestly suggest to the Council
that if we have prevented the Ambassador of Israel
from speaking on the draft resolution-and
I imagined
he would speak with die regard to the urgency of the
matter-and then proceed to the draft resolutioq, whatever conclusion we come to will not have the same
force as it would have if we had heard him.
71. I have been in the same position as you are now,
Sir, and I consider that it is in the good reputation
of this Council that we should always be prepared to
hear within reason the parties immediately concerned
before we take a decision. I believe that it is the right
action to permit the Ambassador of Israel to be heard
and then to proceed-I hope without undue delay-to
the vote on the draft resolution before US. I would
defend that action on a principle which is a very sound
principle and which we must preserve in this Council,
I should have thought, as much as anywhere else-the
principle of the right of free speech on a matter which
is of direct concern to the party who wishes to speak
to us.

64. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpretatio,l fr-om French):
I think everyone here agrees on the need to proceed
urgently to a vote on the draft resolution. However,
several proposals have been made, and I should like
to ask the representative of the Soviet Union whethe]
he is making a formal proposal that the Council should
immediately
proceed to vote on the draft resolution
submitted by Spain. If he is making a formal proposal,
I will put his proposal to the vote, and then, if it is
adopted, we shall proceed immediately to vote on the
draft resolution submitted by the representative of
Spain.

72. The PRESIDENT
(interpvetatiorz fiorn French):
I would draw the attention of the Council to the fact
that we are prolonging the discussion. However, the
Ambassador of Zambia has asked to speak. I call on
him.

65. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(trajzslatedfiom
R~lssiaiz): First of all, I see no validity
in the United States representative’s contention that
the representative of Israel should be given the floor.
The representative of Israel has already made a statement here in which he set forth in detail the position
of his Government and his delegation. What can he

73. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): When I spoke earlier
it was not my intention to try to prolong the debate,
7

but it would seem that I have in the Drocess become
the victim of circumstances. I do noi wish to speak
in respect of whether or not the representative of Israel
should be given an opportunity to speak before we
proceed to this rather urgent draft resolution which
has been submitted by the Ambassador of Spain and
formally seconded by my delegation. I wish only to
seek some clarification concerning the rules of procedure. Rule 30 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Sec.urity Council states:
“If a representative raises a point of order, the
President shall immediately state his ruling. If it is
challenged, the President shall submit his ruling to
the Security Council for immediate decision and it
shall stand unless overruled.”

The proposal was not adopted, having failed to
obtain the affirmative votes of nine members.
78. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of Israel and I ask him
to be extremely brief.
79. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): I shall indeed be very
brief. I should like simply to refer to the draft resolution
proposed by the representative of Spain, to point out
that in submitting it the representative of Spain referred
to the Charter and found it appropriate to describe
Israel’s action against continued aggression as a violation of the Charter, without, however, referring to the
warfare which is being waged against Israel in flagrant
breach of the Charter.

74, The position as I understand it is this. The representative of Israel asked to speak. The President
was just about to call on him when a point of order
was raised by the Ambassador of Syria. The President
stated his ruling. The ruling was subsequently challenged. Therefore, I would have thought that under
the circumstances the best thing would have been to
submit this entire proposal to the Security Council as
a whole in order to make a decision,

80. I already emphasized in my statement this morning that no contribution to peace in the Middle East
can be made by the adoption of one-sided resolutions.
I also informed the Council that the Israel action has
been terminated and that Israel is already in the process
of withdrawing its forces from Lebanese territory.
81. Now, in these circumstances the draft resolution
proposed by the representative of Spain is clearly
divorced from reality. It would be unfortunate if the
Council should now vote on and adopt a draft resolution
marked not only by an absence of equity but also by
a refusal to take cognizance of the plain facts of the
situation.

75. The PRESIDENT
(interpretafion from Frelzch):
I must reply immediately .that that is precisely the
procedure which I was following. The representative
of Israel was going to speak. There was a point of
order raised, and that is why I asked the Council
whether it considered that we should immediately proceed to the vote or whether we should allow the representative of Israel to speak. But no one requested
that thei-e be a formal vote on the problem of whether
or not we should proceed immediately
to the vote.
In the circumstances, I call now on the representative
of Syria who had asked to be allowed to speak previousl y .

82. If this draft resolution were to be adopted, the
Security Council would have achieved a singular
accomplishment
which even alchemists hatie never
aspired to: turning the past into the future.
83. Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation
fiorn
Spanish): My delegation wishes to remind the representative of Israel that when we introduced our draft
resolution we said that this Council would have “ample
opportunity
to adopt the appropriate measures and
form an opinion on the events”. As you correctly
pointed out, Mr. President, this is a purely interim
measure, in view of the seriousness of the events.

76. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The representative of the
Soviet Union made a formal proposal to the effect that
we should proceed to the vote immediately. I second
that motion.

84. For this reason, my delegation, above and beyond
any other consideration, and so that there can be no
possible
misunderstanding,
introduced
this draft
resolution, because the action taken by Israel, in the
opinion of my delegation, runs counter to Article 2,
paragraph 4 of the Charter, which provides that:
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Purposes of the United Nations.”

77. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
That is precisely what I asked just now. Now that
there is a formal proposal to proceed immediately
to
the vote, I shall put that proposal to the vote,
A vote was taken by Show of hands.
In favour: Burundi, Finland, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against: United Kingdom of Great Britain
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
China,
Nicaragua, Spain.

Colombia,

France,

and

85. Because of this Article, which leaves no room
for doubt, my delegation submitted its draft resolution,
Whatever other events are discussed will be studied
and considered, and the Council will take action on
them, after, the vote on the draft resolution which mY
delegation had the honour of introducing.

Nepal,

The result of the vote ‘was 7 in favour, 2 against,
with 6 abstentions.
8

86. May I repeat: we introduced that draft resolution
in view of the fact that a principle had been violated,
without prejudice to whatever further action the Security Council may wish to take in determining responsibilities for other matters. My delegation was of the
view that the Council cannot remain inactive when
so many lives are at stake and when acts of aggression
have been committed in violation of a sacred principle
of the Charter.

procedural motion has shown who stands where, who
is on whose side, who is defending the victim of aggression and who is giving moral, political and financial
support to the aggressor and supplying him with arms
and aircraft. This is a tangible demonstration of the
realities of the present-day world and of the interplay
of forces in the Security Council.
93. If the Anglo-Saxon team votes against the draft
resolution submitted by Spain and supported by the
Arab delegations, it will give the whole world a clear
picture of its position, of the position of the two
countries which it represents here in the Security
Council.

87. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorz fi’oln French):
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I call
on the Permanent Representative of Lebanon.
88. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I do not want to delay
the debate while there are Lebanese lives being victimized by Israeli aggression-while
our territory is
occupied. But1 was astonished to hear another concoction from the Israeli representative, reporting that his
military forces are being evacuated from Lebanon after
having accomplished an investigatory mission, as the
self-appointed gendc~mze of peace in the Middle East
has the right to do.

94. Accordingly, we should take an immediate vote
on this substantive draft resolution lest we fall in with
the aggressor’s plans and permit him to entrench himself in the territory which he has seized. The Israeli
representative has told us stories about troops leaving.
Where are they going? They are going into Lebanese
territory, and it is the Security Council’s responsibility
to vote immediately on the draft resolution demanding
‘Israel’s withdrawal from the territory of the victim of
aggression.

89. We know the acts of aggression of Israel; we know
the lies of its military chiefs; we know it has occupied
the territories of three Arab States for nearly three
years now; and I am astonished that we still find some
members of the Council ready to listen to these concoctions from the representative of Israel.

95. The PRESIDENT
(inter’yretntion from French):
The representative of Israel has asked to speak and
I now call on him.
96. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): I should like to submit
respectfully to members of the Security Council that
following the cue of Arab-Soviet propaganda will bring
us nowhere. We still remember how the Soviet Union
by false propaganda reports in May 1967 prodded the
Arab States to aggression against Israel. Apparently
the Soviet representative today is repeating the same
tactics.

90. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
before proceeding to the vote, I call in turn on the
two remaining speakers whose names are on my list.
T call on the representative of the United States.
91. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I repeat
that I do not want to delay our action, but I must
confess that I am a little concerned about the relevance
of the draft resolution. The representative of Israel
has just said that the Israeli armed forces are in the
process of withdrawing from Lebanese territory. I
would suggest for the consideration of the sponsor of
this draft resolution and of the Council that the draft
resolution would be strengthened and made, I believe,
more relevant to the situation as it now exists if there
were added to it the phrase “and an immediate cessation of allmilitary
operations in the area”. That would,
I suggest, facilitate and expedite the withdrawal, which
is what we have in mind, and bring to an end all military
operations in the area.
92.

97, The PRESIDENT
(interpuetafion fiojn French):
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on
a point of order.
98. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated j?om Russian): We are discussing a draft
resolution, not the policy of the Soviet Union. I protest
against these slanderous attacks by the representative
of Israel, who is in the habit of making such attacks
and who dreams at night of how to seize every opportunity to subject the Soviet Union to the usual dose
of slander. I propose that we should proceed to a vote
on the draft resolution.

Mr.‘MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Azlssian): The Security Council and
aI1 those present here have for the second time witnessed the scandalous activites of the Anglo-Saxon
team. Not so long ago, this pair used its double veto
to prevent the adoption of a draft resolution submitted
by the Africati and Asian delegations condemning
racism in Southern Rhodesia. Now attempts are being
made to block the adoptidn of a draft resolution
directed against the aggressor Israel, which is being
defended and protected by the United States, supported by the United Kingdom. Even the vote on the

99. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion .i%om French):
I call on the representative of Israel and would request
him to conclude his statement as soon as possible.

~frrrnsfafed.fkom

100. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): As for Arab propaganda
and the distortion of facts by Arab Governments and
Arab representatives, we have been given a taste of
that today. The representative of Lebanon has based
his entire argumentation
on the fact that the Israeli
armed forces are engaged in an encounter against the
Lebanese army, that Israeli armed forces are in fact
9

attacking the Lebanese army. I should like to deny
most unequivocally that particular distortion of the
truth. There has been no encounter whatever between
the Lebanese and Israeli forces. The Israeli action this
morning is directed solely against the terrorist bases
imposed on Lebanon against Lebanese interests under
protest from a great number of Lebanese leaders. I
donot believe that the Security Council should proceed
to take any action whatever before clarifying those
facts positively and definitively.

107. Mr. YOST (United States of America): The representative of the Soviet Union seems to be determined
to delay the vote on this draft resolution by broadening
the subject to include matters which are being dealt
with outside. We shall comment fully during our subsequent debate in regard to the basic issues involved
in the conflict in the Middle East and the role which
the four Powers have been playing in endeavouring
to bring about the implementation
of resolution 242
(1967).

101. The PRESIDENT
(i/?tcrp,.etcrriorz~om French):
I shall give the floor immediately to the representatives
of Finland and the United Kingdom, after which we
shall proceed to the vote.

108. I should like to assure the Council immediately,
however, in the light of the totally unjustified statement
of the representative of the Soviet Union, that my
Government has been pursuing with the greatest earnestness and persistence its efforts to bring about the
full implementation
of that resolution. And if those
efforts have been thwarted, it is not the responsibility
of the United States Government.

102. Mr, JAKOBSON
(Finland): I wish to make a
brief explanation of vote. My delegation has always
upheld the principle that all parties to a dispute must
be heard before a decision is taken. In this case this
was done. Both the representative of Lebanon and
the representative of Israel have been heard and the
draft resolution submitted by Spain arose from those
two statements as an urgent and interim measure. It
was submitted on the explicit understanding that the
debate would then continue.

109. The PRESIDENT
(interpretutionfi’orn
French):
We shall immediately
proceed to the vote. There is
a proposal from the delegation of Spain and an amendment from the delegation of the United States. In
accordance with rule 36 of the rules of procedure, I
shall put the amendment of the United States delegation
to the vote first. I would remind members that it consists in adding to the Spanish proposal the following
words: “and an immediate cessation of all military operations in the area”.

103. In the course of the debate all the members of
the Council as well as the representatives invited to
participate will have every opportunity to state theil
views. It was for that reason that my delegation considered it logical that we should proceed to the vote
on the draft resolution first and then continue the
debate.

110. I call on the representative
of order.

of Syria on a point

111. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Did the representative of
the United States propose his amendment formally?
Is this a formal proposition by the representative of
the United States?

104. Accordingly, while there is obviously incomplete information from the area from independent
sources, as was stated by the Secretary-General at the
beginning of this meeting, my delegation believes that
the Security Council should proceed without further
delay to vote on the draft resolution.

112. Mr. YOST (United
formal proposal.

States of America):

It is a

113. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tivnshted fro/n Russia):
I formally propose an
amendment to the United States amendment. Instead
of “immediate
cease-fire”
we would propose
“immediate stopping of aggression and withdrawal”.
Instead of the word “cease-fire” we would porpose
“stopping of aggression”.

10.5. Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom): I merely
wish to say with reference to the comments made by
the Ambassador of the Soviet Union that if it is an
Anglo-Saxon principle to preserve the rights of free
speech, and if it is an Anglo-Saxon principle to give
to anyone accused the right to reply, then it is a principle not to be ashamed of but a principle to be proud
of, and it would be well if that principle
could be
imported into the,Soviet Union.

114. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I am
afraid that the representative of the Soviet Union has
not been listening to our proceedings very carefully.
We did not use the word “cease-fire”, The amendment
I suggested was to add to the Spanish draft resolution
the words “and an immediate cessation of all military
operations in the area”. I am curious to know whether
the representative of the Soviet Union is opposed to
the cessation of all military operations in the area.

106. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tr-n,7s/atedfiorn Russicrn): I do not intend to prolong the debate; I merely wish to give the members
of the Security Council some information, For more
than a year the position jointly adopted by this duo
has prevented an agreement from being reached in the
intensive consultations regarding the implementation
of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). Their policy
of protecting the aggressor and violating the fundamental rights of the victims of aggression is impeding a
political settlement in the Middle East and exacerbating
the situation.

115. Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation
from
Spanish): When my delegation introduced its draft
resolution, we were prompted by the urgency of the
matter. The fact that Israeli armed forces have invaded
10

Leb anon has not been questioned. May I advise those
wishing to include in the draft resolution concepts
&hich have not been duly considered by the Council
!’ introduce any such amendments to the draft resolu[*On which the Council will be adopting after due con‘@ration
of the whole question.

to take a vote on the amendment, and we shall, of
course, accept the judgement of the Council.

‘16.
My deleg ation, as I say, has been prompted by
the Urgency of the situation, and we have been thinking
in terms of adopting a provisional measure that will
put an end to this invasion. If we start adding amendments now, without there being a sufficient debate
lhereon, I believe that we will not achieve the purpose
that we had in mind when we introduced our draft
reWlution.
I would appeal, then, to members of the
Council to withdraw any draft amendments they have
Submitted to the draft resolution that we had the honour
of introducing.

126. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translatedfiom Russian): I request the United
States representative to read out the exact wording
of his amendment once again..

12.5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom French):
In the circumstances, I shall put to the vote the amendment of the United States.

127. Mr. YOST (United States of America): My
amendment would propose to add to the language submitted by the representative of Spain the following
words: “and an immediate cessation of all military operations in the area”.
128. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translatedfiom Russian): I propose the following
amendment td the United States amendment: “and
stopping of lsraeli aggression against Lebanon”.

117. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom
French):
As the representative of FRANCE, and not as President of the Security Council, I should like to associate
myself with the appeal made by the representative of
SPain that we should vote without further delay on
the draft resolution.

129. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom French):
In accordance with rule 36 of the rules of procedure
of the Security Council, I shall first of all put to the
vote the sub-amendment of the Soviet Union.

118. Npw, resuming my functions as PRESIDENT,
1 give the floor to the representative of the Soviet
Union.
119.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubRussian): I will not take the floor
because you have already said what I wanted to say.
Thank you.

In favour: Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

120.

Abstaining: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland,
France, Nepal, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Zambia.

lics) (taanslatedfiom

Against: None.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
the representative of the United States maintain
the amendment that he has proposed?

Does

121. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Yes, Mr.
President. It seems to me that this is entirely consistent
with the intent of the representative of Spain and, as
I said in presenting this amendment, would strengthen
the draft resolution and bring about more expeditiously
the ends that he has in mind. I would hope, therefore,
that it might be formally acted upon.

The result of the vote was3 in favour, none against,
with 12 abstentions.
The sub-amendment was not adopted, having failed
to obtain th.e affirmative votes of nine menzbers.

130. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom French):
I now put the United States amendment to the vote.

122. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom French):
Does the representative of the Soviet Union maintain
the amendment he has submitted to the United States
amendment?

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: United Kingdom of Great Britain
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubRussian): I shared your view and
the wish of the Spanish representative that we should
proceed immediately
to a vote without amendments
of any kind. If we begin submitting amendments, there
will be more amendments. I therefore ask you to appeal
to the United States representative not to press his
amendment, so that we may vote on the draft resolution
in the form in which it was submitted by the Spanish
delegation.

The result of the vote was 2 in favour, none against,
with 13 abstentions.

Mr. YOST (United States of America): I think
it will not delay us more than a few moments

The amendment was not adopted, having failed to
obtain the affirmative votes qf nine members.

123.

Mr. MALIK

and

lics) Itranslatedfiom

124.
that

Against: None.
Abstaining: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland,
France, Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Zambia.

11

accordance with Article 40 of the Charter, which reads
as follows:

131. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I now put to the vote the draft resolution submitted
by Spain.

“In order to prevent an aggravation of the
situation, the Security Council may, before making
the recommendations or deciding upon the measures
provided for in Article 39, call upon the parties concerned to comply with such provisional measures
as it deems necessary or desirable. Such provisional
measures shall be without prejudice to the rights,
claims, or position of the parties concerned. The
Security Council shall duly take account of failure
to comply with such provisional measures.”

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution

was adopted unnrzimously.3

132. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfvom
French):
I call on the representative of Syria, who has expressed
the wish to speak.
133. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): My delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by Spain in

The meeting rose ‘at I .45 p.m.

3 See resolution 279 (1970).

12

HGW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nalionr
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
q nd distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Sectlon,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

LtNlES

Les publications
der Notions
Unier
sent en vcnte
dons
10s libroiries
et ICI agences
dCpositairer
du monde cntitr.
Informez-vour
aupr&s de votre libroirie
ou odressez.vous
6:
Notions
Unfes, Section
der venter,
New York ou Geniva.
HAH

IlOnY’iMTb

HSAAHHIl

OPrAHM3AQHH

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publlceeioner
de 10s Noeioner
Unidas ert6n
en todas porter
del mundo.
Conrulte
o su librara
Yentas, Nuevo York o Gincbro.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

06bEAllHEHHblX

HAYHtl

UNIDAS

en vcnto en librerias
o dirfjose
a: N&ones

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

y cosos distribuidaas
Unidor,
Secci6n

de

8X5-June

1973~-1.050
