VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3187 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973 and 3391 (XXX)
of 19 November 1975,
Taking note of resolutions 17 and 24 adopted by the
Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to
19 August 1976,19
Convinced that the promotion of national culture
enhances a people's ability to understand the culture
and civilization of other peoples and thus has a most
favourable impact on international co-operation,
Convinced also that the protection by all means of
national culture and heritage is an integral part of the
process of preservation and future development of cultural values,
1. Invites all Member States to sign and ratify the
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property,20 adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization on 14 November 1970;
2. Calls upon all Member States to take all necessary steps to prevent, on their territories, any illicit
traffic in works of art coming from any other country,
especially from territories which were or are under colonial or foreign domination and occupation;
3. Affirms that the restitution to a country of its
objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts,
documents and any other cultural or artistic treasures
constitutes a step forward towards the strengthening of
international co-operation and the preservation and
future development of cultural values.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/41.

Second World Black and African Festival
of Arts and Culture

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Referring to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 21 in particular to article 15,
which reaffirms the right of everyone to participate in
the preservation and development of culture,
Conscious of the need for agreement on a system
of values based on justice, equality, freedom and fellowship and on the recognition of the unity of mankind
with all its diverse peoples, races and cultures,
Convinced that contacts and exchanges between
different cultures on the basis of the equality and the
sovereignty of States can make a genuine contribution
to the enrichment of cultural values on a national,
regional and world-wide scale,
Conscious that the recognition of cultural identity
as an integral part of the mobilization of society is an
essential factor in the achievement and preservation
of independence, national sovereignty and development,
Convinced that the forthcoming Second World Black
and African Festival of Arts and Culture will contribute
19 See A/31/197, annex

IV.

. 2? United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organ-

JZahon, Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session,
vol. I, Resolutions, pp. 135-141.
21 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

97

immensely to the promotion of international co-operation and understanding,
l. Commends the efforts made thus far by the international community, including international organizations and the International Festival Committee, in
the preparations for the Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture;
2. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by
Nigeria in its capacity as host country for the Festival;
3. Appeals to all interested and concerned countries
to make all possible efforts at the national and international levels towards ensuring the success of the
Festival.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/77.

Implementation of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it reaffirmed its resolve to
achieve the total and unconditional elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Reaffirming that the policies of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid are flagrant violations of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
constitute serious violations of the obligations of Member States under the Charter,
Hearing in mind the vital importance of establishing
a new international economic order based on justice
and equality,
Noting that the realization of the national independence of the People's Republic of Angola and the
courageous action of the People's Republic of Mozambique in applying fully the United Nations system
of sanctions against the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia have contributed to the growing isolation of the
racist regime in South Africa,
Realizing the serious threat to international peace
and security resulting from the continued defiance by
the racist regimes in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia of the resolutions and the will of the international
community in relation to the abhorrent policies of apartheid and racial discrimination, the continued illegal
occupation of Namibia and the denial of the right of
peoples to self-determination,
Convinced that the Programme for the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination22
is a major undertaking in the fight against racial discrimination which deserves the full support of all Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations,
l. Condemns the intolerable conditions which continue to prevail in southern Africa and elsewhere, including the denial of the right to self-determination and
the inhumane and odious application of apartheid and
racial discrimination;
2. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of oppressed peoples to liberate themselves
from racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alien domination;
22 Resolution

3057 (XXVIII), annex.
