Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2771 (XXVI). World social situation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2436 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 on the world social situation and 2542
(XXIV) of 11 December 1969 containing the Declaration on Social Progress and Development,
Bearing in mind the goals and objectives embodied
in the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, contained
in its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Noting with appreciation the 1970 Report on the
World Social Situation,8
Deeply concerned that the world social situation has
continued to deteriorate, that the persistence of poverty,
une~ployment, hunger, disease, illiteracy, inadequate
housing and uncontrolled growth of population in certain parts of the world has acquired new dimensions
and that many causes of the growing disparities between
the developed and developing countries hinder the advancement of the developing countries,
1. Endorses the provisions of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1581 B (L) of 21 May 1971;
2. Reaffirms the urgency of taking effective measures aimed at halting the deterioration of the world
social situation and promoting social progress and
development;
3. Emphasizes the pressing need to raise levels of
living in the developing countries, to reduce disparities
between developed and developing countries and within
countries, to accelerate economic and social reforms,
and for all countries to pursue progressive and well
co-ordinated policies for the promotion of economic
and social progress and development throughout the
world;
4. Emphasizes further that colonialism, racial discrimination, apartheid, alien domination, foreign occupation, aggressive wars and other policies of oppression and exploitation, and the violation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms and economic exploitation by foreign monopolies constitute principal
obstacles to social progress and development in many
parts of the world and that urgent attention is required,
particularly for the amelioration of the social situation
of the peoples living in those parts of the world;
5. Stresses that the primary responsibility for the
development of developing countries rests upon thems~lves, but that th_eir own own efforts, however great,
will not be sufficient to enable them to achieve the
desired development goals as expeditiously as they
must, unless they are assisted through increased financial resources and more favourable economic and
c<?mmercial policies on the part of the developed countnes;
6. Urges Governments of developed countries to
fulfil their obligation to implement the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, and in particular to attain the
targets for trade, financial resources and the provisions
for the transfer of science and technology for the
development of developing countries embodied in the
Strategy-and where possible to exceed those targetswhich is essential to the amelioration of the world
social situation;
8 Jbid.

77

7. Reaffirms the inherent rights of all peoples and
the permanent sovereignty of all countries, particularly
of developing countries, over their natural resources,
calls upon Governments and international organizations concerned to refrain from any action which may
detract from the exercise by other States of permanent
sovereignty over their natural resources and emphasizes
the importance for the developing countries of coordinating their actions within economic subregional,
regional and continental organizations so as to derive
the maximum benefits from their natural resources;
8. Draws the attention of all States and the United
Nations bodies and specialized agencies concerned to
the following conclusions and recommendations
based upon the consideration of the 1970 Report on
the World Social Situation:
(a) The improvement of social conditions in many
parts of the world has become, as never before,
dependent upon the improvement of international
political and economic relations. The social situation
of the peoples under colonial and alien domination,
or under foreign occupation, is a source of great
concern. Their liberation is a prerequisite for the
improvement of their social conditions.
( b) A substantial rise in the incomes of the developing countries, required for the reduction of inequality between developed and developing countries, presupposes, among other things, a positive
approach by the developed countries to the questions
of trade and aid; the resources necessary for the
attainment of this objective could be achieved, among
other means, through a drastic reduction in military
expenditures, leading finally to general and complete
disarmament under effective international control as
well as through the exploitation of the resources of
the sea-bed and the ocean floor beyond national
jurisdiction for the benefit of all mankind, taking
into account the special needs and interests of the
developing countries, as referred to in General
Assembly resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17 December
1970.
( c) Economic growth has generally been accompanied by a considerable widening of disparities in
the distribution of income, wealth and services.
Effective measures for promoting economic growth
with social justice should receive the highest priority.
Social progress will depend, to a very large extent,
upon the early and vigorous implementation of a
wide range of structural and institutional reforms,
such as agrarian reforms, reforms aimed at securing
just distribution of national wealth and income, and
s1;1ch programmes_ as measures for family planning
aimed at controllmg the rate of population growth
in countries which consider that that rate hampers
their development.
(d) The growth of unemployment and under~mploy~~nt, par~icularly in t~e developing countries,
1s acqumng senous proportions. Rapid expansion
of e~ployment oi::po~tunities should be regarded as
an important ob_Jective of dev~lopment planning.
J:ar greater attention should be given to the applicat10n of _labour inten_s~ve techniques for the purpose
of drawing under-utilized Jabour in rural and urban
areas into extensive programmes of development.
( e) The implementation of the International Developm~nt .Strategy in all its interrelated aspects is
an obligation of both developed and developing
countries. A substantial improvement in the level

78

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

of living of the masses in developing countries should
be a central objective of the Second United Nations
Development Decade. Improvement in the quality
and distribution of social services, particularly in
the fields of education, health, agriculture, housing,
social welfare and social defence, should be recognized as an integral part of the over-all development
effort.
(f) Increased utilization of science and technology will greatly help social progress and development. Equally important is its equitable sharing by
the developed and developing countries. The Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development should study the im~lementation of the provisions of the present resolution
and of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development on the question of science and technology
in relation to social development.
(g) The unfavourable terms of trade, including
the instability of prices of primary commodities
which constitute the bulk of exports of many developing countries, are undermining the efforts of these
countries to improve their social situation. These
terms have been further aggravated by the recent
disquieting developments in international economic
relations and, in particular, by the instability of the
international monetary system. The Economic and
Social Council, in its consideration of the monetary
and financial situation, should pay special attention
to the influence of the current crisis on social progress in different countries, particularly in developing
countries, and mention it in its report to the General
Assembly.
(h) The outflow of qualified personnel from developing countries to developed countries seriously
hampers economic and social development in developing countries.
(i) Broad popular participation, not only in the
implementation of development programmes but also
in the formulation of policies and plans and other
forms of decision-making, should be regarded as
both an objective and a means of development.
(j) Due attention should be paid to the needs
and aspirations of the younger generation. Effective
policy measures designed to involve fully the
younger generation in the promotion of social progress and development should be undertaken.
(k) Adequate measures should be taken to remove discriminatory practices against women in all
spheres. Greater attention should be paid to women's education, vocational training and guidance so
as to ensure their full integration and participation
in all aspects of economic and social life.
( l) Adequate attention should be given to multidisciplinary community services in the field of family
and child welfare, particularly in situations of rapid
urbanization and social change affecting family
levels of living and especially the welfare of preschool children.
9. Calls upon Governments and the United Nations
bodies and specialized agencies concerned to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in the preparation of the
next report on the world social situation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
next report on the world social situation to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session, through the Economic and Social Council, for consideration in conjunction with the mid-term over-all review and ap-

praisal of the Second United Nations Development
Decade and to evaluate and analyse trends relating to
social development-their causes and manifestations
and the experiences thereon-throughout the world,
including the situation in colonial, dependent and o~cupied Territories, within the framework of the umfied approach to development, ?earing in ~ind . the
provisions of the present resolution, the deliberations
on this item at the current session of the General Assembly, the fiftieth session of the E~onomic and Soc~al
Council and the twenty-second session of the Commission for Social Development, and the provisions of the
Declaration on Social Progress and Development.
1991 st plenary meeting,
22 November 1971.
2783 (XXVI). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2106 (XX) of 21 December 1965 in which it adopted and opened for signature
and ratification the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
invited eligible States under article 17 of that Convention to sign and ratify it without delay,
Stressing the significance of the coming into force of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and of the bringing
into being of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and requesting all States parties to
the Convention to give full co-operation to that Committee in order that it may fulfil iits mandate under the
Convention,
Noting the recommendations contained in Economic
and Social Council resolution 1588 (L) of 21 May
1971,
Having received the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination,4 established
under the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, on the second
year of its activities,
Expressing its satisfaction at the ratification of or
accession to the Convention by 55 States and at the
intention expressed by various other States to ratify or
accede to the Convention in the near future,
l. Urges all States which are not yet parties to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify or accede to
the Convention as soon as possible and requests them
to report to the General Assembly on the measures
taken by them to this effect, on any obstacles that may
have been encountered and on any interim measures
that have been taken to comply strictly with the principles set out in the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
in the Convention;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
on the second year of its activities, submitted under
article 9 of the Convention;
3. Draws the attention of all States to the contents
of that report;
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/8418).
