A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/263
17 August 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 36
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.60 and Add.1)]
48/263.

Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982

The General Assembly,
Prompted by the desire to achieve universal participation in the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 1/ (hereinafter
referred to as the "Convention") and to promote appropriate representation in
the institutions established by it,
Reaffirming that the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof, beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as the "Area"),
as well as the resources of the Area, are the common heritage of mankind, 2/
Recalling that the Convention in its Part XI and related provisions
(hereinafter referred to as "Part XI") established a regime for the Area and
its resources,

____________
1/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3),
document A/CONF.62/122.
2/
General Assembly resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17 December 1970;
article 136 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 2

Taking note of the consolidated provisional final report of the
Preparatory Commission for the International Seabed Authority and for the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, 3/
Recalling its resolution 48/28 of 9 December 1993 on the law of the sea,
Recognizing that political and economic changes, including in particular
a growing reliance on market principles, have necessitated the re-evaluation
of some aspects of the regime for the Area and its resources,
Noting the initiative of the Secretary-General which began in 1990 to
promote dialogue aimed at achieving universal participation in the Convention,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on the outcome of his
informal consultations, 4/ including the draft of an agreement relating to the
implementation of Part XI,
Considering that the objective of universal participation in the
Convention may best be achieved by the adoption of an agreement relating to
the implementation of Part XI,
Recognizing the need to provide for the provisional application of such
an agreement from the date of entry into force of the Convention on
16 November 1994,
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
on the informal consultations;
2.
Reaffirms the unified character of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982;
3.
Adopts the Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
(hereinafter referred to as the "Agreement"), the text of which is annexed to
the present resolution;
4.
Affirms that the Agreement shall be interpreted and applied
together with Part XI as a single instrument;
5.
Considers that future ratifications or formal confirmations of or
accessions to the Convention shall represent also consent to be bound by the
Agreement and that no State or entity may establish its consent to be bound by
the Agreement unless it has previously established or establishes at the same
time its consent to be bound by the Convention;
6.
Calls upon States which consent to the adoption of the Agreement
to refrain from any act which would defeat its object and purpose;
7.
Expresses its satisfaction at the entry into force of the
Convention on 16 November 1994;
____________
3/

Documents LOS/PCN/130 and Add.1.

4/

A/48/950.
/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 3

8.
Decides to fund the administrative expenses of the International
Seabed Authority in accordance with section 1, paragraph 14, of the Annex to
the Agreement;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit immediately certified
copies of the Agreement to the States and entities referred to in article 3
thereof, with a view to facilitating universal participation in the Convention
and the Agreement, and to draw attention to articles 4 and 5 of the Agreement;
10.
Also requests the Secretary-General immediately to open the
Agreement for signature in accordance with article 3 thereof;
11.
Urges all States and entities referred to in article 3 of the
Agreement to consent to its provisional application as from 16 November 1994
and to establish their consent to be bound by the Agreement at the earliest
possible date;
12.
Also urges all such States and entities that have not already done
so to take all appropriate steps to ratify, formally confirm or accede to the
Convention at the earliest possible date in order to ensure universal
participation in the Convention;
13.
Calls upon the Preparatory Commission for the International Seabed
Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea to take
into account the terms of the Agreement when drawing up its final report.
101st plenary meeting
28 July 1994
ANNEX
AGREEMENT RELATING TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PART XI
OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF THE SEA OF
10 DECEMBER 1982
The States Parties to this Agreement,
Recognizing the important contribution of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 1/ (hereinafter referred to as "the
Convention") to the maintenance of peace, justice and progress for all peoples
of the world,
Reaffirming that the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof, beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as "the Area"),
as well as the resources of the Area, are the common heritage of mankind,
Mindful of the importance of the Convention for the protection and
preservation of the marine environment and of the growing concern for the
global environment,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on the results of the informal consultations among States held from
1990 to 1994 on outstanding issues relating to Part XI and related provisions
of the Convention 4/ (hereinafter referred to as "Part XI"),
/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 4

Noting the political and economic changes, including market-oriented
approaches, affecting the implementation of Part XI,
Wishing to facilitate universal participation in the Convention,
Considering that an agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI
would best meet that objective,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Implementation of Part XI
1.
The States Parties to this Agreement undertake to implement Part XI in
accordance with this Agreement.
2.

The Annex forms an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 2
Relationship between this Agreement and Part XI

1.
The provisions of this Agreement and Part XI shall be interpreted and
applied together as a single instrument. In the event of any inconsistency
between this Agreement and Part XI, the provisions of this Agreement shall
prevail.
2.
Articles 309 to 319 of the Convention shall apply to this Agreement as
they apply to the Convention.
Article 3
Signature
This Agreement shall remain open for signature at United Nations
Headquarters by the States and entities referred to in article 305,
paragraph 1 (a), (c), (d), (e) and (f), of the Convention for 12 months from
the date of its adoption.
Article 4
Consent to be bound
1.
After the adoption of this Agreement, any instrument of ratification or
formal confirmation of or accession to the Convention shall also represent
consent to be bound by this Agreement.
2.
No State or entity may establish its consent to be bound by this
Agreement unless it has previously established or establishes at the same time
its consent to be bound by the Convention.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 5

3.
A State or entity referred to in article 3 may express its consent to be
bound by this Agreement by:
(a)
Signature not subject to ratification, formal confirmation or the
procedure set out in article 5;
(b)
Signature subject to ratification or formal confirmation, followed
by ratification or formal confirmation;
(c)

Signature subject to the procedure set out in article 5; or

(d)

Accession.

4.
Formal confirmation by the entities referred to in article 305,
paragraph 1 (f), of the Convention shall be in accordance with Annex IX of the
Convention.
5.
The instruments of ratification, formal confirmation or accession shall
be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 5
Simplified procedure
1.
A State or entity which has deposited before the date of the adoption of
this Agreement an instrument of ratification or formal confirmation of or
accession to the Convention and which has signed this Agreement in accordance
with article 4, paragraph 3 (c), shall be considered to have established its
consent to be bound by this Agreement 12 months after the date of its
adoption, unless that State or entity notifies the depositary in writing
before that date that it is not availing itself of the simplified procedure
set out in this article.
2.
In the event of such notification, consent to be bound by this Agreement
shall be established in accordance with article 4, paragraph 3 (b).
Article 6
Entry into force
1.
This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after the date on which 40
States have established their consent to be bound in accordance with
articles 4 and 5, provided that such States include at least seven of the
States referred to in paragraph l (a) of resolution II of the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea 5/ (hereinafter referred to as
"resolution II") and that at least five of those States are developed States.
If these conditions for entry into force are fulfilled before 16 November
1994, this Agreement shall enter into force on 16 November 1994.
__________
5/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3),
document A/CONF.62/121, annex I.
/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 6

2.
For each State or entity establishing its consent to be bound by this
Agreement after the requirements set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled,
this Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth day following the date
of establishment of its consent to be bound.
Article 7
Provisional application
1.
If on 16 November 1994 this Agreement has not entered into force, it
shall be applied provisionally pending its entry into force by:
(a)
States which have consented to its adoption in the General
Assembly of the United Nations, except any such State which before 16 November
1994 notifies the depositary in writing either that it will not so apply this
Agreement or that it will consent to such application only upon subsequent
signature or notification in writing;
(b)
States and entities which sign this Agreement, except any such
State or entity which notifies the depositary in writing at the time of
signature that it will not so apply this Agreement;
(c)
States and entities which consent to its provisional application
by so notifying the depositary in writing;
(d)

States which accede to this Agreement.

2.
All such States and entities shall apply this Agreement provisionally in
accordance with their national or internal laws and regulations, with effect
from 16 November 1994 or the date of signature, notification of consent or
accession, if later.
3.
Provisional application shall terminate upon the date of entry into
force of this Agreement. In any event, provisional application shall terminate
on 16 November 1998 if at that date the requirement in article 6, paragraph 1,
of consent to be bound by this Agreement by at least seven of the States (of
which at least five must be developed States) referred to in paragraph 1 (a)
of resolution II has not been fulfilled.
Article 8
States Parties
1.
For the purposes of this Agreement, "States Parties" means States which
have consented to be bound by this Agreement and for which this Agreement is
in force.
2.
This Agreement applies mutatis mutandis to the entities referred to in
article 305, paragraph 1 (c), (d), (e) and (f), of the Convention which become
Parties to this Agreement in accordance with the conditions relevant to each,
and to that extent "States Parties" refers to those entities.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 7

Article 9
Depositary
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be the depositary of
this Agreement.
Article 10
Authentic texts
The original of this Agreement, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized thereto, have signed this Agreement.
DONE AT NEW YORK, this ... day of July, one thousand nine hundred and
ninety-four.

Annex
SECTION 1. COSTS TO STATES PARTIES AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
1.
The International Seabed Authority (hereinafter referred to as "the
Authority") is the organization through which States Parties to the Convention
shall, in accordance with the regime for the Area established in Part XI and
this Agreement, organize and control activities in the Area, particularly with
a view to administering the resources of the Area. The powers and functions of
the Authority shall be those expressly conferred upon it by the Convention.
The Authority shall have such incidental powers, consistent with the
Convention, as are implicit in, and necessary for, the exercise of those
powers and functions with respect to activities in the Area.
2.
In order to minimize costs to States Parties, all organs and subsidiary
bodies to be established under the Convention and this Agreement shall be
cost-effective. This principle shall also apply to the frequency, duration and
scheduling of meetings.
3.
The setting up and the functioning of the organs and subsidiary bodies
of the Authority shall be based on an evolutionary approach, taking into
account the functional needs of the organs and subsidiary bodies concerned in
order that they may discharge effectively their respective responsibilities at
various stages of the development of activities in the Area.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 8

4.
The early functions of the Authority upon entry into force of the
Convention shall be carried out by the Assembly, the Council, the Secretariat,
the Legal and Technical Commission and the Finance Committee. The functions of
the Economic Planning Commission shall be performed by the Legal and Technical
Commission until such time as the Council decides otherwise or until the
approval of the first plan of work for exploitation.
5.
Between the entry into force of the Convention and the approval of the
first plan of work for exploitation, the Authority shall concentrate on:
(a)
Processing of applications for approval of plans of work for
exploration in accordance with Part XI and this Agreement;
(b)
Implementation of decisions of the Preparatory Commission for the
International Seabed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea (hereinafter referred to as "the Preparatory Commission") relating
to the registered pioneer investors and their certifying States, including
their rights and obligations, in accordance with article 308, paragraph 5, of
the Convention and resolution II, paragraph 13;
(c)
Monitoring of compliance with plans of work for exploration
approved in the form of contracts;
(d)
Monitoring and review of trends and developments relating to deep
seabed mining activities, including regular analysis of world metal market
conditions and metal prices, trends and prospects;
(e)
Study of the potential impact of mineral production from the Area
on the economies of developing land-based producers of those minerals which
are likely to be most seriously affected, with a view to minimizing their
difficulties and assisting them in their economic adjustment, taking into
account the work done in this regard by the Preparatory Commission;
(f)
Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures necessary for the
conduct of activities in the Area as they progress. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Annex III, article 17, paragraph 2 (b) and (c), of the
Convention, such rules, regulations and procedures shall take into account the
terms of this Agreement, the prolonged delay in commercial deep seabed mining
and the likely pace of activities in the Area;
(g)
Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures incorporating
applicable standards for the protection and preservation of the marine
environment;
(h)
Promotion and encouragement of the conduct of marine scientific
research with respect to activities in the Area and the collection and
dissemination of the results of such research and analysis, when available,
with particular emphasis on research related to the environmental impact of
activities in the Area;
(i)
Acquisition of scientific knowledge and monitoring of the
development of marine technology relevant to activities in the Area, in
particular technology relating to the protection and preservation of the
marine environment;

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 9

(j)
Assessment of available data relating to prospecting and
exploration;
(k)
Timely elaboration of rules, regulations and procedures for
exploitation, including those relating to the protection and preservation of
the marine environment.
6.
(a)
An application for approval of a plan of work for exploration
shall be considered by the Council following the receipt of a recommendation
on the application from the Legal and Technical Commission. The processing of
an application for approval of a plan of work for exploration shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention, including Annex III thereof,
and this Agreement, and subject to the following:
(i)

A plan of work for exploration submitted on behalf of a State or
entity, or any component of such entity, referred to in resolution
II, paragraph 1 (a) (ii) or (iii), other than a registered pioneer
investor, which had already undertaken substantial activities in
the Area prior to the entry into force of the Convention, or its
successor in interest, shall be considered to have met the
financial and technical qualifications necessary for approval of a
plan of work if the sponsoring State or States certify that the
applicant has expended an amount equivalent to at least US$ 30
million in research and exploration activities and has expended no
less than 10 per cent of that amount in the location, survey and
evaluation of the area referred to in the plan of work. If the
plan of work otherwise satisfies the requirements of the
Convention and any rules, regulations and procedures adopted
pursuant thereto, it shall be approved by the Council in the form
of a contract. The provisions of section 3, paragraph 11, of this
Annex shall be interpreted and applied accordingly;

(ii)

Notwithstanding the provisions of resolution II, paragraph 8 (a),
a registered pioneer investor may request approval of a plan of
work for exploration within 36 months of the entry into force of
the Convention. The plan of work for exploration shall consist of
documents, reports and other data submitted to the Preparatory
Commission both before and after registration and shall be
accompanied by a certificate of compliance, consisting of a
factual report describing the status of fulfilment of obligations
under the pioneer investor regime, issued by the Preparatory
Commission in accordance with resolution II, paragraph 11 (a).
Such a plan of work shall be considered to be approved. Such an
approved plan of work shall be in the form of a contract concluded
between the Authority and the registered pioneer investor in
accordance with Part XI and this Agreement. The fee of US$ 250,000
paid pursuant to resolution II, paragraph 7 (a), shall be deemed
to be the fee relating to the exploration phase pursuant to
section 8, paragraph 3, of this Annex. Section 3, paragraph 11, of
this Annex shall be interpreted and applied accordingly;

(iii)

In accordance with the principle of non-discrimination, a contract
with a State or entity or any component of such entity referred to
in subparagraph (a) (i) shall include arrangements which shall be
similar to and no less favourable than those agreed with any
registered pioneer investor referred to in subparagraph (a) (ii).
/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 10

If any of the States or entities or any components of such
entities referred to in subparagraph (a) (i) are granted more
favourable arrangements, the Council shall make similar and no
less favourable arrangements with regard to the rights and
obligations assumed by the registered pioneer investors referred
to in subparagraph (a) (ii), provided that such arrangements do
not affect or prejudice the interests of the Authority;
(iv)

A State sponsoring an application for a plan of work pursuant to
the provisions of subparagraph (a) (i) or (ii) may be a State
Party or a State which is applying this Agreement provisionally in
accordance with article 7, or a State which is a member of the
Authority on a provisional basis in accordance with paragraph 12;

(v)

Resolution II, paragraph 8 (c), shall be interpreted and applied
in accordance with subparagraph (a) (iv).

(b)
The approval of a plan of work for exploration shall be in
accordance with article 153, paragraph 3, of the Convention.
7.
An application for approval of a plan of work shall be accompanied by an
assessment of the potential environmental impacts of the proposed activities
and by a description of a programme for oceanographic and baseline
environmental studies in accordance with the rules, regulations and procedures
adopted by the Authority.
8.
An application for approval of a plan of work for exploration, subject
to paragraph 6 (a) (i) or (ii), shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures set out in section 3, paragraph 11, of this Annex.
9.
A plan of work for exploration shall be approved for a period of 15
years. Upon the expiration of a plan of work for exploration, the contractor
shall apply for a plan of work for exploitation unless the contractor has
already done so or has obtained an extension for the plan of work for
exploration. Contractors may apply for such extensions for periods of not more
than five years each. Such extensions shall be approved if the contractor has
made efforts in good faith to comply with the requirements of the plan of work
but for reasons beyond the contractor’s control has been unable to complete
the necessary preparatory work for proceeding to the exploitation stage or if
the prevailing economic circumstances do not justify proceeding to the
exploitation stage.
10.
Designation of a reserved area for the Authority in accordance with
Annex III, article 8, of the Convention shall take place in connection with
approval of an application for a plan of work for exploration or approval of
an application for a plan of work for exploration and exploitation.
11.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 9, an approved plan of work
for exploration which is sponsored by at least one State provisionally
applying this Agreement shall terminate if such a State ceases to apply this
Agreement provisionally and has not become a member on a provisional basis in
accordance with paragraph 12 or has not become a State Party.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 11

12.
Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, States and entities
referred to in article 3 of this Agreement which have been applying it
provisionally in accordance with article 7 and for which it is not in force
may continue to be members of the Authority on a provisional basis pending its
entry into force for such States and entities, in accordance with the
following subparagraphs:
(a)
If this Agreement enters into force before 16 November 1996, such
States and entities shall be entitled to continue to participate as members of
the Authority on a provisional basis upon notification to the depositary of
the Agreement by such a State or entity of its intention to participate as a
member on a provisional basis. Such membership shall terminate either on
16 November 1996 or upon the entry into force of this Agreement and the
Convention for such member, whichever is earlier. The Council may, upon the
request of the State or entity concerned, extend such membership beyond
16 November 1996 for a further period or periods not exceeding a total of
two years provided that the Council is satisfied that the State or entity
concerned has been making efforts in good faith to become a party to the
Agreement and the Convention;
(b)
If this Agreement enters into force after 15 November 1996, such
States and entities may request the Council to grant continued membership in
the Authority on a provisional basis for a period or periods not extending
beyond 16 November 1998. The Council shall grant such membership with effect
from the date of the request if it is satisfied that the State or entity has
been making efforts in good faith to become a party to the Agreement and the
Convention;
(c)
States and entities which are members of the Authority on a
provisional basis in accordance with subparagraph (a) or (b) shall apply the
terms of Part XI and this Agreement in accordance with their national or
internal laws, regulations and annual budgetary appropriations and shall have
the same rights and obligations as other members, including:
(i)

The obligation to contribute to the administrative budget of the
Authority in accordance with the scale of assessed contributions;

(ii)

The right to sponsor an application for approval of a plan of work
for exploration. In the case of entities whose components are
natural or juridical persons possessing the nationality of more
than one State, a plan of work for exploration shall not be
approved unless all the States whose natural or juridical persons
comprise those entities are States Parties or members on a
provisional basis;

(d)
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 9, an approved plan of
work in the form of a contract for exploration which was sponsored pursuant to
subparagraph (c) (ii) by a State which was a member on a provisional basis
shall terminate if such membership ceases and the State or entity has not
become a State Party;
(e)
If such a member has failed to make its assessed contributions or
otherwise failed to comply with its obligations in accordance with this
paragraph, its membership on a provisional basis shall be terminated.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 12

13.
The reference in Annex III, article 10, of the Convention to performance
which has not been satisfactory shall be interpreted to mean that the
contractor has failed to comply with the requirements of an approved plan of
work in spite of a written warning or warnings from the Authority to the
contractor to comply therewith.
14.
The Authority shall have its own budget. Until the end of the year
following the year during which this Agreement enters into force, the
administrative expenses of the Authority shall be met through the budget of
the United Nations. Thereafter, the administrative expenses of the Authority
shall be met by assessed contributions of its members, including any members
on a provisional basis, in accordance with articles 171, subparagraph (a), and
173 of the Convention and this Agreement, until the Authority has sufficient
funds from other sources to meet those expenses. The Authority shall not
exercise the power referred to in article 174, paragraph 1, of the Convention
to borrow funds to finance its administrative budget.
15.
The Authority shall elaborate and adopt, in accordance with article 162,
paragraph 2 (o) (ii), of the Convention, rules, regulations and procedures
based on the principles contained in sections 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this Annex,
as well as any additional rules, regulations and procedures necessary to
facilitate the approval of plans of work for exploration or exploitation, in
accordance with the following subparagraphs:
(a)
The Council may undertake such elaboration any time it deems that
all or any of such rules, regulations or procedures are required for the
conduct of activities in the Area, or when it determines that commercial
exploitation is imminent, or at the request of a State whose national intends
to apply for approval of a plan of work for exploitation;
(b)
If a request is made by a State referred to in subparagraph (a)
the Council shall, in accordance with article 162, paragraph 2 (o), of the
Convention, complete the adoption of such rules, regulations and procedures
within two years of the request;
(c)
If the Council has not completed the elaboration of the rules,
regulations and procedures relating to exploitation within the prescribed time
and an application for approval of a plan of work for exploitation is pending,
it shall none the less consider and provisionally approve such plan of work
based on the provisions of the Convention and any rules, regulations and
procedures that the Council may have adopted provisionally, or on the basis of
the norms contained in the Convention and the terms and principles contained
in this Annex as well as the principle of non-discrimination among
contractors.
16.
The draft rules, regulations and procedures and any recommendations
relating to the provisions of Part XI, as contained in the reports and
recommendations of the Preparatory Commission, shall be taken into account by
the Authority in the adoption of rules, regulations and procedures in
accordance with Part XI and this Agreement.
17.
The relevant provisions of Part XI, section 4, of the Convention shall
be interpreted and applied in accordance with this Agreement.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 13

SECTION 2. THE ENTERPRISE
1.
The Secretariat of the Authority shall perform the functions of the
Enterprise until it begins to operate independently of the Secretariat. The
Secretary-General of the Authority shall appoint from within the staff of the
Authority an interim Director-General to oversee the performance of these
functions by the Secretariat.
These functions shall be:
(a)
Monitoring and review of trends and developments relating to deep
seabed mining activities, including regular analysis of world metal market
conditions and metal prices, trends and prospects;
(b)
Assessment of the results of the conduct of marine scientific
research with respect to activities in the Area, with particular emphasis on
research related to the environmental impact of activities in the Area;
(c)
Assessment of available data relating to prospecting and
exploration, including the criteria for such activities;
(d)
Assessment of technological developments relevant to activities in
the Area, in particular technology relating to the protection and preservation
of the marine environment;
(e)
Evaluation of information and data relating to areas reserved for
the Authority;
(f)

Assessment of approaches to joint-venture operations;

(g)

Collection of information on the availability of trained manpower;

(h)
Study of managerial policy options for the administration of the
Enterprise at different stages of its operations.
2.
The Enterprise shall conduct its initial deep seabed mining operations
through joint ventures. Upon the approval of a plan of work for exploitation
for an entity other than the Enterprise, or upon receipt by the Council of an
application for a joint-venture operation with the Enterprise, the Council
shall take up the issue of the functioning of the Enterprise independently of
the Secretariat of the Authority. If joint-venture operations with the
Enterprise accord with sound commercial principles, the Council shall issue a
directive pursuant to article 170, paragraph 2, of the Convention providing
for such independent functioning.
3.
The obligation of States Parties to fund one mine site of the Enterprise
as provided for in Annex IV, article 11, paragraph 3, of the Convention shall
not apply and States Parties shall be under no obligation to finance any of
the operations in any mine site of the Enterprise or under its joint-venture
arrangements.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 14

4.
The obligations applicable to contractors shall apply to the Enterprise.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 153, paragraph 3, and Annex III,
article 3, paragraph 5, of the Convention, a plan of work for the Enterprise
upon its approval shall be in the form of a contract concluded between the
Authority and the Enterprise.
5.
A contractor which has contributed a particular area to the Authority as
a reserved area has the right of first refusal to enter into a joint-venture
arrangement with the Enterprise for exploration and exploitation of that area.
If the Enterprise does not submit an application for a plan of work for
activities in respect of such a reserved area within 15 years of the
commencement of its functions independent of the Secretariat of the Authority
or within 15 years of the date on which that area is reserved for the
Authority, whichever is the later, the contractor which contributed the area
shall be entitled to apply for a plan of work for that area provided it offers
in good faith to include the Enterprise as a joint-venture partner.
6.
Article 170, paragraph 4, Annex IV and other provisions of the
Convention relating to the Enterprise shall be interpreted and applied in
accordance with this section.
SECTION 3. DECISION-MAKING
1.
The general policies of the Authority shall be established by the
Assembly in collaboration with the Council.
2.
As a general rule, decision-making in the organs of the Authority should
be by consensus.
3.
If all efforts to reach a decision by consensus have been exhausted,
decisions by voting in the Assembly on questions of procedure shall be taken
by a majority of members present and voting, and decisions on questions of
substance shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of members present and
voting, as provided for in article 159, paragraph 8, of the Convention.
4.
Decisions of the Assembly on any matter for which the Council also has
competence or on any administrative, budgetary or financial matter shall be
based on the recommendations of the Council. If the Assembly does not accept
the recommendation of the Council on any matter, it shall return the matter to
the Council for further consideration. The Council shall reconsider the matter
in the light of the views expressed by the Assembly.
5.
If all efforts to reach a decision by consensus have been exhausted,
decisions by voting in the Council on questions of procedure shall be taken by
a majority of members present and voting, and decisions on questions of
substance, except where the Convention provides for decisions by consensus in
the Council, shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of members present and
voting, provided that such decisions are not opposed by a majority in any one
of the chambers referred to in paragraph 9. In taking decisions the Council
shall seek to promote the interests of all the members of the Authority.
6.
The Council may defer the taking of a decision in order to facilitate
further negotiation whenever it appears that all efforts at achieving
consensus on a question have not been exhausted.
/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 15

7.
Decisions by the Assembly or the Council having financial or budgetary
implications shall be based on the recommendations of the Finance Committee.
8.
The provisions of article 161, paragraph 8 (b) and (c), of the
Convention shall not apply.
9.
(a)
Each group of States elected under paragraph 15 (a) to (c) shall
be treated as a chamber for the purposes of voting in the Council. The
developing States elected under paragraph 15 (d) and (e) shall be treated as a
single chamber for the purposes of voting in the Council.
(b)
Before electing the members of the Council, the Assembly shall
establish lists of countries fulfilling the criteria for membership in the
groups of States in paragraph 15 (a) to (d). If a State fulfils the criteria
for membership in more than one group, it may only be proposed by one group
for election to the Council and it shall represent only that group in voting
in the Council.
10.
Each group of States in paragraph 15 (a) to (d) shall be represented in
the Council by those members nominated by that group. Each group shall
nominate only as many candidates as the number of seats required to be filled
by that group. When the number of potential candidates in each of the groups
referred to in paragraph 15 (a) to (e) exceeds the number of seats available
in each of those respective groups, as a general rule, the principle of
rotation shall apply. States members of each of those groups shall determine
how this principle shall apply in those groups.
11.
(a)
The Council shall approve a recommendation by the Legal and
Technical Commission for approval of a plan of work unless by a two-thirds
majority of its members present and voting, including a majority of members
present and voting in each of the chambers of the Council, the Council decides
to disapprove a plan of work. If the Council does not take a decision on a
recommendation for approval of a plan of work within a prescribed period, the
recommendation shall be deemed to have been approved by the Council at the end
of that period. The prescribed period shall normally be 60 days unless the
Council decides to provide for a longer period. If the Commission recommends
the disapproval of a plan of work or does not make a recommendation, the
Council may nevertheless approve the plan of work in accordance with its rules
of procedure for decision-making on questions of substance.
(b)
The provisions of article 162, paragraph 2 (j), of the Convention
shall not apply.
12.
Where a dispute arises relating to the disapproval of a plan of work,
such dispute shall be submitted to the dispute settlement procedures set out
in the Convention.
13.
Decisions by voting in the Legal and Technical Commission shall be by a
majority of members present and voting.
14.
Part XI, section 4, subsections B and C, of the Convention shall be
interpreted and applied in accordance with this section.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 16

15.
The Council shall consist of 36 members of the Authority elected by the
Assembly in the following order:
(a)
Four members from among those States Parties which, during the
last five years for which statistics are available, have either consumed more
than 2 per cent in value terms of total world consumption or have had net
imports of more than 2 per cent in value terms of total world imports of the
commodities produced from the categories of minerals to be derived from the
Area, provided that the four members shall include one State from the Eastern
European region having the largest economy in that region in terms of gross
domestic product and the State, on the date of entry into force of the
Convention, having the largest economy in terms of gross domestic product, if
such States wish to be represented in this group;
(b)
Four members from among the eight States Parties which have made
the largest investments in preparation for and in the conduct of activities in
the Area, either directly or through their nationals;
(c)
Four members from among States Parties which, on the basis of
production in areas under their jurisdiction, are major net exporters of the
categories of minerals to be derived from the Area, including at least two
developing States whose exports of such minerals have a substantial bearing
upon their economies;
(d)
Six members from among developing States Parties, representing
special interests. The special interests to be represented shall include those
of States with large populations, States which are land-locked or
geographically disadvantaged, island States, States which are major importers
of the categories of minerals to be derived from the Area, States which are
potential producers of such minerals and least developed States;
(e)
Eighteen members elected according to the principle of ensuring an
equitable geographical distribution of seats in the Council as a whole,
provided that each geographical region shall have at least one member elected
under this subparagraph. For this purpose, the geographical regions shall be
Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean and Western
Europe and Others.
16.
The provisions of article 161, paragraph 1, of the Convention shall not
apply.
SECTION 4. REVIEW CONFERENCE
The provisions relating to the Review Conference in article 155,
paragraphs 1, 3 and 4, of the Convention shall not apply. Notwithstanding the
provisions of article 314, paragraph 2, of the Convention, the Assembly, on
the recommendation of the Council, may undertake at any time a review of the
matters referred to in article 155, paragraph 1, of the Convention. Amendments
relating to this Agreement and Part XI shall be subject to the procedures
contained in articles 314, 315 and 316 of the Convention, provided that the
principles, regime and other terms referred to in article 155, paragraph 2, of
the Convention shall be maintained and the rights referred to in paragraph 5
of that article shall not be affected.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 17

SECTION 5. TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY
1.
In addition to the provisions of article 144 of the Convention, transfer
of technology for the purposes of Part XI shall be governed by the following
principles:
(a)
The Enterprise, and developing States wishing to obtain deep
seabed mining technology, shall seek to obtain such technology on fair and
reasonable commercial terms and conditions on the open market, or through
joint-venture arrangements;
(b)
If the Enterprise or developing States are unable to obtain deep
seabed mining technology, the Authority may request all or any of the
contractors and their respective sponsoring State or States to cooperate with
it in facilitating the acquisition of deep seabed mining technology by the
Enterprise or its joint venture, or by a developing State or States seeking to
acquire such technology on fair and reasonable commercial terms and
conditions, consistent with the effective protection of intellectual property
rights. States Parties undertake to cooperate fully and effectively with the
Authority for this purpose and to ensure that contractors sponsored by them
also cooperate fully with the Authority;
(c)
As a general rule, States Parties shall promote international
technical and scientific cooperation with regard to activities in the Area
either between the parties concerned or by developing training, technical
assistance and scientific cooperation programmes in marine science and
technology and the protection and preservation of the marine environment.
2.
The provisions of Annex III, article 5, of the Convention shall not
apply.
SECTION 6. PRODUCTION POLICY
1.
The production policy of the Authority shall be based on the following
principles:
(a)
Development of the resources of the Area shall take place in
accordance with sound commercial principles;
(b)
The provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, its
relevant codes and successor or superseding agreements shall apply with
respect to activities in the Area;
(c)
In particular, there shall be no subsidization of activities in
the Area except as may be permitted under the agreements referred to in
subparagraph (b). Subsidization for the purpose of these principles shall be
defined in terms of the agreements referred to in subparagraph (b);
(d)
There shall be no discrimination between minerals derived from the
Area and from other sources. There shall be no preferential access to markets
for such minerals or for imports of commodities produced from such minerals,
in particular:

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 18

(i)

By the use of tariff or non-tariff barriers; and

(ii)

Given by States Parties to such minerals or commodities produced
by their state enterprises or by natural or juridical persons
which possess their nationality or are controlled by them or their
nationals;

(e)
The plan of work for exploitation approved by the Authority in
respect of each mining area shall indicate an anticipated production schedule
which shall include the estimated maximum amounts of minerals that would be
produced per year under the plan of work;
(f)
The following shall apply to the settlement of disputes concerning
the provisions of the agreements referred to in subparagraph (b):
(i)

Where the States Parties concerned are parties to such agreements,
they shall have recourse to the dispute settlement procedures of
those agreements;

(ii)

Where one or more of the States Parties concerned are not parties
to such agreements, they shall have recourse to the dispute
settlement procedures set out in the Convention;

(g)
In circumstances where a determination is made under the
agreements referred to in subparagraph (b) that a State Party has engaged in
subsidization which is prohibited or has resulted in adverse effects on the
interests of another State Party and appropriate steps have not been taken by
the relevant State Party or States Parties, a State Party may request the
Council to take appropriate measures.
2.
The principles contained in paragraph 1 shall not affect the rights and
obligations under any provision of the agreements referred to in
paragraph 1 (b), as well as the relevant free trade and customs union
agreements, in relations between States Parties which are parties to such
agreements.
3.
The acceptance by a contractor of subsidies other than those which may
be permitted under the agreements referred to in paragraph 1 (b) shall
constitute a violation of the fundamental terms of the contract forming a plan
of work for the carrying out of activities in the Area.
4.
Any State Party which has reason to believe that there has been a breach
of the requirements of paragraphs 1 (b) to (d) or 3 may initiate dispute
settlement procedures in conformity with paragraph 1 (f) or (g).
5.
A State Party may at any time bring to the attention of the Council
activities which in its view are inconsistent with the requirements of
paragraph 1 (b) to (d).
6.
The Authority shall develop rules, regulations and procedures which
ensure the implementation of the provisions of this section, including
relevant rules, regulations and procedures governing the approval of plans of
work.

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 19

7.
The provisions of article 151, paragraphs 1 to 7 and 9, article 162,
paragraph 2 (q), article 165, paragraph 2 (n), and Annex III, article 6,
paragraph 5, and article 7, of the Convention shall not apply.
SECTION 7. ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
1.
The policy of the Authority of assisting developing countries which
suffer serious adverse effects on their export earnings or economies resulting
from a reduction in the price of an affected mineral or in the volume of
exports of that mineral, to the extent that such reduction is caused by
activities in the Area, shall be based on the following principles:
(a)
The Authority shall establish an economic assistance fund from a
portion of the funds of the Authority which exceeds those necessary to cover
the administrative expenses of the Authority. The amount set aside for this
purpose shall be determined by the Council from time to time, upon the
recommendation of the Finance Committee. Only funds from payments received
from contractors, including the Enterprise, and voluntary contributions shall
be used for the establishment of the economic assistance fund;
(b)
Developing land-based producer States whose economies have been
determined to be seriously affected by the production of minerals from the
deep seabed shall be assisted from the economic assistance fund of the
Authority;
(c)
The Authority shall provide assistance from the fund to affected
developing land-based producer States, where appropriate, in cooperation with
existing global or regional development institutions which have the
infrastructure and expertise to carry out such assistance programmes;
(d)
The extent and period of such assistance shall be determined on a
case-by-case basis. In doing so, due consideration shall be given to the
nature and magnitude of the problems encountered by affected developing
land-based producer States.
2.
Article 151, paragraph 10, of the Convention shall be implemented by
means of measures of economic assistance referred to in paragraph 1. Article
160, paragraph 2 (l), article 162, paragraph 2 (n), article 164, paragraph
2 (d), article 171, subparagraph (f), and article 173, paragraph 2 (c), of the
Convention shall be interpreted accordingly.
SECTION 8. FINANCIAL TERMS OF CONTRACTS
1.
The following principles shall provide the basis for establishing rules,
regulations and procedures for financial terms of contracts:
(a)
The system of payments to the Authority shall be fair both to the
contractor and to the Authority and shall provide adequate means of
determining compliance by the contractor with such system;

/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 20

(b)
The rates of payments under the system shall be within the range
of those prevailing in respect of land-based mining of the same or similar
minerals in order to avoid giving deep seabed miners an artificial competitive
advantage or imposing on them a competitive disadvantage;
(c)
The system should not be complicated and should not impose major
administrative costs on the Authority or on a contractor. Consideration should
be given to the adoption of a royalty system or a combination of a royalty and
profit-sharing system. If alternative systems are decided upon, the contractor
has the right to choose the system applicable to its contract. Any subsequent
change in choice between alternative systems, however, shall be made by
agreement between the Authority and the contractor;
(d)
An annual fixed fee shall be payable from the date of commencement
of commercial production. This fee may be credited against other payments due
under the system adopted in accordance with subparagraph (c). The amount of
the fee shall be established by the Council;
(e)
The system of payments may be revised periodically in the light of
changing circumstances. Any changes shall be applied in a non-discriminatory
manner. Such changes may apply to existing contracts only at the election of
the contractor. Any subsequent change in choice between alternative systems
shall be made by agreement between the Authority and the contractor;
(f)
Disputes concerning the interpretation or application of the rules
and regulations based on these principles shall be subject to the dispute
settlement procedures set out in the Convention.
2.
The provisions of Annex III, article 13, paragraphs 3 to 10, of the
Convention shall not apply.
3.
With regard to the implementation of Annex III, article 13, paragraph 2,
of the Convention, the fee for processing applications for approval of a plan
of work limited to one phase, either the exploration phase or the exploitation
phase, shall be US$ 250,000.
SECTION 9. THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
1.
There is hereby established a Finance Committee. The Committee shall be
composed of 15 members with appropriate qualifications relevant to financial
matters. States Parties shall nominate candidates of the highest standards of
competence and integrity.
2.
No two members of the Finance Committee shall be nationals of the same
State Party.
3.
Members of the Finance Committee shall be elected by the Assembly and
due account shall be taken of the need for equitable geographical distribution
and the representation of special interests. Each group of States referred to
in section 3, paragraph 15 (a), (b), (c) and (d), of this Annex shall be
represented on the Committee by at least one member. Until the Authority has
sufficient funds other than assessed contributions to meet its administrative
expenses, the membership of the Committee shall include representatives of the
five largest financial contributors to the administrative budget of the
/...

A/RES/48/263
Page 21

Authority. Thereafter, the election of one member from each group shall be on
the basis of nomination by the members of the respective group, without
prejudice to the possibility of further members being elected from each group.
4.
Members of the Finance Committee shall hold office for a term of five
years. They shall be eligible for re-election for a further term.
5.
In the event of the death, incapacity or resignation of a member of the
Finance Committee prior to the expiration of the term of office, the Assembly
shall elect for the remainder of the term a member from the same geographical
region or group of States.
6.
Members of the Finance Committee shall have no financial interest in any
activity relating to matters upon which the Committee has the responsibility
to make recommendations. They shall not disclose, even after the termination
of their functions, any confidential information coming to their knowledge by
reason of their duties for the Authority.
7.
Decisions by the Assembly and the Council on the following issues shall
take into account recommendations of the Finance Committee:
(a)
Draft financial rules, regulations and procedures of the organs of
the Authority and the financial management and internal financial
administration of the Authority;
(b)
Assessment of contributions of members to the administrative
budget of the Authority in accordance with article 160, paragraph 2 (e), of
the Convention;
(c)
All relevant financial matters, including the proposed annual
budget prepared by the Secretary-General of the Authority in accordance with
article 172 of the Convention and the financial aspects of the implementation
of the programmes of work of the Secretariat;
(d)

The administrative budget;

(e)
Financial obligations of States Parties arising from the
implementation of this Agreement and Part XI as well as the administrative and
budgetary implications of proposals and recommendations involving expenditure
from the funds of the Authority;
(f)
Rules, regulations and procedures on the equitable sharing of
financial and other economic benefits derived from activities in the Area and
the decisions to be made thereon.
8.
Decisions in the Finance Committee on questions of procedure shall be
taken by a majority of members present and voting. Decisions on questions of
substance shall be taken by consensus.
9.
The requirement of article 162, paragraph 2 (y), of the Convention to
establish a subsidiary organ to deal with financial matters shall be deemed to
have been fulfilled by the establishment of the Finance Committee in
accordance with this section.

-----
