Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commillee

3121 (XXVIII). Target for World Food Programme pledges for the period 1975-1976
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of its resolution 2095 (XX}
of 20 December 1965, under which the World Food
Programme is to be reviewed before each pledging
conference,
Recalling the provisions of paragraph 4 of its resoluti?n 2805 (XXVI~ of 14 December 1971 whereby,
subJect to the review mentioned above, the next
pledging conference is to be convened, at the latest,
early in 1974, at which time Governments should be
invited to pledge contributions for 1975 and 1976
with a view to reaching such a target as may then be
recommended by the General Assembly and by the
Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations,
Noting that the review of the Programme was undertaken ?Y the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental
C<?mmitte_e of the World Food Programme at its twentythird session and by the Economic and Social Council
at its fifty-fifth session,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 1830 (LV) of 18 October 1973, as well
as the recommendations contained in the report of
the Intergovernmental Committee,21
Recognizing the value of multilateral food aid as
!mplef!lented by the World Food Programme since its
mcept1on and the necessity of continuing its action
both as a form of capital investment and for meeting
emergency food needs,
1. Establishes for the two years 1975 and 1976 a
target for voluntary contributions to the World Food
Programme of $440 million, of which not less than
one third should be in cash and services, and expresses the hope that such resources will be augmented
by substantial additional contributions from other
sources in recognition of the prospective volume of
sound project requests and the capacity of the Programme to operate at a higher level;

2. Urges States Members of the United Nations or
members or associate members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to make
every effort to ensure the full attainment of the target;
. 3. Requ~sts the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to convene a
pledging conference for this purpose at United Nations
Headquarters early in 1974;
4. Decides that, subject to the review provided for
in G~neral Assembly resolution 2095 (XX), the next
pledgmg conference, at which Governments should be
invited to pledge contributions for 1977 and 1978
with a view to reaching such a target as may then be
recommended by the Assembly and by the Conference
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, should be convened, at the latest early in
1976.
'
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973
21 See E/5318.

45

3122 (XXVIII). United Nations Capital
Development Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2186 (XXI} of 13 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Capital Development Fund,
Further recalling resolution 62 (III) of 19 May
1972 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development,28 which sets forth a very important programme for international action in favour of the least
developed among the developing countries, and particularly paragraph 44 of that resolution concerning
the feasibility of using the United Nations Capital
Development Fund first and foremost for the least·
developed among the developing countries,
Noting the study on the desirability and feasibility
of establishing a special fund for the least developed
among the developing countries,29 prepared by the
Secretary-General in response to Economic and Social
Council resolution 1710 (LIII) of 28 July 1972, as
well as the note by the Secretary-General on the institutional arrangements for the implementation of special
measures in favour of the least developed among the
developing countries, 30 prepared in response to paragraph 1 of Council resolution 1753 (LIV)of 16 May
1973,
Reaffirming the provisions of its resolution 2186
(XXI), in particular those contained in articles I, II
and III relating to the purpose, guiding principles and
general economic provisions of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund,
Reaffirming the need for a reorientation of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund as a capital-providing fund first and foremost for the least developed
among the developing countries,
Considering that the United Nations Capital Development Fund could most effectively be used in complementing the technical assistance and pre-investment
activities of the United Nations Development Programme, as well as the investment activities of existing
international financial institutions, inter alia, in support
of those development and investment activities that
would build and strengthen the economic and social
infrastructure of these countries, including in particular in the fields of integrated rural development and
small-scale industries,
Taking into account that the United Nations Capital
Development Fund is not only a means for co-operation between developed and developing countries but
also an instrument for co-operation among developing
countries themselves, and that such co-operation among
developing countries could be further promoted and
strengthened,
1. Welcomes the decision of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme -that
the United Nations Capital Development Fund should
be used to serve first and foremost the least developed
among the developing countries, and further welcomes
the efforts made so far in implementing this decision by
the Administrator of the Programme;
28 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.
29 E/5269.
so E/5416.

46

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

2. Reaffirms Economic and Social Council resolution 1753 (LIV), in particular paragraphs 2, 3 and 4
thereof, and Council resolution 1754 (LIV) of 16
May 1973;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, in consultation with the ag\;ncies and
organizations of the United Nations system concerned,
to continue to consider further ways and means of
using most effectively the resources of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund first and foremost
for the benefit of the least developed among the developing countries and to report on the matter, including the administrative arrangements, to the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
at its eighteenth session, taking into a~count the views
expressed during the consideration of this item at the
current session of the General Assembly;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General and the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session, through the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-seventh session, a report on the
implementation of paragrap;1 3 above;
5. Welcomes the increasing trend towards support
for the expansion of the activities of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund and calls upon Member
States and especially the developed countries, particularly in the light of the new orientation of the
Fund, to provide substantial voluntary contributions
to the Fund so as to make it fully operative and effective;
6. Decides to preserve the original functions of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1974, in accordance with the measures s~t
forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3123 (XXVIII). Partieipation of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme in the lnter-A,gen<'y Consultative
Boar(l of the Unitt>d Nations Development
Programme

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the '.,overning Council of the United Nations Development Programme 31
and the recommendation of the Economic and Social
Council3 2 concerning the participation in the Programme's Inter-Agency Consultative Board of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Believing that the participation of the Executive Director in the Inter-Agency Consultative Board would
benefit both the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme,
Decides that the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme shall be invited to
participate, as appropriate, in the meetings of the Inter•1 1 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5365/Rev. l ).
'.2 /bid., Supplement No. I (E/5400), p. 20.

Agency Consultative Board of the United Nations
Development Programme.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3124 (XXVIII). Special pledging conference
of the United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund, 33
Noting with approval the efforts of the United Nations Children's Fund to help developing countries to
serve the needs of children and adolescents within the
framework of a unified approach to economic and
social development,
Recognizing the important contribution which the
United Nations Children's Fund i~ making to the
achievement of the goals of the Second United Nations
Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the necessity of increasing the financial resources of the United Nations Children's Fund in
order to enable it to meet more adequately the expanding needs for assistance by the Fund to basic services
benefiting children in the developing countries,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1709 (LIU) of 28 July 1972 and General Assembly
resolution 3015 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972. in
which the Council and the Assembly, inter alia, reiterated the appeal for increased contributions to the
United Nations Children's Fund to enable it to reach
its target figure of $ 100 million by 1975,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1821 (LV) of 9 August 1973;
2. Reaffirms its support for the policies of the United
Nations Children's Fund and commends the Fund for
its invaluable service to children in need over the
past twenty-seven years;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund. to convene during the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, in 1974, a special
pledging conference for voluntary contributions to be
made to the Fund in order to facilitate the attainment
of the target figure of $100 million in the Fund's resources by 1975;
4. Appeals to Governments to extend their full cooperation in helping to make the special pledging
conference of the United Nations Children's Fund a
success.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973
3125 (XXVIII). United .Natiom1 Voluntet>rs
proµ;ramme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 December
1970, by which it established the United Nations
Volunteers programme within the United Nations sys33 Official Records of the Gl'neral Assembly, Twenty-eif{hth
Session, Supplement No. 3 ( A/9003 and Corr.I), chap. VI,
sect. D.
