S/PRST/2021/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 March 2021
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
On 12 March 2021, in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item
entitled “The situation in Libya”, in accordance with the procedure agreed in light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and set out in
S/2020/372, the President of the Security Council issued the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the vote of confidence by the House of
Representatives to endorse the cabinet of a new unified interim Libyan
government charged with leading the country up to elections and stresses the
importance of this step in the Libyan political process.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of the unification of
Libya’s institutions, as set out in the roadmap agreed by the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum in Tunis in November 2020.
“The Security Council calls on all Libyan authorities and actors to ensure
a smooth handover of all competences and duties to the new interim
government. The Security Council welcomes Prime Minister Serraj’s statement
in this regard.
“The Security Council calls on the forthcoming interim government to
make the necessary preparations for free and fair national Presidential and
Parliamentary elections on 24 December 2021 including arrangements to ensure
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women.
“The Security Council further calls on the forthcoming interim
government to improve the delivery of services to the Libyan people, launch a
comprehensive national reconciliation process, adhere to their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians, and
prioritise full implementation of the 23 October 2020 Ceasefire Agreement.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to implement the ceasefire
agreement in full and urges Member States to respect and support the full
implementation of the agreement, including through the withdrawal of all
foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya without further delay.
“The Security Council calls for full compliance with the UN arms embargo
by all Member States, in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of a credible and
effective Libyan-led Ceasefire Monitoring Mechanism under UN auspices and
welcomes the deployment of the UN advance team to Libya. The Security

21-03450 (E)

150321

*2103450*

S/PRST/2021/6

Council looks forward to receiving proposals on the tasks and scale of the
ceasefire monitoring mechanism from the Secretary-General in accordance with
the timeline set out in the letter of the President of the Security Council
S/2021/110 of 4 February.
“The Security Council recognises the need to plan for the disarmament,
demobilisation and reintegration of armed groups, security sector reform and to
establish an inclusive, civilian-led security architecture for Libya as a whole.
“The Security Council recognises the important role of neighbouring
countries and regional organisations in support of UN efforts.
“The Security Council underlines its support to the UN Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) to Special Envoy Ján Kubiš, UNSMIL Coordinator Raisedon
Zenenga and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator Georgette Gagnon.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
UN-facilitated Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process and to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya.”

2/2

21-03450
