28

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

1. Notes with satisfaction the assistance given to Iran
by a number of Governments, the United Nations, the
specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations and
private persons, and expresses the hope that such assistance will be increased ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General and the heads of
the specialized agencies to give consideration to the
urgent needs of Iran when deciding, within the scope of
their resources and authority, on the additional services
to be extended to Member States;
3. Requests the Managing Director of the Special
Fund to consider sympathetically any qualified project
which is presented by Iran in connexion with the "'.ork
of rehabilitating the people and economy of the region ;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the World
Food Programme to give urgent and sympathetic attention to any requests from Iran to meet emergency food
requirements resulting from the disaster ;
5. Recommends that the Technical Assistance Committee, the Technical Assistance Board and the Executive Chairman of the Board should take account of the
special needs of Iran in the years 1962-1964, and do what
is possible to meet them ;
6. Draws the attention of Member States to the
recommendations contained in the report on international co-operation in the field of seismological research, seismology and earthquake engineering concerning the improvement of seismological observations, the
analysis of seismological data, seismic and seismo-tectonic mapping, codes and regulations for the design of
earthquake-resistant structures, tsunami warning systems, and relief measures;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, and invites the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Meteorological Organization
and other agencies concerned, to continue to promote
actively international co-operation in the study of ~he
origin and mechanism of earthquakes of the type which
devastated north-western Iran and in the improvement
of the protective measures which can be taken against
earthquakes as well as the remedial measures designed
to repair damage caused by them.
1144th plenary meeting,
5 October 1962.
1763 (XVII). Draft Convention and draft Recommendation on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration
of Marriages
A
ON CONSENT TO MARRIAGE, l\hNIMUlll
AGE FOR MARRIAGE AND REGISTRATION OF MARRL\(;ES

CONVENTION

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is appropriate to conclude under
the auspices of the United Nations an international
convention on the free consent to marriage, minimum
age for marriage and the registration of marriages,
Decides to open the Convention annexed to the present
resolution for signature and ratification on l O Decem-

her 1962.
1167th plenary meeting,
7 November 1962.

ANNEX
CONVENTION ON CONSENT TO MARRIAGE, MINIMUM AGE FOR
MARRIAGE AND REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES

The Contracting States,
Desiring, in conformity with the Oiarter of the United
Nations, to promote universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling that article 16 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights states that:
"(1) Men and women of full age, without any limitation
due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry
and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to
marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
"(2) Marriage shall be entered into only with the free
and full consent of the intending spouses.",
Recalling further that the General Assembly of the United
Nations declared, by resolution 843 (IX) of 17 December 1954,
that certain customs, ancient laws and practices relating to
marriage and the family were inconsistent with the principles
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Reaffirming that all States, including those which have or
assume responsibility for the administration of N on-Self-Governing and Trust Territories until their achievement of independence, should take all appropriate measures with a view to
abolishing such customs, ancient laws and practices by ensuring,
inter alia, complete freedom in the choice of a spouse, eliminating
completely child marriages and the betrothal of young girls
before the age of puberty, establishing appropriate penalties
where necessary and establishing a civil or other register in
which all marriages will be recorded,
Here by agree as hereinafter provided :
Article 1
1. No marriage shall be legally entered into without the full
and free consent of both parties, such consent to be expressed
by them in person after due publicity and in the presence of the
authority competent to solemnize the marriage and of witnesses,
as prescribed by law.
2. Notwithstanding anything in paragraph 1 above, it shall
not be necessary for one of the parties to be present when the
competent authority is satisfied that the circumstanc-es are
exceptional and that the party has, before a competent authority
and i~ such manner as may be prescribed by law, expressed and
not withdrawn consent.

Article 2
States parties to the present Convention shall take legislative action to specify a minimum age for marriage. No marriage
shall be legally entered into by any person under this age, except
where a competent authority has granted a dispensation as to
age, for serious reasons, in the interest of the intending spouses.

Article 3
All marriages shall be registered in an appropriate nfficial
register by the competent authority.
Articlr 4

1. The present Convention shall, until 31 December 1963 be
open for signature on behalf of all States Members of 'the
United Nations or members of any of the specialized agencies,
and of any other State invited by the General Assembly of the
United Nations to become a party to the Convention.
2. The present Convention is subject to ratification. The
instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.

Article 5
1. The present Convention shall be open for accession to all
States referred to in article 4, paragraph l.
2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument
of accession with thf" Secn't,1ry General of the United Nations.

Rel!olutiom adopted on the report& of the Third Committee
Artick 6
1. The present C.Onvention shall come into force on the
ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the eighth instru-•
ment of ratification or accession.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention
after the deposit of the eighth instrument of ratification or
accession the Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth
day afte; deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification
or accession.

Article 7
1. Any Contracting State may denounce the present l 'onvention by written notification to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. Denunciation shall take effect one year after the
date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
2. The present Convention shall cease to be in force as from
the date when the denunciation which reduces the number of
parties to less than eight becomes effective.

Article 8
Any dispute which may arise between any two or more Contracting States concerning the interpretation or application of
the present Convention which is not settled by negotiation shall,
at the request of all the parties to the dispute, be referred to
the International Court of Justice for decision, unless the parties
agree to another mode of settlement.

Article 9
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify all
States Members of the United Nations and the non-member
States contemplated in article 4, paragraph 1, of the present
Convention of the following :
(a) Signatures and instruments of ratification received in accordance with article 4;
(b) Instruments of accession received in accordance with
article 5;
(c) The date upon which the Convention enters into force in
accordance with article 6;
(d) Notifications of denunciation received in accordance with
article 7, paragraph 1 ;
(e) Abrogation in accordance with article 7, paragraph 2.

Article 10
1. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally authentic
shall be deposited in the archive; of the United :Jations.
'
2. The Secretary-General of the Unite<l Nations shall transmit a certified copy of the Convention to all States Members of
the United Nations and to the non-member States contemplated
in article 4, paragraph 1.

B
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON CONSF.NT TO MARRIAGE

.M IND-lt:'M

AGE FOR MARRIAGE AND RRGISTRATIO~
OF MARRIAGES

The General Assembly
Requests the Economic and Social Council to ask the
Commission on the Status of Women to consider the
draft Recommendation on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of Marriages2
in the light of the discussions in the General Assembly
on the draft Convention relating to the same subject,
and to report back in time for consideration of the
draft Recommendation by the Assembly at its eighteenth
session.
1167th plenary meeting,
7 November 1962.
2 See

1772 (XVII).

Committee on Rousing, Building
and Planning

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 903 C (XXXIV) of 2 August 1962 establishing a
Committee on Housing, Building and Planning,
Noting further that many Member States have expressed interest in the new Committee,
1. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to establish a Committee on Housing, Building
and Planning whose terms of reference and reporting
procedure provide a new instrument for consideration
of the problems involved and appropriate integration of
housing and urban development programmes with economic, social and industrial development programmes;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
resumed thirty-fourth session to consider enlarging the
membership of the Committee from eighteen to twentyone.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.

1773 (XVII). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Rights of the Child
adopted by the General Assembly on 20 November
1959,3
Mindful of the interrelation of economic and social
progress,
Considering the interest of the United Nations Children's Fund, in collaboration with other United Nations
bodies, in all aspects of the child's physical, mental and
social development,
Considering further that the United Nations Development Decade offers an opportunity to promote the health,
education and welfare of children and youth a:, part of
the broader effort to accelerate economic and social progress in the developing countries,
1. Takes note with approval of the decisions of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund for orienting the work of the Fund towards the
economic and social development efforts of the United
Nations Development Decade;
2. Recommends that Member States, as appropriate,
should:
(a) Take account of the needs of children and youth
ih the planning and administration of public health, education, social welfare, preparation for employment, housing, industry and agriculture, bearing in mind the need
for the strengthening of family life, and make such
plans part of over-all development programmes ;
( b) Give due importance, in working towards the
objectives of the United Nations Development Decade,
to their own programmes for children and youth in
allocating their av0ilable resources, and take account,
in their international aid programmes, of the needs of
children and youth;
( c) Take full advantage of the services which the
United Nations Children's Fnnd can offer, especially in
planning for children and youth and in training appropriate personnel in collaboration with the Bureau of

Economic and Social Council resolution 821 III B

(XXXII) of 19 July 1961.

29

3 Resolution

131<6 (XTV!.
