VI.

167

Resolutiom adopted on tbe repons of the Third Committee

tion of the Programme for the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
3. Welcomes also the continued co-operation of the
Committee with the competent specialized agencies and
other United Nations bodies, especially with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to secure the fullest possible implementation of
article 7 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Commends the Committee for continuing to focus
its attention on the just cause of peoples struggling
against colonialism, oppression and occupation wherever
they exist, particularly in southern Africa, as is within
its mandate;
5. Calls once again upon relevant United Nations
bodies to supply the Committee with sufficient information on Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and
all other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies to enable
it to discharge fully its responsibilities under article 15
of the Convention;
6. Expresses its grave concern that some States parties to the Convention, for reasons beyond their control,
are being prevented from fulfilling their obligations
under the Convention in parts of their respective territories, and in this respect supports the opinion expressed
by the Committee regarding the persistence of this problem in the Syrian Arab Republic, 22 reiterates its endorsement of Committee decision 1 (XV) of 1 April
1977 23 and reaffirms its resolution 32/13 of 7 November 1977 as well as its resolutions 2784 (XXVI) of 6
December 1971 and 3266 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974, concerning the situation in the Golan Heights;

1. Invites the States parties to supply the Committee
with all the requested information on their implementation of the principles and provisions of the Convention,
including information on the demographic composition
of their population and on their relations with the racist
regimes in southern Africa, in order to enable the Committee to discharge fully its responsibilities;
8. Calls upon the States parties to observe fully the
provisions of the Convention and other international
instruments and agreements to which they are parties
concerning the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination, and to take effective measures for securing
full equality and promotion and protection of the rights
of every person, group of persons or national or ethnic
minority, as well as full .protection of the rights of migrant workers, by preventing all practices of racial
discrimination;
9. Urges all States which are not parties to the Convention to ratify or to accede to it and, pending such
ratification or accession, to be guided by the basic provisions of the Convention in their internal and foreign
policies;
10. Notes with due attention Committee decision 1
(XX) of 13 August 1979 24 concerning the future meetings of the Committee and requests the Secretary-General
in this connexion to explore the possibility of providing
necessary assistance for the holding of such meetings
22 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/34/18), para. 138.
28 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/32/18),
chap. VIII, sect. A.
24 lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/34/18),
chap. VIII, sect. B.

in developing countries and to submit a report in this
regard to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.

69th plenary meeting
15 November 1979

34 / 43.

Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the need to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, as provided
in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 25 which proclaims that everyone has the right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Convinced of the desirability of elaborating an international instrument on the elimination of all forms of
intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or
belief,
Recalling its resolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10 December 197 4, in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to submit to the General Assembly, through
the Economic and Social Council, a single draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance
and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling also its resolution 33/106 of 16 December
1978,
Taking note of the work thus far done by the Commission on Human Rights,
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to give high priority to the drafting of the
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or
Belief;
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to strive towards completion of the draft Declaration at its thirty-sixth session with a view to submitting
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, a single
draft Declaration;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Elimination of
all forms of religious intolerance" and to give it high
priority.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979

34/ 44.

Importance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and of
the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November 1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3070
(XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX) of 29
November 1974, 3382 (XXX) of 10 November 1975
and 33/24 of 29 November 1978, and Security Council
resolutions 418 (1977) of 4 November 1977 and 437
(1978)of l0October 1978,
25

Resolution 217 A (III).

168

General Allembly-Tblrty-foudb Session

Recalling also its resolutions 2465 (XXIII) of 20
December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973 and 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December
1974, concerning the use and recruitment of mercenai:ies
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 26
the final communique and resolutions adopted by the
Tenth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at
Fez from 8 to 12 May 1979,27 and the Final Declaration
of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Governmeht of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from 3
to 9 September 1979,28
Recalling the resolutions on Zimbabwe, Namibi8: and
the Palestinian question adopted by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African ~nity at its
thirty-third ordinary session, held at Monrovia from 6 to
20 July 1979,29
Taking note of the Political Declaration adopted by
the First Conference of Heads of State and Government
of the Organization of African Unity and the League of
Arab States, held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March 1977, 80
Considering that the activities of Israel, in particular
the denial to the Palestinian people of its right to selfdetermination and independence, constitute a seri?us
and increasing threat to international peace and security,
Reaffirming its faith in General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the ~claration on the Granting of Inde_Pendence to C?loi:uaI
Countries and Peoples, and the importance of its implementation,
Reaffirming the importance of the unive~al. realization of the right of peoples to self-determmatlon, national sovereignty and territorial integrity_ and of 1;he
speedy granting of independence to colontal countries
and peoples as imperatives for the full enjoyment of all
human rights,
Reaffirming that "bantustanization" is incompatible
with genuine independence and national unity and sovereignty and has the effect of perpetuating the power ?f
the white minority and the racist system of apartheid
in South Africa,
Reaffirming the obligation of all Member States to
comply with the princiJ!les of the qiarter and t~e resolutions of the United Nations regardmg the exercise of the
right to self-determination by peoples under colonial
and alien domination,
Welcoming the independence of Dominica and Saint
Lucia,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros,
Indignant at the continued violations of the human
rights of the peoples still under colonial and f?reign
domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of
the illegal occupation. of Na~ibia and South ~rica's attempts to dismember its territory, the perpetuation of ~he
racist minority regimes in Zimbabwe and South Afnca
and the denial to the Palestinian people of its inalienable
national rights,
1. Calls upon all States to implement fully and faithfully the resolutions of the United Nations regarding
A/34/367 and Add.1 and 2.
A/34/389 and Corr.1, annexes I and II.
2s A/34/542, annex.
20 A/34/552, annex I, resolutions CM/Res.719 (XXXIII),
CM/Res.720 (XXXIII) and CM/Res.725 (XXXIII).
so A/32/61, annex I.
2e
21

the exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples
under colonial and alien domination;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of pe_oples for independence, terr!torial int~grity, naJion.al umty
and liberation from colomal and alien dommation and
foreign occupation by all available means, including
armed struggle;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe, of the Palestinian people and of
all peoples under colonial and alien domin~tio!" t~ selfdetermination national independence, terntonal mtegrity, and natio'nal unity and sovereignty without external
interference;
4. Strongly condemns all partial agreements and
separate treaties which constitute a flagrant violation of
the rights of the Palestinian people, the principles of_ the
Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions
adopted in various international forums _on _the Palestinian issue and which prevent the reahzat10n of the
Palestinian 'people's aspiration to return to its _homeland, to achieve self-determination and to exercise full
sovereignty over its territories;
5. Takes note -with satisfaction of the decision
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and ~ove1;11ment of the Organization of African Unity at its sixteenth ordinary session, held at Monrovia from 17 to 20
July 1979, on the question of Western Sahara81 and
invites all Member States to spare no efforts for the effective implementation of that decision;
6. Takes note of the contacts made by the Goveri:iment of the Comoros and the Government of France m
the search for a just solution to the integration ?f the
Comorian island of Mayo_tte into the Como~os _m accordance with the resolut10ns of the Orgamzatlon of
African Unity and the United Nations on that question;
7. Condemns the policy of "bantustanization" and
reiterates its support for the oppressed people o_f South
Africa in their just and legitimate struggle agamst the
racist minority regime in Pretoria;
8. Condemns the violations of the sanctions imposed by the Security Council against the illegal rebel
regime in Southern Rhodesia;
9. Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenat?es
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States constitutes a criminal act and that the mercenaries themselves are criminals, and calls upon the Governments of all countries to enact legislation declaring the
recruitment, financing and training of me~cenaries in
their territory and the transit of mercenanes t~r<?~gh
their territory to be punishable offences a!1d proh1b1tmg
their nationals from serving as mercenanes, and to report on such legislation to the Secretary-General;
10. Condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and of other countries whose political, economic, milita~y, nuclear? strategic, cultural and sporting relations with the racist !egimes in southern Africa and elsewhere encouragmg
those regimes to persist in their sup~res~ion of th~ aspirations of peoples for self-determmat1on and mdependence;
11. Again demands the immediate application of
the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa, imposed under Security Council resolution _418 (;977), _by
all countries, particularly by those co~mtne~ which mai!1tain military and nuclear co-operation with the racist
31

A/34/552, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.114 {XVI).

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the repor111 of the Third Committee

Pretoria regime and continue to supply related material
to that regime;
12. Strongly condemns all Governments which do
not recognize the right to self-determination and independence of all peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, notably the peoples
of Africa and the Palestinian people;
13. Strongly condemns the ever-increasing massacres of innocent and defenceless people, including women and children, by the racist minority regimes in
southern Africa in their desperate attempt to thwart the
legitimate demands of the people;
14. Further condemns the expansionist activities of
Israel in the Middle East, as well as the continuous
bombing of civilian Arab and, in particular, Palestinian
populations and the destruction of their villages and encampments, which constitutes a serious obstacle to the
realization of the self-determination and independence
of the Palestinian people;
15. Urges all States, competent United Nations organs, specialized agencies and other international organizations to extend their support to the Palestinian
people through its representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization, in its struggle to restore its right to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations;
16. Demands the immediate and unconditional release of all persons detained or imprisoned as a result
of their struggle for self-determination and independence,
full respect for their fundamental individual rights and
the observance of article 5 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 32 under which no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment;
17. Reiterates its appreciation for the material and
other forms of assistance that peoples under colonial
and foreign rule continue to receive from Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a maximization of that assistance;
18. Further calls for a maximization of all forms of
assistance given by all States, appropriate United Nations organs, specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to the victims of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid through their national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity;
19. Takes note of Economic and Social Council
decision 1979 /39 of 10 May 1979, by which the Council decided that the studies on the historical and current
development of the right to self-determination on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations and other instruments adopted by United Nations organs, with particular reference to the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, 33 and on the
implementation of United Nations resolutions relating
to the right of peoples under colonial and alien domination to self-determination 31 should be printed and given
the widest possible distribution, including distribution in
Arabic;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
to give the widest possible publicity to the struggle being

waged by oppressed peoples for the realization of their
self-determination and national independence;
21. Decides to consider this item again at its thirtyfifth session on the basis of the reports which Govemments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations have been requested to submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under foreign
domination and control.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979

34/45.

Resolution 217 A (III).
E/CN.4/Sub.2/404 (vols. I-III).
34
E/CN.4/Sub.2/405/Rev.l; the study was published under
the title The Right to Self-Determination (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.5).

International Covenants on Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 /86 of 13 December 1976,
32/66 of 8 December 1977 and 33/51 of 14 December
1978,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 3 "
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal,
more Member States have acceded to the International
Covenants on Human Rights, 36
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol thereto,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Human Rights Committee on its sixth and seventh sessions3' and expresses satisfaction at the serious and constructive manner in which the Committee is continuing
to undertake its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights which have extended their co-operation to the
Human Rights Committee when submitting their reports
under article 40 of the Covenant and urges States parties which have not yet done so to submit their reports
to the Committee as speedily as possible;
3. Urges States parties which have been requested
by the Human Rights Committee to provide additional
information to comply with that request;
4. Welcomes the information that the Economic
and Social Council has now finalized arrangements for
the consideration of reports submitted under the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 38 and expresses the hope that
the Council will take steps to consider those reports as
soon as possible;
5. Again invites all States which have not yet done
so to become parties to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to
35

32

33

169

A/34/440.
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
31
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/34/40).
3
8 See Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/43 of
11 May 1979.
36
