A/60/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

69th plenary meeting
Friday, 23 December 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 47 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/60/L.44)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 47,
jointly with agenda item 66 and its sub-items (a) and
(b), at the thirty-first to thirty-third plenary meetings
on 13 and 14 October.
I call on the representative of Rwanda to
introduce draft resolution A/60/L.44.
Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): On behalf of the
African Group and all the sponsors, I have the honour
to introduce, under agenda item 47, draft resolution
A/60/L.44, entitled “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in
Africa”.
I should like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Angola, Brazil,
Djibouti, Egypt, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Ghana, Lesotho,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Slovakia, Slovenia, the
Solomon Islands, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Turkey.
Africa bears an overwhelming proportion of the
malaria burden. The Secretary-General reports that

(Sweden)

“[u]p to 144 million people in Africa currently live in
areas at risk of epidemic malaria” (A/60/208, para. 35).
Epidemic malaria is the cause of up to 12 million
malaria episodes and between 155,000 and 310,000
deaths per year among people of all ages in Africa
alone. Malaria is, however, a disease that is
preventable, treatable and curable. It is thus, in the
effort to combat malaria as well as to implement the
Millennium Development Goals, that the African
Group has submitted the draft resolution entitled
“2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”.
The draft resolution is an update of a similar
resolution adopted last year on this issue. The draft
resolution has been updated to take into account the
new developments and measures to combat malaria.
My delegation wishes to thank the delegation of
Tanzania for facilitating the negotiation of the text, and
also all Member States that participated in the
discussion on the draft resolution. Their contributions
have enriched the draft resolution, the implementation
of which will facilitate the eradication of that deadly
disease. My delegation, in introducing the draft
resolution, hopes that, as in previous years, it will be
adopted by consensus.
Delegations may wish to be advised that the
following revisions have been made to the draft
resolution.
In operative paragraph 8, the word “and” should
appear in the third line between the words “Malaria”

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

05-66525 (E)

*0566525*

A/60/PV.69

and “through country-led initiatives”, and a comma
should be inserted after the words “adequate
international support”. The revised paragraph would
read as follows:
“Calls upon the international community,
inter alia, through helping to meet the financial
needs of the Global Fund to Fight HIV/AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria and through countryled initiatives with adequate international
support, to create conditions for insecticidetreated mosquito nets, insecticides for indoor
residual spraying for malaria control and
effective antimalarial combination treatments to
be fully accessible, including free distribution of
such nets where appropriate;”.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/60/L.44, as orally
revised.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/60/L.44, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/60/L.44, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 60/221).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 47?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution (A/60/L.16/Rev.1)
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of peace
and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/59/L.45)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 66 and
its sub-items (a) and (b), jointly with agenda item 47,
at the thirty-first to the thirty-third plenary meetings on
13 and 14 October.

2

The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica to introduce draft resolutions
A/60/L.16/Rev.1 and A/60/L.45.
Mrs. Mills (Jamaica): I have the honour, on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to introduce two
draft resolutions under agenda item 66, “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support”.
I should like to indicate that, since the formal
submission of both texts, additional sponsors have
signed on to both draft resolutions.
With respect to draft resolution A/60/L.16/Rev.1,
additional sponsors to those listed in the document are
Angola, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Djibouti, Finland,
France, Greece, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Poland,
Portugal, Rwanda, Slovenia, Spain and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
With respect to draft resolution A/60/L.45 on the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, additional sponsors
to those listed in the document are Angola, Canada and
Rwanda.
Both draft resolutions are of particular
importance to the Group of 77 and China. They both
reflect the full importance that the Group attaches to
extending support to the African continent. That is in
keeping with the special attention that has been given
to the special needs of Africa throughout the course of
this year. We continue in both draft resolutions to
underscore the progress made in the continent, but
reiterate more importantly the need for the continued
support of the United Nations system and the wider
international community in general.
I should like to indicate some revisions to draft
resolution A/60/L.16/Rev.1.
In operative paragraph 15, we would delete the
words “and of the assessment of the level and extent of
aid delivery vis-à-vis pledges”. The paragraph would
thereby end with the words “on Africa”.
With respect to operative paragraph 19, the word
“continuing” should be substituted for the word
“continuous”.

A/60/PV.69

With those revisions, I commit to the General
Assembly both draft resolutions for adoption by all
member States.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolutions A/60/L.16/Rev.1, as orally
revised, and A/60/L.45.

Before concluding, I should like to extend
compliments on behalf of the Group of 77 and China to
the facilitator, Mr. Abdellah Benmellouk of Morocco,
and to all delegations that participated in the
negotiations, thereby enabling the texts to be brought
to the Assembly for adoption by consensus.

The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/60/L.16/Rev.1, entitled “New Partnership
for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”, as orally revised.

The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed to consider draft resolutions A/60/L.16/Rev.1,
as orally revised, and A/60/L.45.
In
connection
with
draft
resolution
A/60/L.16/Rev.1, as orally revised, I call on the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley: In connection with draft resolution
A/60/L.16/Rev.1, as orally revised, I wish to inform the
General Assembly that, under the terms of the third
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution, as orally
revised, the General Assembly would recall further
“the 2005 World Summit Outcome, including the
recognition of the need to meet the special needs of
Africa”.
In operative paragraph 33 of the draft resolution,
the General Assembly would request the SecretaryGeneral
“to continue to take measures to strengthen the
Office of the Special Adviser on Africa in order
to enable it to effectively fulfil its mandate,
including monitoring and reporting on progress
related to meeting the special needs of Africa”.
Resources to strengthen the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa are included in the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, as
contained in document A/60/6 (Sect. 2) and in the
revised estimates, as contained in document A/60/537,
of the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2006-2007, relating to the outcome document of the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly
of September 2005, submitted by the President of the
General Assembly.
Therefore, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/60/L.16/Rev.1, as orally revised, no
additional appropriations would be required.

Ukraine has become a sponsor of the draft
resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/60/L.16/Rev.1, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/60/L.16/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted (resolution 60/222).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/60/L.45, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
Ukraine has become a sponsor of the draft
resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/60/L.45?
Draft resolution A/60/L.45 was adopted
(resolution 60/223).
The President: Before I call on delegations
wishing to speak in explanation of position on the draft
resolutions just adopted, may I remind them that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I call on the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela in explanation of position.
Mrs. Núñez de Odremán (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has not opposed the
consensus, given our support for and solidarity with the
peoples of Africa.
However, given our well-known position
concerning the outcome document of the 2005 summit,
we wish to express reservations concerning the third
preambular paragraph of resolution 60/222 and the
fifth preambular paragraph of resolution 60/223.

3

A/60/PV.69

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item 66 and of agenda
item 66 as a whole?
It was so decided.
The President: The time has come for me to
make a few concluding remarks before we close this
part of the work of the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly. As I said, I hope that today will be the last
day of our work, but since I am not certain of the time
of the day when we shall be able to meet again in the
plenary to decide the budget, I want to take advantage
of the broad presence of representatives in this Hall
this morning to say a few words. I trust that they have
all received my letter of yesterday reviewing our
progress to date on the 2005 world summit follow-up; I
will not repeat the details of that letter. It has also been
circulated in the Hall today.
As members know, the Fifth Committee has not
yet finalized the work on the 2006-2007 budget. I am
encouraged by the diligent and constructive efforts that
are being made to find solutions, and I am hopeful that
during the course of the day we can reach a conclusion
on that urgent and absolutely vital issue for the United
Nations. We need clearly defined financial conditions
guiding our work in the next two years.
I am the first to acknowledge that this has been
an unusually intense period of work for the General
Assembly. Let us recall that, exactly 100 days ago, our
leaders gathered here for the world summit and
adopted an ambitious reform agenda for the United
Nations. That set the pace and direction of much of our
work over the past few months. Since the summit, we
have engaged wholeheartedly in the implementation of
the reforms, alongside our regular programme of work.
I am deeply grateful to all representatives for the
energy they have invested in our work and for their
willingness seriously to work through the open,
transparent and inclusive mechanisms we have put in
place for our consultations and negotiations.
We have already recorded some important
achievements. We have reached agreement on the
Peacebuilding Commission. We have expanded and
transformed the existing central humanitarian funding
mechanism into the new Central Emergency Response
Fund. We have adopted the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, and later today we will, I hope,

4

be able take action on the draft resolution on
HIV/AIDS, paving the way for an important high-level
meeting next year.
Those are achievements of which we should all
be very proud. If they are quickly and effectively
implemented — the word “implemented” is important
in our Organization — and effectively supported, they
stand to make an important, practical difference to
people around the world who rely on the United
Nations in their hope for a brighter future. Those
achievements are also an early indication to the world
that this body, the General Assembly of the United
Nations, can and will take difficult but important
decisions on the challenges that confront us and the
world.
Our achievements so far must also give impetus
to our ongoing work on other important reform
issues — the Human Rights Council, development
follow-up and reform of the Economic and Social
Council, Secretariat and management reform, Security
Council reform and the work on counter-terrorism.
They should also give us strength as we begin in
January to consider further aspects of the summit
follow-up, such as system-wide coherence, the
environment
work
and
General
Assembly
revitalization.
I believe, as I stated earlier, that the most
valuable and tangible contribution that we can make to
revitalizing the General Assembly will be the timely
and effective implementation of the world summit
outcome. After this fall’s work and experiences, I am
more convinced than ever about the importance of
strengthening the role and relevance of the General
Assembly. We represent all the nations and all the
peoples of the world. Together, we must reaffirm the
central position of the General Assembly as the chief
deliberative, policy-making and representative organ of
the United Nations.
Today, I would first like to express my thanks to
all the members of the Secretariat, not least UnderSecretary-General Jian Chen and all the dedicated and
hard-working staff in the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management. They have
provided us with invaluable support during this first
part of the sixtieth session. Nor must we forget all the
people who work behind the scenes — the interpreters,
the printers and everyone who makes our work flow so
well.

A/60/PV.69

Secondly, I would like to thank our co-chairs,
Committee chairs and all the others among us who
have played leading roles in our work to date. Some
have just brought their work to a conclusion, others are
just beginning, but they are united by their skilled
approach and strong commitment to their work and
their determination to see the United Nations deliver
what our leaders asked us to do.
I would also like to thank all our Permanent
Representatives, representatives and staff for the noble
spirit in which they have worked and for the support
they have given me and my Office during these first
100 days. It is deeply appreciated. A particular thanks
goes to the excellent group of vice-presidents, who
have so skilfully and faithfully helped me lead the
General Assembly.
When I was writing these remarks together with
my colleagues, we tried to look for other things that
had happened in 100 days. In fact, we found that, in the
nineteenth century, there was a Chinese emperor who
launched 100 days of reform, during which he initiated
many bold and ambitious reform processes. The only
trouble — one which made me hesitant to bring up that
example — was that, after 100 days, his aunt, the
empress dowager, decided that she had had quite
enough and put him in prison for the rest of his life.
In closing, I would like to wish everyone and
their families a joyful and peaceful holiday season and
a prosperous new year. I trust that we will all —
including our members of the Fifth Committee — have
an opportunity to rest and recharge our batteries over
the coming days. I look forward to welcoming
everyone back in January to continue our work with
renewed energy, determination and belief in this
Organization.
The Assembly will take up the remaining items as
listed in today’s Journal, including the reports of the
Fifth Committee, as soon as the Fifth Committee has
finished its work.
The meeting was suspended at 10.55 a.m. and
resumed at 10.10 p.m.
The President: I welcome members back this
evening; we at the United Nations have some strange
ways of celebrating holidays. And to extend our
pleasure, before we reach the budget issue, at the
outcome of which we are rejoicing, we need to go

through the other agenda items that we left unfinished
this morning.
Agenda item 45
Follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special
session: implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS
Draft resolution (A/60/L.43)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/625)
The President: The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
draft resolution A/60/L.43 is issued as document
A/60/625, and the text of the programme budget
implications is contained, for the time being, in
document A/C.5/60/L.22, section J.
In view of the lateness of the hour, I will not read
out my prepared statement on this important draft
resolution. Copies are being distributed to delegations.
Let me say only that the new year, 2006, will
mark five years since the landmark Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS, adopted at the twentysixth special session of the General Assembly. The
world has made progress on the fight against
HIV/AIDS, but much remains to be done. In the next
hour, more than 300 people will die as a result of
AIDS. In the same span of time, more than 500 men,
women and children will become newly infected, more
than half of them under the age of 24.
Our initial response to HIV/AIDS was slow, but
we must make 2006 the year when the international
community finally steps up to the plate. We need to
focus on education, gender and health. I was glad that
the General Assembly’s recent summit outcome
document (resolution 60/1) included provisions on
health systems capacity and that the Assembly
unanimously adopted a resolution on enhancing
capacity-building in global public health (resolution
60/35).
The draft resolution I am introducing today,
entitled “Preparations for and organization of the 2006
follow-up meeting on the outcome of the twenty-sixth
special session: implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS”, paves the way for the
comprehensive review of progress in implementing the
2001 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and

5

A/60/PV.69

for the high-level meeting to be held in May and June
2006. Further, it responds to the commitment
undertaken by our leaders at the 2005 world summit to
fully implement all the commitments established by the
Declaration.
Let me just extend my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Christopher Hackett of Barbados and
Ambassador Laxanachantorn Laohaphan of Thailand
for their skilled and committed co-chairing of the
informal consultations which produced this draft
resolution. And, of course, I want to pay tribute to all
delegates for reaching agreement in the consultations.
We all know that there was difficulty finding common
ground on some sensitive issues. That spirit of
compromise is much appreciated.
In closing, I should note that high-level
attendance will be critical to the success of the
proposed meeting next year. If draft resolution
A/60/L.43 is adopted today, I would strongly
encourage high-level representation at the meeting
from as many Member States as possible.
Before giving the floor to the representative of
Cuba, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
on draft resolution A/60/L.43, I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Cumberbach Miguén (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): When the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1) was adopted, our delegation clearly
indicated its dissatisfaction with the section on various
questions related to the international development
agenda. We made clear our reservations with respect to
the text of the outcome document, whose adoption was
marred by a lack of transparency and by manipulation
on the part of certain very powerful delegations. No
substantive progress was made in terms of the
commitments undertaken in United Nations summits
and conferences. Nor were we able to reaffirm the
outcomes of those summits and conferences.
While the outcome document affirms that the
agreed commitments of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS of the twenty-sixth special
session, held in 2001, will be fully implemented, it
then
immediately
undermines
those
agreed
commitments: the goal of universal access to treatment
for all those who need it is reduced to the mere aim of
coming as close as possible to that goal by 2010. But

6

we all know that to halt the pandemic, urgent and
effective action must be taken now.
It is clear that the guardians of the neo-liberal
marketplace are more concerned about the profits of
the major pharmaceutical corporations than about the
lives of millions of human beings who suffer the
consequences of HIV/AIDS. The families of the some
300 people who will die — as you, Sir, said — in the
next hour should be aware of that.
With the adoption of draft resolution A/60/L.43,
on preparations for the meeting to be held next year,
the General Assembly is about to repeat the error it
made in September 2005. Our delegation will therefore
not join the consensus on the draft resolution, and it
disassociates itself from the draft resolution’s language
on universal access to treatment for all those that need
it, contained in paragraph 12, which repeats the step
backwards taken by paragraph 57 (d) of the September
2005 summit outcome document. Furthermore, that
language prepares the way for diluting other
development goals in public health and other areas that
are not of interest to big business.
Our country will continue to oppose the obstacles
put in the path of the sustainable development of
developing countries.
The President: In view of the lateness of the
hour, may I ask delegates to make their explanations of
vote or position as brief as possible.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/60/L.43, entitled “Preparations for and
organization of the 2006 follow-up meeting on the
outcome of the twenty-sixth special session:
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/60/L.43?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/224).
The President: I call now on delegations wishing
to speak in explanation of position on the draft
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Yáñez Pilgrim (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation did not
oppose the consensus on A/60/L.43, but it believes it
necessary to make the following statement.

A/60/PV.69

One of the many reasons for which the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela did not accept the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) was because of the
considerable step backwards in the area of the fight
against HIV/AIDS that it would legitimize. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela sees the new
language accepted by some heads of State or
Government — by which the commitment is solely to
come as close as possible to the goal of universal
access to treatment by 2010 for all those who need it
rather than a firm commitment to ensure access for all
to antiretroviral treatment — as a step backward and a
failure to implement the Millennium Declaration and
the Millennium Development Goals.
We urge the entire international community to
keep the Millennium Declaration commitments alive
and not limit the goals set in 2000 by means of this
new, not very encouraging language. We also hope that
this step backwards in the fight against the scourge of
HIV/AIDS does not set a precedent that allows the
most powerful countries of the international system to
reduce the other Millennium Development Goals to
their bare minimum.
For those reasons, we express our reservations
with respect to the third preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 12 of the draft resolution.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States joined consensus on the resolution just
adopted on preparations for and organization of the
2006 follow-up meeting on the outcome of the twentysixth special session: implementation of the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS. While we
regret the appearance of an unexpected, last-minute
report on programme budget implications, it is our
expectation that all costs for the comprehensive review
not already covered by the biennium budget will be
absorbed.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
45.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/60/L.34)

Amendment (A/60/L.35)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/621)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on agenda item 73 and its
sub-items (a), (c) and (d) at its 51st and 52nd plenary
meetings, on 14 November 2005, and adopted seven
resolutions under this item at its 52nd and 63rd plenary
meetings.
In connection with this sub-item, the General
Assembly now has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/60/L.34 and an amendment thereto
contained in document A/60/L.35. The report of the
Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of draft resolution A/60/L.34 and its
amendment is issued as document A/60/621, and the
text of the programme budget implications is
contained, for the time being, in document
A/C.5/60/L.22, section F.
Before proceeding further, I would like to inform
members that the sponsor of the amendment contained
in document A/60/L.35 has withdrawn the amendment.
I give the floor to the representative of the United
States, who wishes to speak in explanation of position.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join the consensus on the
draft resolution on assistance to survivors of the 1994
genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and
victims of sexual violence, with the following
explanation.
With respect to operative paragraph 5, to which
we had proposed an amendment, issued as document
A/60/L.35, we wish to emphasize our commitment to
carrying out the mandate of the draft resolution. We
also wish to reaffirm our commitment to stopping
genocide wherever it may occur and to supporting
outreach programmes for all citizens and countries that
have suffered that monstrous crime. That is why we are
joining the consensus on this draft resolution.
We have devoted substantial monetary and human
resources to a wide range of programmes in Rwanda,
in areas ranging from democracy and governance to
health, HIV/AIDS, rural economic growth and food
security. Some of those programmes are dedicated to
advancing justice and reconciliation at the local and
national levels. Of particular relevance to the draft
resolution is the fact that we provide funding for the

7

A/60/PV.69

Genocide Survivors Fund, which awards scholarships
to survivors. In addition, we provide 25 per cent of the
funding for the Criminal Tribunal to try and sentence
the perpetrators of the 1994 genocide. These are
significant contributions that testify to the strength of
our commitment to fighting genocide and to bringing
the perpetrators to justice.
Our position on operative paragraph 5 reflects our
conviction that the enhanced authority, efficiency and
effectiveness of the United Nations depends in part on
budget reform.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/60/L.34, entitled
“Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of
sexual violence”.
We have a number of additional sponsors:
Burundi, Croatia, Italy, Monaco, Norway, Slovenia,
South Africa, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Tunisia.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/60/L.34?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/225).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria in explanation of vote after
the vote.
Mr. Idoko (Nigeria): I will not take much time,
given that we are already late into the night — and into
our holidays.
I am grateful to members for the adoption of this
resolution without a vote. We also wish to recall that a
similar resolution was adopted without a vote last year.
Tonight’s adoption once more demonstrates the
understanding and the support that members have
shown not only for the resolution but for the situation
of the survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
I also wish to thank those delegations which
participated in the negotiations on the draft resolution
for the level of understanding and flexibility that they
demonstrated in the course of the consultations. Our
appreciation also goes to the countries that sponsored
the draft resolution.
I wish members a wonderful holiday break.

8

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 73.
Reports of the First, Second, Third and Fifth
Committees
The President: The General Assembly will now
take up the remaining reports of the three Committees
as follows: the report of the First Committee on agenda
item 97; the reports of the Second Committee on subitem (c) of agenda item 54 and sub-item (a) of agenda
item 55; and the reports of the Third Committee on
agenda items 64, 67 and sub-items (b) and (c) of
agenda item 71. Thereafter, the General Assembly will
also take up the reports of the Fifth Committee on
agenda items 121, 122, 127 to 129, 132, 134, 135, 123,
124 and 122.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the four
Committees before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of these four Committees have been
made clear in the Committees and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the First,
Second, Third and Fifth Committees, I should like to
advise representatives that we are going to proceed to
take decisions in the same manner as was done in the

A/60/PV.69

Committees, unless notified otherwise in advance. That
means that, where separate or recorded votes were
taken, we will do the same. I should also hope that we
may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the respective Committee.
Agenda item 97 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/60/463)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/617)
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution XXIV, recommended by the
First Committee in paragraph 94 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution
XXIV is issued as document A/60/617, and the text of
the programme budget implications is contained, for
the time being, in document A/C.5/60/L.22, section B.
Draft resolution XXIV is entitled “Transparency
in armaments”.
Separate votes have been requested on the words
“and the recommendations contained in paragraphs 112
to 114 of the 2003 report of the Secretary-General” in
operative paragraph 2, on operative paragraph 3, on
operative paragraph 4 (b) and on operative paragraph 6
of draft resolution XXIV. Are there any objections to
those requests?
As there are no objections, I shall first put to the
vote the words “and the recommendations contained in
paragraph 112 to 114 of the 2003 report of the
Secretary-General” in operative paragraph 2 of draft
resolution XXIV, on which a separate vote has been
requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,

Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti,
Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen.
The words “and the recommendations contained
in paragraphs 112 to 114 of the 2003 report of the
Secretary-General” in operative paragraph 2
were retained by 97 votes to none, with 20
abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Eritrea,
Israel, Paraguay and Zambia informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour; the delegations of Lebanon and the
United Kingdom informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to abstain.]
The President: I shall next put to the vote
operative paragraph 3 of draft resolution XXIV, on
which a separate vote has been requested. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,

9

A/60/PV.69

Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia
and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Djibouti, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Yemen.
Operative paragraph 3 was retained by 94 votes
to none, with 22 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Eritrea,
Israel, Paraguay and Zambia informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Lebanon informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain; the
delegation of Myanmar informed the Secretariat
that it had intended not to participate in the
voting.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 4 (b) of draft resolution XXIV, on
which a separate vote has been requested. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

10

In favour:
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen.
Operative paragraph 4 (b) was retained by 97
votes to none, with 19 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Eritrea,
Israel, Paraguay and Zambia informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Lebanon informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain; the
delegation of Myanmar informed the Secretariat
that it had intended not to participate in the
voting.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 6 of draft resolution XXIV, on

A/60/PV.69

which a separate vote has been requested. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Monaco, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Djibouti, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Yemen.
Operative paragraph 6 was retained by 93 votes
to none, with 22 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Eritrea,
Israel, Paraguay and Zambia informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Lebanon informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]

The President: I now put to the vote draft
resolution as a whole. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan,
Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Latvia,
Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia.
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Djibouti, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Yemen
Draft resolution XXIV as a whole was adopted by
99 votes to none, with 22 abstentions (resolution
60/226).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia and
Israel informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegations of

11

A/60/PV.69

Lebanon and Myanmar informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 97?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
First Committee.
Agenda item 54 (continued)
Globalization and interdependence
(c) International migration and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/60/490/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/623)
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution II recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 15 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution II is
issued as document A/60/623, and the text of the
programme budget implications is contained, for the
time being, in document A/C.5/60/L.22, section H.
We shall now take a decision on draft resolution
II. The Second Committee adopted draft resolution II.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
60/227).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 55 (continued)
Groups of countries in special situations
(a) Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries

12

Report of the Second Committee
(A/60/491/Add.1)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/624)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of the draft resolution
is issued as document A/60/624, and the text of the
programme budget implications is contained, for the
time being, in document A/C.5/60/L.22, section I.
A separate vote has been requested on operative 6
of the draft resolution. Is there any objection to that
request?
As there is no objection, I shall now put to the
vote operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, on
which a separate vote has been requested. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, France, Gambia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Sudan, United States of America.

A/60/PV.69

Abstaining:
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Netherlands, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine.
Operative paragraph 6 was retained by 86 votes
to 2, with 38 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia,
Canada, Colombia, Paraguay and the Sudan
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour; the delegations of Israel, New
Zealand, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
abstain.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution as a whole. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted
(resolution 60/228).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of subitem (a) of agenda item 55.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Second
Committee.
Agenda item 64 (continued)
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/60/503)
Reports of the Fifth Committee (A/60/616 and
A/60/619)
The President: The Assembly will take action on
draft resolutions IV and VI recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 48 of its report.
The reports of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolutions IV

and VI are issued as documents A/60/619 and
A/60/616 respectively. The text of the programme
budget implications for the two draft resolutions is
contained, for the time being, in document
A/C.5/60/L.22, section A and section D, respectively.
I wish to inform members that, as was agreed in
the Fifth Committee, the words “should there be a
shortage of voluntary contributions” in section D of
document A/C.5/60/L.22 have been deleted, and the
sentence ends with the word “2006”.
Draft resolution IV is entitled “Future operation
of the International Research and Training Institute for
the Advancement of Women”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Gambia,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia and
Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Japan,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

13

A/60/PV.69

Abstaining:
Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Norway,
Poland, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Slovenia, Switzerland, Ukraine.

Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

Draft resolution IV was adopted by 95 votes to
10, with 25 abstentions (resolution 60/229).

Against:
United States of America.

[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Israel
and Paraguay informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]

Abstaining:
Brunei Darussalam, Japan, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Singapore, United Arab Emirates.

The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women”.

Operative paragraph 14 was retained by 117
votes to 1, with 6 abstentions.

Separate votes have been requested on operative
paragraph 14 and on operative paragraph 15 of draft
resolution VI. Is there any objection to those requests?
As there are no objections to those requests, I
shall first put to the vote operative paragraph 14 of
draft resolution VI, on which a separate vote has been
requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia and Montenegro,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab

14

[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Israel
and Paraguay informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall next put to the vote
operative paragraph 15 of draft resolution VI, on which
a separate vote has been requested. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Benin, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United

A/60/PV.69

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zambia.
Against:
Bahrain, Cuba, Egypt, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Saudi Arabia, Sudan, United States of America,
Yemen.
Abstaining:
Brunei Darussalam, China, Japan, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Qatar, Singapore, United Arab
Emirates.
Operative paragraph 15 was retained by 105
votes to 8, with 8 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Israel
and Paraguay informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I now put to the vote draft
resolution VI as a whole. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Morocco,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia and Montenegro,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,

Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) ,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Draft resolution VI as a whole was adopted by
127 votes to 1 (resolution 60/230).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Israel,
Paraguay and the Philippines informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 64?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/60/505)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/618)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution II, recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 46 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution II
has been issued as document A/60/618. For the time
being, the text of the programme budget implications is
contained in section C of document A/C.5/60/L.22.
In connection with draft resolution II, the
secretariat of the Third Committee has informed us that
there were some inadvertent omissions to the list of
sponsors contained in the report of the Committee. A
corrigendum will be issued in due course.
Draft resolution II is entitled “Rights of the
child”. Separate votes have been requested on
operative paragraphs 15 (d), 27, 28 and 35. Are there
any objections to those requests?

15

A/60/PV.69

There being none, I shall first put to the vote
operative paragraph 15 (d) of draft resolution II, on
which a separate recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zambia.
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Brunei
Darussalam, Guyana, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Syrian Arab Republic, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Malawi, Morocco, Qatar, Sri Lanka,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Operative paragraph 15 (d) was retained by 95
votes to 11, with 14 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Israel
and Paraguay informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour; the delegation of
Zambia informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain.]

16

The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 27 of draft resolution II, on which
a separate recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zimbabwe.
Against:
Barbados, Brunei Darussalam, China, Costa Rica,
Egypt, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Jamaica, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Maldives,
Mali, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
United States of America, Yemen.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Jordan, Malaysia,
Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Sri
Lanka, United Arab Emirates, Zambia.
Operative paragraph 27 of draft resolution II was
retained by 85 votes to 20, with 16 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Costa
Rica, Israel, Oman and Paraguay informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Zimbabwe informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]

A/60/PV.69

The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 28 of draft resolution II, on which
a separate recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Brunei
Darussalam,
Guyana,
Jamaica,
Malaysia,
Singapore, Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Bahrain, China, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Morocco, Oman, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
States of America, Zambia.
Operative paragraph 28 of draft resolution II was
retained by 93 votes to 10, with 17 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Israel,
Oman and Paraguay informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour; the
delegation of Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat

that it had intended not to participate in the
voting.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 35 of draft resolution II, on which
a separate recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia and Montenegro,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Japan, Uganda, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Ghana, Guinea, Morocco.
Operative paragraph 35 of draft resolution II was
retained by 116 votes to 3, with 3 abstentions.

17

A/60/PV.69

[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Brazil,
Israel and Paraguay informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour.]

[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia, Israel
and Paraguay informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]

The President: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution II as a whole. A recorded vote has been
requested.

The President: I call on the representative of the
United States of America who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote.

A recorded vote was taken.

Mr. Wolff (United States of America): With
regard to resolution 60/231, entitled “Rights of the
child”, which was introduced under agenda item 67,
“Promotion and protection of the rights of children”,
the United States would like to bring to the attention of
the General Assembly the amendments to the draft
resolution presented by our delegation during its
consideration by the Third Committee. We are not
going to resubmit those amendments in plenary
meeting, but we would like it reflected in the record
that our position has not changed. The United States
wishes to underscore our disagreement with regard to
the phrasing of references in the resolution to the
International Criminal Court and the Convention of the
Rights of the Child, among other provisions, and the
lack of emphasis on other instruments protecting
children.

In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia and
Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 67?

Against:
United States of America.

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 21 of its report.

Draft resolution II as a whole was adopted by
130 votes to 1 (resolution 60/231).

18

It was so decided.
Agenda item 71 (continued)
Human rights questions
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/60/509/Add.2 (Part I))
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/622)

The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of the draft resolution
has been issued as document A/60/622. For the time

A/60/PV.69

being, the text of the programme budget implications is
contained in section G of document A/C.5/60/L.22.
We shall now take a decision on the draft
resolution, which is entitled “Ad Hoc Committee on a
Comprehensive and Integral International Convention
on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and
Dignity of Persons with Disabilities”.
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/232).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 71?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee
(A/60/509/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/620)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution VI, which was
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 70
of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution VI
has been issued as document A/60/620. For the time
being, the text of the programme budget implications is
contained in section E of document A/C.5/60/L.22.
I call on the representative of Myanmar, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position before
action is taken on the draft resolution.
Mr. Wai (Myanmar): For the reasons we gave
loud and clear during the meeting of the Third
Committee held on 18 November 2005, we
categorically reject the allegations and accusations
contained in draft resolution VI, entitled “Situation of
human rights in Myanmar”. On behalf of the delegation
of Myanmar, I would also like to reiterate our
dissociation from that draft resolution.

The President: We shall now take a decision on
draft resolution VI, entitled “Situation of human rights
in Myanmar”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution VI
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution
60/233).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 71 and of agenda item 71
as a whole?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Third Committee.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 121, 122, 127 to 129, 132, 134, 135, 123, 124
and 122.
I request Ms. Katja Pehrman of Finland,
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee, to introduce, in one
intervention, the reports of the Fifth Committee before
the Assembly.
Ms. Pehrman (Finland), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour today to introduce to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee
containing recommendations on issues that required
action during the main part of the sixtieth session of
the General Assembly. The Fifth Committee met
between 10 October and 23 December 2005 and held
36 plenary meetings and more than 100 rounds of
informal informal consultations, as well as
innumerable informal consultations outside Conference
Room 5.
With regard to agenda item 121, entitled
“Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors”, in paragraph 7 of its
report contained in document A/60/561 the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.

19

A/60/PV.69

Concerning agenda item 122, entitled “Review of
the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 8 of
its report contained in document A/60/609 the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution entitled “Report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services on the inspection
of programme and administrative management of the
subregional offices of the Economic Commission for
Africa”.
With regard to agenda item 127, entitled “Pattern
of conferences”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained
in document A/60/601 the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution on pattern of conferences, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 128, entitled “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations”, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/60/602 the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 129, entitled “Human
resources management”, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/60/603 the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 132, entitled “Report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services”, in paragraph 6 of its
report contained in document A/60/604, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on its management audit of the regional
commissions”, which the Committee adopted without a
vote.
The draft reports of the Committee on agenda
items 134 and 135 — entitled, respectively, “Financing
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and

20

31 December 1994” and “Financing of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991” — are contained in
documents A/60/605 and A/60/606, respectively.
In paragraph 6 of each report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
two draft resolutions, all of which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 123, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005”, in
paragraphs 7 and 8 of its report contained in document
A/60/593 the Fifth Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of one draft resolution
and one draft decision, respectively. The draft
resolution is entitled “Estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or
the Security Council: United Nations Office in TimorLeste”. The Committee adopted both draft proposals
without a vote.
The Assembly also has before it document
A/60/593/Add.2, in paragraph 6 of which the Fifth
Committee recommends the adoption of a draft
resolution on the second performance report on the
programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, which
the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 124, entitled
“Proposed programme budget for the biennium 20062007”, in paragraph 45 of its report contained in
document A/60/608 the Fifth Committee recommends
the adoption of five draft resolutions, the texts of
which, for the time being, are contained in documents
A/C.5/60/L.25, L.26, L.27, L.12 and L.13 respectively.
Also with regard to agenda item 124, the
Committee considered 10 statements of programme
budget implications, which are contained in sections A
to J of document A/C.5/60/L.22. The Committee
adopted them without a vote. The related reports of the
Fifth Committee are contained in documents A/60/616
to A/60/625.
Also under agenda item 122, entitled “Review of
the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 9 of
its report (A/60/609), the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft decision

A/60/PV.69

relating to questions deferred for future consideration.
The draft decision was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
I wish to thank delegations for their cooperation
and to assure them that the changes made in the course
of the Fifth Committee’s 36th formal meeting, held this
evening, have been duly taken into account and will be
reflected in the draft resolutions that are before the
Assembly tonight.
Before I conclude, allow me, on a brief personal
note, to thank Ambassador John Ashe, Chairman of the
Fifth Committee, for the way in which he guided us
through our work. In addition, I would like to warmly
thank my fellow Bureau members and all my other
colleagues in the Fifth Committee, with whom it is
always a truly enjoyable experience to work. At one
point, I actually thought that experience would never
end. Many thanks go also to Mr. Rajat Saha, Chairmanelect of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions. And I would like to thank for
their very pleasant company all of those next to whom
I have had the privilege and honour to be seated on the
podium of Conference Room 3.
Finally, on behalf of all of us, I would like to
express our profound thanks to the representatives of
the Secretariat, and especially to the secretariat of the
Fifth Committee — Mr. Movses Abelian, Ms. Helene
Thorup-Hayes and their staff — for their support.
I wish all of you, colleagues, and your families a
wonderful and relaxing holiday. If anyone deserves
that, you certainly do. Once again, happy holidays; I
will see you all next year.
The President: We are indeed enjoying the
holidays, are we not?
Agenda item 121
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/561)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft

resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/234).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
121.
Agenda item 122
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/609)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 9 of the
same report.
We will first take a decision on the draft
resolution and will revert to the draft decision at the
end of the meeting. The text of the draft resolution, for
the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.17.
The draft resolution is entitled “Report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services on the inspection
of programme and administrative management of the
subregional offices of the Economic Commission for
Africa”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/235).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
122.
Agenda item 127
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/601)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft

21

A/60/PV.69

resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.21.

resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?

We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/238).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/236).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
127.
Agenda item 128
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/602)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.20.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/237).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
128.
Agenda item 129
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/603)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.23.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft

22

The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
129.
Agenda item 132
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/604)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.5.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, which is entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on its management audit of the regional
commissions”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/239).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
132.
Agenda item 134
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/605)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee

A/60/PV.69

in paragraph 6 of its report. The texts of the two draft
resolutions, for the time being, are contained in
documents
A/C.5/60/L.15
and
A/C.5/60/L.18,
respectively.
We will now take a decision on the two draft
resolutions.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Second
performance report for the biennium 2004-2005 on the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
60/240).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
60/241).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
134.
Agenda item 135
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/606)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
The text of the two draft resolutions, for the time
being, is contained in documents A/C.5/60/L.16 and
A/C.5/60/L.19, respectively.
We will now take a decision on the two draft
resolutions.
The first draft resolution is entitled “Second
performance report for the biennium 2004-2005 on the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/242).
The President: The second draft resolution is
entitled “Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”.
The Fifth Committee adopted this draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/243).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
135.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/593 and
A/60/593/Add.2)

23

A/60/PV.69

The President: The General Assembly will first
consider the report of the Fifth Committee contained in
document A/60/593. The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 8 of the
same report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution and on the draft decision.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“Estimates in respect of special political missions,
good offices and other political initiatives authorized
by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council:
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste”.

Agenda item 124
Proposed programme budget for the biennium
2006-2007
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/608)
The President: The report of the Fifth
Committee is, for the time being, contained in
document A/C.5/60/L.28 and is available only in
English.
In view of the late hour and the lack of time to
process the report of the Fifth Committee on this item,
and in the absence of objection, the Assembly will
consider the report in English only.

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The Assembly has before it five draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 45
of its report.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/244).

The text of the five draft resolutions, for the time
being, is contained in documents A/C.5/60/L.25,
A/C.5/60/L.26, A/C.5/60/L.27, A/C.5/60/L.12 and
A/C.5/60/L.13, respectively.

The President: The draft decision, entitled
“United Nations Fund for International Partnerships”,
was adopted by the Fifth Committee. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the report of the Fifth Committee contained in
document A/60/593/Add.2. The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, which is entitled “Programme budget for
the biennium 2004-2005”. This draft resolution is in
two parts. Part A is entitled “Final budget
appropriations for the biennium 2004-2005”. Part B is
entitled “Final income estimates for the biennium
2004-2005”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/245 A and B).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
123.

24

We will now take a decision on the five draft
resolutions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Questions relating to the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2006-2007”.
The Fifth Committee adopted this draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
60/246).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007”, has
three parts. Part A is entitled “Budget appropriations
for the biennium 2006-2007”. Part B is entitled
“Income estimates for the biennium 2006-2007”. Part
C is entitled “Financing of appropriations for the year
2006”.
The Fifth Committee adopted this draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
60/247 A-C).

A/60/PV.69

The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Special subjects relating to the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2006-2007”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
60/248).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the
biennium 2006-2007”.
The Fifth Committee adopted this draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
60/249).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2006-2007”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
60/250).
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives wishing to speak in explanation of
position on the resolutions just adopted.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the pleasure to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Tonight’s agreement is a good outcome for the
United Nations. We have a two-year budget with
substantial resources and an assessment for one year,
which means that all Member States are expected to
make contributions as required by the Charter.
The European Union has been actively involved
in negotiations, and we hope that we have played our
part in bridging the differences which did exist. The
budget and the associated resolutions bring together the
different challenges facing the United Nations, many of
which were set out in the summit outcome document.
We have recently made some modest progress on
implementation of that document. Next year the
European Union looks forward to much more progress
as we work together to fulfil our commitments.

Management reform is for all of us a priority, and
the summit has set a timetable for us, so those results
should be available when we come to consider the
request by the Secretary-General for the expenditure
authority for the second tranche envisaged for 2006.
In working on the discussions on paragraph 3 of
the budget appropriation resolution, the negotiators
were agreed on the importance of the budget permitting
the continuous functioning of the United Nations, but,
equally, it was acknowledged that the SecretaryGeneral’s request would be treated on its merits, with
no automaticity.
The European Union will continue to work
actively with colleagues next year in order to achieve
the necessary reforms and to make the progress
expected of us as set out at the summit. We are
confident that the Assembly will generate progress on
these aspects to build on what we have achieved
tonight and that therefore the budget in its entirety will
be implemented as we would expect.
Mr. President, if I could end on a personal note
and thank you not just for your leadership on this
particular issue but also for having given up the
possibility of getting home to Sweden for Christmas in
order to make sure that this went through. We salute
you for that, and we wish all our colleagues a very
happy holiday.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his greetings related to the
Christmas celebration.
Mr. Neil (Jamaica): The Group of 77 and China
agreed to the adoption, without a vote, of the resolution
on the biennium budget for 2006-2007 and the
accompanying appropriations resolution. However, we
have to express some serious concerns and
reservations.
First, as to process, as you yourself have said
frequently, Mr. President, negotiations and decisionmaking in the United Nations should be conducted in
the context of an open, transparent and inclusive
process. To that end, there are established
arrangements through the Committee structure.
Unfortunately, what happened on this occasion did not
meet the required high standards. The process was
conducted in a closed group, behind closed doors.
We recognize the constraints of time and of
pressures to complete consideration of the agenda and

25

A/60/PV.69

especially to adopt a budget for the biennium. It was a
critical objective that needed to be fulfilled in order to
avoid plunging the Organization into a crisis. But it is,
unfortunately, becoming all too frequent for
negotiations and decision-making to take place in a
closed group.
These procedures have to change; otherwise, the
integrity of consensus decisions will be open to
question. On this occasion, there was considerable
dissatisfaction in the Group of 77 and China at the
bypassing of the Fifth Committee in the negotiation of
the budget.
Secondly, as to substance, we are pleased that we
were able to arrive at a consensus on a budget for the
next biennium. We believe that it is a good budget, and
those in the negotiations contributed to a good
outcome. The Group of 77 and China negotiated
constructively, in good faith, throughout the process
towards achieving that result and made many
compromises and gestures to accommodate other
parties.
However, we have to express our gravest
reservations at the inclusion in paragraph 3 of the
appropriations resolution of a spending limitation of
$950 million. This has nullified to a great extent the
fruits of our efforts, because it effectively reduces the
biennium budget to a six-month budget. It is a serious
aberration in our budgetary arrangements for such a
spending limitation to be imposed on the SecretaryGeneral. Worse is the purpose, which is to apply
pressure on Member States to act under the pain of
deprivation of funding for the Organization. This is
contrary to the spirit of the Charter, which requires
Member States to fulfil their obligations with regard to
the financing of the United Nations.
The introduction of conditionalities into the
system through the control of the purse is a very
troubling and regrettable tendency. As it has
consistently stated and demonstrated, the Group of 77
and China supports reform for better management and
improved efficiency in the Secretariat. Our heads of
Government have pledged their support, and our
delegations are working towards fulfilling that
commitment. We will not always agree on all
proposals, and we will continue to judge proposals on
their merits.
Unfortunately, a veritable sword of Damocles has
now been placed over our heads in the form of a threat

26

to United Nations financing, coming from the largest
contributors to the budget. That is why, in many
respects, this is a sad occasion for us.
The Group of 77 and China 77 rejects
conditionalities, and we oppose the imposition of the
spending limit on the Secretary-General. But we were
faced with a very difficult choice. We did not wish to
risk a serious financial crisis for the Organization,
which would have resulted from the failure to adopt a
budget. We therefore decided not to call for a vote on
the imposition of the spending cap, despite our strong
objection.
The Group of 77 and China wishes to state, for
the record, that we regard this action as an exceptional
measure which should not be treated as a precedent. It
should never be repeated. We wish also to state that it
is our expectation that the membership will ensure that
the request for further spending of the outstanding
balance will be honoured when the Secretary-General
makes his request in mid-year 2006.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): Mr. President, the
delegation of Japan welcomes the adoption of the
2006-2007 biennium budget by consensus. We thank
you for your strong leadership, under which
negotiations leading to its adoption by consensus were
conducted. Many delegations participated actively in
the budget negotiations and made important
contributions.
In that regard, I wish to note with appreciation
the key role played by Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones
Parry of the United Kingdom and Ambassador Stafford
Neil of Jamaica, Chairman of the Group of 77.
Incorporating the early harvest results of the
summit outcome document into the biennial budget has
been a complicated process. The position that my
delegation has taken throughout this process reflects
our deep commitment to the reform of our
Organization and our conviction that this must be
achieved early in the current session of the General
Assembly. It is our expectation that in the next six
months or so, we will, and must, make substantial
progress on management reform issues. Our progress
will have to be assessed and reflected appropriately in
the process of reaching a General Assembly decision
on the adjustment to the budget. To ensure this, we
needed a mechanism that would enhance our
discussions in the early part of next year.

A/60/PV.69

The agreed compromise solution we have reached
for such a mechanism is unique and, we believe, shows
the collective determination of the entire membership
that we all are serious about reform.
It is my delegation’s understanding that
paragraph 3 of the appropriations resolution does not
mean automaticity of approval of the SecretaryGeneral’s request for spending authority. Neither
should this paragraph be seen as a conditionality in
order to force any budget decision. Rather, my
delegation regards the compromise solution as concrete
evidence of Member States’ firm determination to
realize, in good faith, the implementation of United
Nations reform, as our leaders resolved at the
September summit. We welcome the adoption of the
budget and intend to participate actively and
constructively in all of the reform discussions
beginning early next year.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
joined the consensus today despite our serious
reservations about the process that led to the agreement
on this budget. We agreed to it only because we believe
in the ideals for which the Organization stands. We did
so because we support the reform efforts upon which
we embarked in September.
However, we wish to state very, very clearly that
there should be no illusion that we will be able to
support such an action in the future, because we
believe that it is totally exceptional. We will not allow
the budget to be used as a means to abolish mandates
that we support and that fall outside the scope of the
summit decision. We do not believe that anything can
prevent us from making certain that the Organization
acts in the interests of both the developed and the
developing countries.
Most persuasive to us was the fact that the
Secretary-General himself told us that he could live
with this budget, albeit with great reluctance on the
part of the Secretariat. We joined the consensus so as to
ensure that the United Nations is provided with a
realistic budget and predictable resources in the
coming years. However, in placing conditionalities on
expenditure, we have failed to live up to our
responsibility. We are concerned by the impact that this
political decision will have on the functioning of the
United Nations.

only they can force others to accept their vision of
reform, by resorting to coercive measures. That is
clearly undesirable and not conducive to a transparent
process and an honest attempt to adopt reform
measures. South Africa supports United Nations
reform, but we believe in the equality of all Member
States, despite our different levels of contribution to
the Organization’s resources.
On a personal note, Mr. President, let me wish
you the best of whatever little holiday is left. I am
delighted to be going back to my grandsons, who have
been waiting for me all this time.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States welcomes today’s General Assembly
decision to approve budgetary arrangements that will
permit ongoing United Nations operations and
activities while Member States continue discussions on
implementing the reforms they agreed to during the
September 2005 world summit.
The agreement establishes a biennium budget
with a first-year assessment in which the SecretaryGeneral is authorized to spend $950 million — or
about six months of expenditures — pending further
action by the General Assembly. That decision
provides the United Nations with sufficient resources
to continue its operations, while underscoring the
collective commitment by Member States to achieve a
stronger, more effective and more accountable
Organization. These reforms, therefore, are in the
interests of every Member State.
Today’s agreement also provides for the
establishment of an ethics office with adequate
resources to commence its important functions, for the
conduct of an independent external evaluation of
United Nations auditing and oversight systems in order
to identify measures for strengthening those important
systems, and for the creation of an independent audit
advisory committee. These are all critical achievements
reflecting our shared objectives.
The United States also stands ready to continue
deliberations with our colleagues, as well as with
Secretariat officials, on the best ways to make more
progress on the other reforms agreed at the summit,
including the comprehensive review of United Nations
mandates and the assessment of human resources and
budget regulations.

There is a misperception regarding the reform
agenda being pursued by some Member States — that

27

A/60/PV.69

It is clear that in six months, we can assess
progress on management reform issues and then decide
how to address resource questions for the remainder of
2006. We have the ability — which the negotiators of
the resolutions have acknowledged — to refrain from
joining consensus on the next budget decision.
We earnestly hope, of course, that progress on
reform measures will be more than sufficient to support
a continuation of the budget for the remainder of 2006.
All of these improvements will strengthen the
Organization and increase its credibility so that it can
better carry out the priorities that Member States have
agreed to.
The United States looks forward to our continued
collective engagement on these matters.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): Like others, let me thank
you, Mr. President, for giving up your Christmas with
your family.
I am delighted tonight to speak on behalf of the
CANZ group of countries — Canada, Australia and
New Zealand — which obviously welcomes the
consensus that has been achieved. In the interests of
brevity, however, let me, like Stafford Neil, simply
speak for the record and, in so doing, associate CANZ
with the statements made by the representatives of the
United Kingdom — on behalf of the European
Union — Japan and the United States. They expressed
the hope that the adoption of the budget will signal a
strong continuing commitment to reform and follow-up
to the commitments made by our leaders at the summit.
In that vein, it must be clear, therefore, that CANZ
does not regard our budget undertaking as entailing
any automatic commitment or agreement to
expenditure proposals for the remainder of 2006.
I could speak at greater length and deliver that
message less precisely, but, in the interests of getting
out of here, let me just stop at that point.
Mr. Iosifov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): From the very outset of the negotiations, the
Russian delegation consistently advocated the adoption
of a full-fledged United Nations budget for the next
biennium. The adoption of a 2006-2007 budget will
contribute to the Organization’s efforts to implement
the extremely important reforms — including in the
area of management — proceeding from the decisions
agreed at the 2005 summit.

28

We emphasize once again the urgent need to
continue the reform process in order to enhance and
strengthen the accountability of the Secretariat to
Member States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): Now that we have
adopted the United Nations biennium budget without a
vote, my delegation, in addition to fully subscribing to
the remarks made by the Chairman of the Group of 77
and China, would like to highlight some important
aspects that determined — and will continue to
determine — our position in dealing with budgetrelated issues.
First, while we support the full and speedy
implementation of the agreed reforms set out in the
2005 outcome document (resolution 60/1), we do not
believe that the United Nations budget should be held
hostage to the implementation of those reforms. In our
view, the United Nations is much bigger than reform,
and we should always ensure together that the United
Nations gets the necessary funds to enable it to
honestly and objectively carry out all the mandates
adopted by its Member States.
Secondly, the setting of a cap on the SecretaryGeneral’s authorization to spend from the budget in
2006 is on an exceptional basis and should not
constitute a precedent to followed at any time in the
future.
Thirdly, we stress the need to maintain the
necessary balance among the activities of the General
Assembly, the Fifth Committee, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, the Committee for Programme and
Coordination and other organs dealing with United
Nations budgetary and financing issues, particularly in
addressing the reform process.
Fourthly, we look forward to the approval,
without any reservations or conditionalities, of further
spending authority when the Secretary-General submits
his request. We caution against mixing the
consideration of such spending authority with the
positions taken on reform proposals or progress
achieved on such proposals — particularly those
related to mandate review, which we do not and should
not consider as a cost-cutting measure rather than as a
measure to enhance the Organization’s effectiveness
and validity.

A/60/PV.69

Ms. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, my delegation fully supports the
statement made by the Chairman of the Group of 77.
Only a few months ago, when our heads of State
or Government were gathered to discuss the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
we all witnessed how United Nations reform hijacked
the discussion of that important subject. Unfortunately,
we remain in the shadow of that exercise. Once again,
reform of the Organization has been used to hijack the
necessary
consideration
and
intergovernmental
discussion of the Secretary-General’s programme
budget proposals for the biennium 2006-2007, in
accordance with the main contributor’s political
agenda. The General Assembly was obligated to
consider those proposals on their own merits, given its
role in the allocation of the resources necessary to
ensure the full implementation of all mandates that it
itself has adopted.
My delegation reiterates that the reform process
is in no way linked to the Organization’s budget, and
we will engage in all negotiations next year on the
basis of that understanding. We hope that these will
take place in a truly open, participatory, transparent
and democratic atmosphere.
My delegation decided to join the consensus on
this resolution out of solidarity with the Group of 77.
The distorted negotiating exercise that took place
outside of the procedures established for the work of
the Fifth Committee precluded discussion of important
reports and proposals before us for consideration. In
view of that fact, my delegation reserves the right to
revisit any issues that were not properly considered and
on which no concrete action was taken on this
occasion.
I should like to refer briefly to the text that we
just adopted regarding the revised budget estimates,
particularly those relating to section 23, on human
rights. My delegation reiterates its reservations about
the approval of posts whose mandates have not been
properly adopted by the General Assembly in
accordance with operative paragraphs 4 and 5 of draft
resolution A/C.5/60/L.25, just adopted. My delegation
will revisit this issue in order to negotiate and adopt
the programme narratives in question, both in the
Committee for Programme and Coordination and in the
Assembly.

With regard to paragraph 11, we should like to
point out that any budgetary discretion for the
Secretary-General must be accompanied by clear
responsibility and accountability mechanisms. We also
reaffirm the role of the Fifth Committee as the main
General Assembly organ responsible for administrative
and budgetary issues. We will take care to ensure full
compliance with that principle in the future.
My delegation wishes to conclude by indicating
that we will ensure that no attempt is made to use this
resolution’s adoption as a means of blackmailing the
Organization. The United Nations cannot be at the
mercy of the political agenda of a single country; it
must serve the legitimate interests of all Member
States.
Mr. Yáñez Pilgrim (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation supports
the statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Jamaica on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
During the past few weeks, we witnessed once
again a negotiating process that called into question the
Organization’s most fundamental principles. We
worked hard to achieve the adoption of a budget — an
issue that should have been discussed at a mainly
technical level through procedures that gave all
Member States an opportunity to define their priorities
and interests.
On the contrary, however, we witnessed a process
whose outcome will reflect only the interests of those
who, because of the amount that they contribute, feel
that they own the Organization and threaten to create a
financial crisis if their unilateral demands are not met.
That kind of procedure has become the norm, which is
gradually changing the United Nations into an
instrument by which the Organization’s most powerful
countries can exercise control.
Once again, we have witnessed the adoption of a
resolution that many define — or wish to define — as
consensual. Nothing could be further from the truth.
We recall the metaphor used by a well-known North
American writer who spoke of the “Dracula effect”,
meaning that this kind of agreement can take place
only in darkness. The outcome of a transparent
procedure would be very different.
My delegation reiterates once again its total and
complete reservations regarding the 2005 summit
outcome document (resolution 60/1), which has no

29

A/60/PV.69

legal or political validity for our delegation and
therefore produces no obligation or mandate for the
Republic. In that connection, my delegation expressly
places on record its disagreement with the first
preambular paragraph and operative paragraphs 5 and
13 of draft resolution A/C.5/60/L.25.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
124.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/609)
The President: We will take action on the draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in its
report. The text of the draft decision is, for the time
being, contained in document A/C.5/60/L.29.
The draft decision is entitled “Questions deferred
for future consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
122.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all of the reports of the Fifth
Committee before it.
Statement by the President
The President: We have now moved from 23 to
24 December; it is Christmas Eve. At 10.30 a.m.
yesterday, I said that I was hopeful that during the
course of the day we would be able to reach a
conclusion on an urgent and vital issue for the United
Nations: the budget for 2006-2007. I said that we
needed clearly defined financial conditions to guide
our work over the next two years.
I want to thank members for the work that they
have done — those who laboured in the Fifth
Committee, as always to the very last minute before
the holidays, as I recall from my years as Permanent
Representative, and, of course, all those who were

30

involved in making it possible for us to adopt the
budget for the next two years.
I understand from comments that have been made
that hard choices had to been made with regard to both
substance and process, where severe time pressures
have certainly played a role. We now have a foundation
for our work. We must continue our regular work and,
at the same time, in a determined way, implement what
our leaders decided in September. I will, to the
maximum, continue to work in an open, transparent
and inclusive manner, as set out at the beginning of our
work. We are also required to deliver and to produce
results in an open, transparent and inclusive manner, as
we were asked to do by our leaders.
I will not speak for long, because I said a few
words this morning. But I think that, as we look back at
this autumn, we can say that we have achieved a great
deal. We have taken a decision on the Peacebuilding
Commission; we have expanded the central emergency
fund and transformed it into the Central Emergency
Response Fund, with new qualitative and quantitative
development. We have adopted an Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel; and we have taken action on the
draft resolution on HIV/AIDS, paving the way for an
important high-level meeting next year.
But we have important and difficult work ahead.
We have to continue to work on the Human Rights
Council. Starting on 11 January next year, we will have
to continue with development follow-up and the reform
of the Economic and Social Council. Tonight we have
been talking a great deal about Secretariat and
management reform issues. Other issues, including
Security Council reform and counter-terrorism, are on
the agenda.
I believe that the most valuable and tangible
contribution to revitalizing the General Assembly will
be to effectively implement the World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1). In the light of our work and
experiences this autumn, I am more convinced than
ever about the importance of strengthening the role and
the relevance of the General Assembly. We represent
all the nations and peoples the world. Together — that
is perhaps the most important word in the English
language and, indeed, in all of the languages
represented here — we must reaffirm the central
position of the General Assembly as the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of

A/60/PV.69

the United Nations, as our leaders phrased it during the
meeting in September.
So at this, the end of the working season and the
beginning of the holiday season, I thank all the
members of the Secretariat who have helped us in our
work in the General Assembly this autumn. I thank the
Co-Chairs of the various plenary consultations, the
Committee Chairs and others who have worked so hard
to bring about results of which we should be proud.
I thank all Permanent Representatives and their
staff in the various Missions for their hard work and
the quality of the work done. Particular thanks goes
from me to the Vice-Presidents, who have so skilfully
and faithfully helped me to lead the General Assembly.
I tried out a joke on my colleagues this morning
when representatives were in the Fifth Committee. It
did not really get across, but I will try it again. When
my staff were preparing my remarks, which is always a
risky business, they tried to find out about things that
had happened in exactly 100 days: yesterday it was 100
days since the beginning of the summit meeting. They
found out that, in the nineteenth century, there was a
Chinese emperor who launched 100 days of reform,
during which he initiated many bold and ambitious
reform processes. The only trouble was that — and this
is serious — after 100 days, his aunt, the empress
dowager, decided that she had had quite enough of him

and put him in prison for the rest of his life. I hope that
that will not be the case for the President of the
Assembly.
In closing, I would like to wish all members and
their families a joyful and peaceful holiday season and
a prosperous and successful new year. I trust that we
will all have an opportunity to rest and recharge our
batteries over the coming days. I look forward to
welcoming members back in January to continue our
work with renewed energy, determination and, above
all, belief in the Organization.
Programme of work
The President: Apart from organizational
matters and items that may have to be considered by
operation of the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
and bearing in mind that consideration and action have
already been taken by the Assembly on a majority of
items thus far, I should like to inform members that the
following items remain on the agenda for consideration
during the sixtieth session of the General Assembly:
agenda items 10, 12, 14, 15, 32, 40, 41, 44 to 46, 48
(a), 49, 54 (b), 55 (a), 72, 73 (a), 108, 112 (a), (c) and
(d), 114, 116 to 152, 154 and 160.
With that, I wish all members happy holidays.
The meeting rose at 12.15 a.m., 24 December
2005.

31
