United Nations

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4623

rd meeting
Friday, 11 October 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Belinga-Eboutou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Corr
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Konuzin
Ms. Lee
Mr. Mekdad
Mr. Broucher
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General (S/2002/1053).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-63564 (E)

*0263564*

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Pakistan in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Akram
(Pakistan) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Cameroon.
Cameroon associates itself with the statement to
be made later in the debate by the Republic of the
Congo on behalf of the 11 States members of the
Economic Community of Central African States. I
should like, however, to make several observations in
my national capacity.
I should like thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala, for
his excellent introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms.
Cameroon has good reason to be interested in the
proliferation of illicit small arms, because it is located
in one of the regions that are probably most affected by
this scourge. This is not the first time that the Security
Council has taken up the issue of small arms and light
weapons. Because of the threat that the proliferation of
and illicit trade in small arms poses to international
peace and security, the Council has been actively
seized of the matter since 1998 and has been
considering it regularly.
Today’s debate, based on the Secretary-General’s
report, is a continuation of the work being done by the
Council. It offers us another opportunity not only to
further refine measures already recognized to combat
this worldwide scourge, but also to explore new
approaches and solutions. In the opinion of my
delegation, the Programme of Action adopted by
consensus by the United Nations Conference on Illicit

2

Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons In All Its
Aspects, held from 9 to 20 July 2001, offers an
appropriate context for international action and for
strengthening the Security Council’s actions.
Recourse to sanctions, particularly arms
embargoes in areas affected by conflict, is still the
preferred instrument for action by the Security Council.
However, looking at the experience of existing sanction
regimes, we see that the effectiveness of strict
implementation of arms embargoes depends, to a large
extent, on the cooperation of many players at the
national, regional and international levels. Their role is
a crucial one if we want regular, reliable and useful
information about trafficking networks, and if we want
to monitor them effectively.
At this point, I would like to stress the decisive
part played by States. Above and beyond the national
measures that need to be taken to contribute to
implementation of the embargoes imposed by the
Security Council, States must regulate the entire arms
sector in order to control, depending on their peculiar
situation, the movement of small arms. That is why we
support the efforts to encourage the drafting of an
international instrument on international arms
transfers, including tracing.
All efforts to control illicit flows of small arms,
particularly in Africa, will be futile without such
measures. The approach based on a moratorium on
arms imports comes up against this constraint. Such a
moratorium is not a panacea that can apply to all
affected regions of the world. Each region is different.
Given its powers, the Council becomes
answerable if it refrains from taking the necessary steps
against the States which deliberately violate arms
embargoes or contribute to violations by the way they
conduct themselves. The Council cannot impose
embargoes while at the same time it chooses to ignore
those other than the targeted State who are guilty of
violating the embargoes. Likewise, the Council must
also look into the sources of the illicit trade in small
arms in violation of its embargoes whether it be related
to the illegal exploitation of natural resources, drug
trafficking or simply international criminal networks.
As far as Cameroon is concerned, the actions of
the various bodies of the United Nations — each within
its own field of competence, of course — on the
question of small arms are complementary and must
lead to a coherent overall strategy. This is why we

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

encourage the Council, where appropriate, to include in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations activities for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants and for the collection and
destruction of weapons. We also believe that the
Council should provide adequate financing for that
purpose.
We fully endorse the relevant recommendations
made in the Secretary-General’s report. They will be a
useful supplement to the measures already advocated
and will certainly help to stop those interests that are
particularly sensitive, sometimes profit-oriented and
often criminal.
Views expressed during this debate complement
others in the report of the Secretary-General. Naturally,
they will be used to enhance the draft presidential
statement that will be presented in the next few days to
the Council members, once completed by our experts.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lee Ho-jin (Republic of Korea): My
delegation appreciates the convening of this open
meeting on the question of small arms as one more step
to further enhance efficiency of the work of the
Security Council. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Dhanapala for the excellent introduction to the
Secretary-General’s report on the subject.
In substance, the subject we are dealing with is an
important issue with many challenges involving
security, humanitarian and development dimensions.
As noted in the presidential statement of the
Security Council of 31 August 2001, the accumulation
of small arms
“compromises the effectiveness of the Security
Council in discharging its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security”. (S/PRST/2001/21)
Indeed, the destabilizing accumulation and illicit
transfer of small arms and light weapons pose major
security concerns for the entire international
community, as reflected by the startling statistics on
this problem. Every year, the misuse of small arms and
light weapons has led to the loss of 500,000 lives, the

majority of them being civilians, including women and
children. Additionally, recent developments have
highlighted the further danger posed by the likelihood
of the use of small arms by terrorists and non-State
actors.
The momentum generated by the Programme of
Action adopted last year at the United Nations
Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons is now
having an impact at national, regional and global
levels. As underscored by the Security Council, the
Programme’s success depends largely on the political
will of the international community. Hence, sustained
and concerted global action is vital in addressing the
problems posed by the illicit transfer of small arms and
light weapons. Accordingly, the Security Council
should continue to play a constructive role in
promoting the implementation of the Programme of
Action.
There are many complexities stemming from the
proliferation of small arms in post-conflict situations.
Of particular concern is the recurring pattern of
violence and instability. Therefore, there is a
compelling need for the Security Council, in carrying
out its peace-building activities, to include specific
considerations for small arms and light weapons.
My delegation regards the 12 recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/1053) as valuable input for future action by the
Security Council. We should like to identify areas
within the report as a basis for our deliberations.
Given that the proliferation of small arms gives
rise not only to the outbreak of violence but also to the
exacerbation, prolongation and perpetuation of
conflict, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes are crucial for consolidating peace
and for promoting an environment for sustainable
development. As reflected by the growing number of
casualties, the availability of weapons in conflictridden areas is a great threat to the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers. The implementation
of more effective DDR programmes within the Security
Council’s conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts will help to ensure the safety of all
civilians in areas of conflict.
The Security Council has rightly stressed the
need to incorporate relevant provision for DDR
programmes into the mandates and budgets of all
peacekeeping operations. It is noteworthy that various

3

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

United Nations peacekeeping operations — particularly
those in Africa — now include a disarmament
component aimed at collecting and disarming these
types of weapons. As we said at a previous open
meeting, the Security Council is fully equipped to
integrate the recommendations concerning DDR into
its future peacekeeping activities as a core element.
With regard to the question of embargoes, the
lessons learned from the past have shown that weapons
embargoes alone are not sufficient. In the view of my
delegation, sanctions should be fine-tuned to
effectively target a region or specific countries to
achieve a greater degree of success. We agree on the
need for the Security Council to study further ways and
means to improve its efficiency on a case-by-case
basis. My delegation welcomes the recommendations
calling for the vigorous and expeditious use of arms
embargoes by the Council. In addition, we would like
to see the Council pursue the use of monitoring
mechanisms, in accordance with Article 41 of the
Charter, with a view to ensuring successful
enforcement.
My delegation agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Security Council
should call on Member States to establish and
implement legislation or measures to regulate the
movement of small arms and light weapons. In
particular, we welcome the Council’s efforts to
encourage all Member States that have not already
done so to adopt and enforce stringent regulations with
regard to export control.
Once again, the Security Council should maintain
its attention and its active engagement with regard to
curbing the proliferation and illicit trade of small arms
and light weapons. The Republic of Korea would like
to assure members of its unswerving support for the
Council’s initiatives in that field.

of whose lives are claimed each year in wars and
conflicts as a result of the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons.
The effectiveness and the credibility of the
Security Council are derived not only from its being
the mechanism that was chosen by the entire world
more than half a century ago to maintain international
peace and security, but also from its ability to address
new challenges to peace and security, to respond to
them and to develop procedures to confront them. The
Council has become aware of the danger posed in
recent years by the illicit proliferation of and
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, of their
impact on humanity and of the urgent need to face this
challenge seriously and effectively, in a manner
commensurate with the danger.
As the Council has considered the changes and
planned its activities accordingly, the General
Assembly has taken concrete steps to consider the legal
and political aspects of the issue of small arms and
light weapons and the dangers that they pose. The
Assembly has done that through the creation of more
than one panel of experts, the holding of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in all Its Aspects, and the adoption
there of an ambitious Programme of Action that we
should make every effort to implement over the next
four years.
I should like to express my delegation’s
appreciation for the valuable report of the SecretaryGeneral on small arms (S/2002/1053) and for the
recommendations that it contains. On behalf of the
Egyptian delegation, I should like to make a few
remarks on the issue now before the Council.

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

First, the fact that hundreds of thousands of
people fall victim each year to small arms and light
weapons clearly makes it necessary for the Security
Council to address the issue of the proliferation of such
weapons within the framework of its main
responsibility: the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, Mr. President, to express to you and to your
friendly country, Cameroon, our sincere thanks and
appreciation. We are pleased to take part in this
meeting under your presidency to discuss an issue of
such great importance to the African continent — an
issue that threatens its children, hundreds of thousands

Secondly, the new measures adopted in that
regard by the Council over the past few years — such
as the establishment of independent panels of experts
and of monitoring mechanisms for implementing arms
embargoes — have had limited success in dealing with
the illicit trade in and the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. That limited success can be

4

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

attributed in some cases to the practical difficulties of
accurately monitoring arms exports and to an absence
in the Council of the political will to enforce certain
embargoes and to verify their implementation — as had
been the case with regard to Somalia for the past 10
years, until the Council finally took measures to ensure
the implementation of the arms embargo imposed
against that country under resolution 733 (1992).
Thirdly, the Egyptian delegation endorses the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the exchange
of information between the Security Council and the
General Assembly be improved in order to bring about
better coordination between the strategies of the two
bodies in the field of small arms and light weapons,
giving due consideration to the differences between the
role and mandate of the Council, on the one hand, and
the more comprehensive role played by the Assembly,
on the other.
(spoke in Arabic)
Fourthly, there is no doubt that, in addition to the
adoption of specific measures to deal with the excess
of small arms and light weapons and their destruction,
the Security Council should include in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations clear provisions with regard
to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
into civilian life of former combatants.
Egypt recommends that the committee on
peacekeeping operations of the General Assembly
should look into the possibility of promoting the
United Nation’s role in the DDR programmes and in
financing activities through the budgets of
peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, the delegation of Egypt fully
endorses the Secretary-General’s recommendation
urging the Security Council to give more attention to
the implementation of arms embargoes and arms
exports to regions and countries that face armed
conflicts or are actually undergoing them, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of The
United Nations. It should also consider the possibility
of adopting certain measures against countries that
deliberately violate Security Council resolutions on
arms embargoes.
The Security Council has an important role to
play in the field of small arms and light weapons, in
light of its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with

Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. While
we stress the responsibility of the Security Council in
this regard, we would like to draw attention, once
again, to the natural right of States, individually or
collectively, to self-defence, and to the right to selfdetermination for all peoples, particularly those under
foreign occupation.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Ukraine. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and make
his statement.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I wish to take this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation to you for
holding this important public debate on the question of
small arms. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive, substantive and timely
report on this issue and Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Dhanapala for his presentation of this important
document.
The illicit trafficking and accumulation of small
arms remain among the greatest impediments to
sustainable development, conflict prevention and
resolution and post-conflict peace-building. They pose
a serious threat to human security and human rights.
Ukraine has continuously expressed its concern
about the serious humanitarian consequences of this
phenomenon, which claimed hundreds of thousands of
innocent lives all over the world, thus highlighting a
global dimension of this problem. We are deeply
convinced that without concerted efforts by the
international community to prevent uncontrolled
proliferation of these weapons it is impossible to
maintain peace, regional security and global security.
The necessity of this has become even more acute and
urgent after the tragic events of 11 September.
The Programme of Action adopted by the 2001
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects has been a
significant but perhaps only a first step towards the
goal of controlling this scourge. We hope that within
the follow-up process at global, regional and national
levels it will be possible to make the implementation of
the Programme of Action more efficient as well as to
find ways to strengthen and further develop the
measures contained therein.
In our view, it is essential to provide for global
and regional coordination between national control

5

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

systems and mechanisms for preventing illicit small
arms and light weapons trade operations.
The responsibility for establishing control over
the traffic in small arms and light weapons rests with
the States acquiring those weapons. At the same time
those States should be encouraged to improve their
abilities to curb the illicit traffic in small arms. That
might require financial assistance from the
international community.
Ukraine welcomes the initiatives taken by the
Secretary-General and is looking forward to the results
of work of the Group of Governmental Experts on the
marking and tracing of small arms. We hope that the
findings of the Group will lay the groundwork for the
development of an international instrument, open to all,
which will increase the national capacity of States to
identify and trace, in a timely and reliable manner,
small arms and light weapons, as well as to seize those
of an illicit nature.
Preventing, combating and eliminating the
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons is
one of the important issues the Security Council must
deal with as part of its primary responsibility for
maintenance of international peace and security.
It is evident that promoting long-term conditions
for development and security is not possible without
resolving ongoing conflicts and taking adequate
measures to ensure stability in post-conflict situations.
Excessive accumulation of and illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons fuel, intensify and
delay the resolution of conflicts. We note that a series
of innovative measures, taken by the Security Council,
to enhance compliance with arms embargoes by
establishing independent panels of experts and
monitoring mechanisms resulted in positive outcomes,
especially in Angola and in Sierra Leone. At the same
time the problem of illicit trafficking persists in some
other areas of conflict.
We believe that at this stage it is important to
review the lessons learned in order to ensure the
efficiency of measures that could be further taken by
the Council. In this connection it will be useful, in our
view, to focus on financial sources used for purchase of
illegal weapons and to address the relationship between
the illicit exploitation of natural and other resources
and the purchase of and trade in illegal arms. It would
also be important to define the role the relevant

6

international organizations, business and financial
institutions and other actors at the international,
regional and local levels can play in the
implementation of arms embargoes.
We share the view expressed in the report of the
Secretary-General that arms embargoes help to stop
arms flows into targeted countries and to rebel groups,
but do not eliminate small arms and light weapons that
already exist in areas of conflict. The effective
functioning of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for former combatants and
the implementation of projects aimed at collecting and
destroying illegal weapons are of considerable
importance to the successful implementation of
measures taken by the Security Council to redress the
situation in a specific country-related context.
We therefore welcome the observations made and
the 12 recommendations proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, and we look forward to a further update on the
issue of small arms and their impact on post-conflict
peace-building, human security and human rights.
I should like to stress the fact that Ukraine
conducts a responsible policy in the field of arms
control. Ukrainian legislation envisages strict measures
to prevent the illegal manufacturing, possession and
trafficking of all types of armaments, including small
arms and light weapons. The national export-control
system provides for effective export and import
licensing procedures. Efforts are also being made to
improve national legislation in this field. One of the
most recent steps was the adoption by the Cabinet of
Ministers of Ukraine of an action plan to implement the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons.
Finally, let me assure the Council that Ukraine
will continue to take an active part in international
efforts to combat the illicit trafficking of small arms
and light weapons and to restrain their uncontrolled
proliferation.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Chile. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Acuña Pimentel (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the opportunity of this public
debate on a subject that, as we all know, is related to
issues that are a source of deep concern to the
international community, not only in the humanitarian,
security, disarmament and development fields, but also
in the field of prevention of international crime,
including drug trafficking, terrorism and human
security.
I am grateful also to the Secretary-General for his
report on this important question, and we deem the 12
recommendations therein of particular interest.
As has been repeatedly stated with concern in
various specialized reports on small arms and light
weapons — reports with recognized academic
credibility — for many years now the world has been
witness to the phenomenon of the excessive
accumulation and illicit traffic in this type of arms.
This accumulation is destabilizing and to a large extent
the result of illicit trading, to the point where this
category of arms is today considered to be one of the
principal scourges causing the death of civilians
throughout the world, particularly children and women.
It also perpetuates, and is one of the underlying causes
of, poverty and the domestic and international conflicts
that affect or hinder the development of countries.
This was recognized by the Secretary-General in
the report he submitted to the Security Council on the
subject, in which he states that preventing, combating
and eliminating the uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons constitutes one of the key tasks of
the Security Council in discharging its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, which was held in July 2001, and its
conclusions represent an important milestone in the
humanitarian field and in the fields of disarmament and
human security. At that Conference, Chile stressed the
need for the Programme of Action on Small Arms and
Light Weapons to include a set of clear and effective
measures to promote respect for, and the protection of,
human life as a fundamental value, over and above the
commercial interests associated with this category of
arms. This is the approach that Chilean domestic law
has adopted on the subject.

Chile firmly supports the Programme of Action
adopted by the Conference. To that end, it sponsored in
November last year, jointly with the Regional Centre
for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin
America and the Caribbean, the first regional expert
workshop to examine and propose measures for the
evaluation of, and follow-up to, the aforementioned
Conference. This initiative is in addition to other
important initiatives taken by our region, such as the
Inter-American Convention against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials,
and the Working Group on this type of arms of
MERCOSUR, Bolivia and Chile. All of these activities
aim to intensify the efforts of our countries to combat
this serious problem in a coordinated manner.
From a global perspective, the Security Council
over the years has put in place a considerable number
of mechanisms to avert, at least to some extent, the
catastrophic
consequences
of
the
excessive
accumulation of, and illicit trafficking in, small arms
and light weapons, including the imposition of
embargoes on territories in situations of conflict and, in
cases of conflict prevention, the undertaking of
peacekeeping operations and peace-building activities.
Over time, the efforts made to operationalize the
wide range of measures in these various cases have
created a rich store of specialized knowledge that can
be used to formulate principles, norms and measures to
combat this phenomenon in a more rational and
effective manner, even though — as the SecretaryGeneral indicated in his report — there are many
regions and cases in which it is not possible to prevent
and eliminate illicit trafficking.
The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons contains important provisions falling within
the purview of the Security Council, for example, those
on the effective implementation of embargoes and
those on the inclusion in the activities of peacekeeping
operations of adequate provisions in this respect.
Against this backdrop and based on the
Secretariat’s experience, the Secretary-General has
formulated a set of 12 recommendations in his report
which my delegation considers to be a valuable
contribution to the Council’s work. Most of these have
already been implemented, at least to some extent, or
are related to initiatives that have been proposed by

7

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

experts and Governments, but that are still the subject
of debate and have yet to be translated into action.
The systematic review by the Council of these 12
recommendations, with the assistance of the
Secretariat, could, in our view, be useful in the
formulation of a methodology that could be used to
take up, with the renewed determination that the
situation requires, the task of implementing more
effective measures to overcome the serious problems
posed by small arms and light weapons.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
Philippines. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): First of all, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also congratulate Bulgaria on its presidency last month.
We further wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Dhanapala for his presentation this morning.
Mr. President, I wish to express my delegation’s
appreciation for your having convened this very
important meeting. The proliferation and uncontrolled
spread of small arms and light weapons pose a serious
threat to peace, safety and security and disrupt
sustainable economic growth and social development.
The excessive accumulation and unregulated
distribution of firearms further aggravate conflicts. My
country has experienced terrorism and the consequent
loss and displacement of innocent civilians and the
commission of heinous crimes due to the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons.
In this regard, the Philippines notes that the
report of the Secretary-General on small arms presents
not only the recent initiatives of the Council but also
recommendations and observations regarding an
expanded role for the Council in its two primary tasks:
arms embargoes, and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants. The
recommendations are noteworthy and would serve well
in the development of both short-term and long-term
strategies to counter the dangers that the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons poses to peace and
security.
With regard to DDR, my delegation maintains its
view that this should not be merely a post-conflict
peace-building measure. With respect to low-intensity,

8

long-running conflicts, this practice may not be very
effective and could even be counter-productive as
combatants turn to crime, piracy, acts of terrorism or
other similar activities. Combatants, therefore, should
have a viable and practical opportunity to remove
themselves from an ongoing conflict and for their small
arms to be collected. The availability of DDR before
conflict ceases may in fact hasten the resolution of
conflict. My delegation is gratified that this element
has been incorporated in the United Nations
Programme of Action, and we welcome the
recommendation contained in the Secretary-General’s
report to include it in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
As part of a long-term strategy, the Philippines
strongly supports the decisions adopted by the Security
Council in its resolutions 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001),
relating to the protection of children in armed conflict.
In recognition of the humanitarian costs and
consequences of small arms proliferation and abuse,
the Philippines is undertaking a comprehensive
programme for children in armed conflict, with three
components — prevention; advocacy and mobilization
to save our children; and rescue, rehabilitation and
reintegration. Measures for prevention are approached
through livelihood programmes, educational assistance,
health care and nutrition services, food security and the
provision of basic facilities and infrastructure.
Of the total recorded crimes committed with
firearms in the Philippines last year, 85 per cent were
committed with unlicensed or illegally possessed
firearms. The Programme of Action adopted by the
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons is, therefore, a major step in the right
direction in addressing this problem. The statement
issued by the Security Council President on 31 August
last year called on all Member States to take required
measures to implement the recommendations contained
therein. The Philippines has undertaken initiatives to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action.
The Philippines hosted a regional seminar on
implementing the United Nations Programme of Action
in July 2002, co-sponsored by Canada. Delegates from
eight member countries of the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and from Australia,
China, Japan and Republic of Korea, together with
representatives from civil society and the arms
industry, participated in this seminar. Observers from

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

some European Union countries and the United States
of America also participated.
This seminar aimed to promote awareness of the
United Nations Programme of Action in Small Arms
and Light Weapons at the regional level. The
discussions focused on capacity- building, training in
law enforcement, customs and airport control,
collection and destruction programmes and DDR.
The report of the seminar Co-Chairmen
concluded that developing a regional arrangement to
deal with the problems of illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is crucial, and it proposed that the
following principles be taken into consideration. First,
there should be respect for and commitment to
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. Secondly, such an arrangement
should be balanced, realistic and implementable, with
the primary objective of ensuring that arms transfers
are made solely by States. Thirdly, such arrangement
should take into account the right of each State to
manufacture, import and retain small arms and light
weapons for its self-defence and security needs.
Fourthly, such arrangement should take into account
the role played by civil society in raising awareness of
the danger associated with the illicit trade in and
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.
Simultaneously with this seminar, a symbolic
arms destruction ceremony was held to coincide with
the first anniversary of the 2001 United Nations
Conference. More than 1,000 confiscated, seized and
surplus small arms and light weapons were destroyed
during the ceremony.
Finally, my delegation appreciates the political
impetus that the Security Council has given to the issue
of small arms and light weapons. We believe this
reflects recognition that the proliferation and abuse of
small arms and light weapons is a threat to
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Philippines for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Australia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Tesch (Australia): Mr. President, the
Australian delegation is pleased to see you in the chair

and is very grateful for the opportunity to speak briefly
on this very important matter. We also thank UnderSecretary-General Dhanapala for his introduction of
the Secretary-General’s report on small arms, which we
consider very important and timely contribution to
international efforts to combat the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.
The report usefully identifies ways in which the
Security Council, in fulfilling its role in maintaining
international peace and security, can help to control
and eradicate the illicit small arms trade, building on
the 2001 United Nations Programme of Action.
All of the report’s recommendations are
important, but some stand out for Australia as being of
particular merit. Reflecting our extensive experience in
dealing with post-conflict situations in the South and
South West Pacific, Australia strongly endorses
recommendations 7 and 8, encouraging the inclusion of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
activities in Council mandates and budgets for
peacekeeping operations. We also strongly endorse
recommendations 5 and 11, calling for the strict
enforcement of all Council resolutions on sanctions,
including those imposing arms embargoes, and for
effective monitoring mechanisms to oversee the
rigorous and effective application of embargoes. It is in
these two areas in particular — inclusion of DDR
activities in peacekeeping mandates and rigid
enforcement of arms embargoes — that the Council can
make a practical and positive impact on international
efforts to combat the illicit small arms trade.
Australia also commends the report’s recognition
of the important role of strengthened national export
control measures in ensuring effective regulation of
small arms exports. Effective national export controls,
including end-use certification, are the first line of
defence against illicit transfers and help to prevent
exports that may start out as licit ending up in the
wrong hands.
While the role of the Council is important, the
prime responsibility for combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons lies with Member States.
The 2001 United Nations Programme of Action
provides a comprehensive and dynamic framework for
Member States to follow in combating the illicit small
arms trade at the national, regional and international
levels.

9

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

Good progress has been made in promoting
regional-level cooperation in particular, as indeed we
have heard from a number of speakers today. The
provision of capacity-building assistance to States with
development needs is an important means of enhancing
regional cooperation. Australia is strongly committed
to continuing to assist countries in the South Pacific
region to combat the problems posed by small arms,
through the institution of better governance and
accountability. We have been actively involved in small
arms disposal processes in Bougainville and the
Solomon Islands, as an element of broader peacebuilding efforts there. Australia is also working closely
with Japan to organize a second small arms workshop
for Pacific Island countries, following a successful
inaugural workshop we hosted in 2001.
In the lead-up to the biennial meeting on small
arms in mid-2003, Australia urges Member States to
renew their efforts to implement the United Nations
Programme of Action. We must maintain a strong
collective resolve to address effectively the
humanitarian and security dimensions of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, as identified in
the Secretary-General’s report.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Australia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Japan. I invite her to take a seat at the
Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Inoguchi (Japan): At the outset, as the
Permanent Representative and head of the delegation
of Japan to the Conference on Disarmament at Geneva,
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to you, Mr.
President, on behalf of my Government, for inviting us
to participate in the Security Council’s deliberations on
the issue of small arms, an increasingly important item
on the disarmament agenda. It is my great honour to
address this body, which has primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
would also like to express my utmost appreciation to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and to Under-SecretaryGeneral Jayantha Dhanapala and his office for issuing a
substantive and comprehensive report on this issue.
Numbers speak for themselves. Small arms and
light weapons kill more than 500,000 people every
year. The excessive accumulation of such weapons is a
particularly dangerous destabilizing factor in post-

10

conflict situations, as it disrupts humanitarian aid
operations
and
hinders
rehabilitation
and
reconstruction efforts. The excessive accumulation of
such weapons can also rekindle conflicts and thus
undermine efforts for peace and stability.
The events of 11 September 2001 showed another
dimension of the issue of small arms. Those are the
weapons that various terrorist groups around the world
use most frequently. The elimination of the supply of
weapons, including small arms, to terrorists, as called
for in Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), is an
essential element in the global fight against terrorism.
The problems of small arms and light weapons
are multidimensional and interlinked. I cannot fail to
note that there is also a gender element involved. One
of the extraordinary aspects of contemporary wars and
conflicts is the large proportion of non-combatants
among the victims. As a matter of fact, the greatest
number of conflict-related deaths of women and
children are caused by small arms. Restraining and
curbing the problems of small arms and light weapons
is a matter of urgent priority for the entire international
community.
The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in July 2001, adopted a Programme of
Action that represents the collective will of the
international community to address these problems.
That outcome of the Conference was further
consolidated with the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 56/24 V, on small arms and light weapons,
the draft of which was submitted jointly by Colombia,
South Africa and Japan in October 2001. That
resolution called upon all States to implement the
Programme of Action and decided to convene a
conference, no later than 2006, to review progress
made in its implementation. The consensus adoption of
that important resolution demonstrates global solidarity
in addressing the issue of small arms and light
weapons.
The resolution also decided to hold biennial
meetings of States, the first of which will take place
next year. The purpose of that meeting is to provide an
opportunity for States and other international actors,
including non-governmental organizations, to share
experiences and lessons learned in the implementation
of the Programme of Action. Such exchanges will

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

allow them to address their problems more effectively
and efficiently.
Japan, as a country steadfastly committed to
tackling the issue of small arms, attaches great
importance to the global implementation of the
Programme of Action. In January we organized a
meeting to follow up on the United Nations
Conference. We are also planning to hold a seminar
with the participation of Pacific countries to facilitate
their implementation of the Programme of Action. I
would like to take this opportunity to remind all
delegations that, since Japan would like to play a
meaningful, if modest, role at the 2003 meeting, it has
already announced its candidacy for the chairmanship
of that meeting.
The Programme of Action comprises two
categories of measures: prevention of the excessive
accumulation of small arms and the reduction of such
accumulations. With regard to prevention, a Group of
Governmental Experts has been established to examine
the feasibility of developing an international
instrument to enable States to identify, trace and
disrupt illegal supply lines. The report of the SecretaryGeneral calls upon Member States to support such
meaningful exercises. As a member of that Group,
Japan will continue to actively contribute to it.
The Programme of Action also calls for the
effective implementation of arms embargoes decided
by the Security Council. Monitoring arrangements are
also in place to ensure the effective enforcement of
embargoes. Japan supports the recommendation of the
report of the Secretary-General that the use of a
combination of those measures should be further
enhanced.
With regard to the reduction of excessive
accumulations of small arms and light weapons, the
Programme of Action stresses the importance of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of ex-combatants. In that regard, the Programme calls
upon affected countries to develop DDR projects, while
also calling for international assistance and cooperation
in support of such projects. Further, the inclusion of
DDR in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
where appropriate, deserves the serious attention of the
Security Council.
Japan will continue to implement appropriate
weapons for development projects in cooperation with
other Governments, international, regional and non-

governmental organizations. Japan has also recently
begun a joint research programme with the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research on arms
collection projects in Albania, Cambodia, Congo, Mali
and Papua New Guinea. That research will be
completed no later than 2004, and we are confident that
it will provide the international community with
valuable lessons learned from the experiences of those
affected countries.
The role of the United Nations is increasingly
important in following up last year’s United Nations
Conference. The Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism is already harmonizing the response of the
United Nations. Japan commends the initiative taken
by the Secretary-General in establishing the small arms
advisory service, which will greatly enhance United
Nations efforts in that area.
I would like to touch upon the significant
achievement of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and the United Nations
standardized instrument for reporting military
expenditures. They are valuable international means for
promoting transparency in armaments and international
confidence-building. This year, the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms is celebrating its tenth
anniversary. Currently, 120 Governments are
submitting their official data on the transfer of arms. In
order to promote the universality of the Register, Japan
has been co-organizing, with Canada, Germany, the
Netherlands and the United Nations, a series of
regional workshops in several countries, including
Ghana and Namibia. A similar seminar is planned to
take place in Indonesia next February.
The trust fund established in the Department for
Disarmament Affairs has supported several United
Nations activities, such as the study of the problems
related to small arms and light weapons, public
awareness programmes and the dispatch of fact-finding
missions to affected countries. Japan has thus far
contributed $2.16 million to the Fund.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
addressing the root causes of violence, armed conflicts,
instability and other threats to international peace and
security. In order to prevent the resurgence of conflicts
and to foster durable peace and stability in postconflict situations, it is important to accelerate the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants. But it is equally important to promote

11

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

economic and social development, democratization and
reconciliation among the parties to a conflict. That
approach will help to ensure a fundamental, long-term
and comprehensive solution to security problems in
volatile areas. I believe that it is an approach the
international community must take in order to
consolidate peace and stability around the world in the
twenty-first century.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
Congo. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the 11 countries members of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) —
Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Rwanda and Sao Tomé and
Principe — I would first like to express our pride in
seeing you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council for
this month. I would also like to thank you for including
in the agenda of the Council the sensitive issue of
small arms, which is at the heart of the greatest
concerns of Central Africa.
For, as everyone knows, Central Africa has for
some years faced a grave situation of armed conflict,
destabilization and insecurity. It was not long ago that
of the 11 members of ECCAS, seven were in a
situation of war or instability. Simply consulting the
agenda of the Security Council, one can see that the
situation in Angola, Burundi, the Great Lakes, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic is routinely the subject of intense
debates in the Chamber.
It is therefore an opportunity for me to thank the
Council for all the interest that it has constantly
attached to the evolution of this highly sensitive
geopolitical and security situation in the subregion.
But this is also an opportunity to announce to the
entire international community that, for the first time in
a long time, prospects for a return to peace are
emerging today in the majority of the States concerned.
The Security Council is therefore especially requested
to take all the necessary measures to encourage, assist,
accelerate and strengthen those positive developments
in order to make the peace process irreversible. That is
particularly the case with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where the strengthening of the United

12

Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is crucial.
If I chose to refer to those situations, it was to
underline that, as is often the case with conflicts in the
Third World, the wars afflicting Central Africa are
principally fuelled by light weapons, the subject of
today’s debate.
To deal with this situation, the leaders of Central
Africa have adopted an entire series of measures to
build confidence among States, to prevent conflicts and
to resolve them when they erupt. They have done so in
order to establish lasting peace and security in a region
which can offer a great deal more to Africa and the
world.
Therefore, numerous initiatives, recommendations
and specific measures were adopted in the framework
of ECCAS and through the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, a working tool that the United Nations has put
at our disposition to assist us in the highly sensitive
domain of peace, security and preventive diplomacy.
In July 1999, at Yaoundé, Cameroon, there was a
high-level subregional seminar on the examination and
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of lasting peace and
development in Africa. At that seminar, the member
countries of ECCAS adopted measures and
recommended the implementation of the following
mechanisms in the fight against the trafficking in and
proliferation of small arms: the establishment of
national commissions to combat the proliferation of
light arms; approaching the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to create an advisory mission on
monitoring and collecting arms in the subregion of
Central Africa; implementation of a community charter
on investments foreseeing coercive measures in dealing
with companies maintaining armed militias; the
creation of a subregional register of conventional
weapons; and a review and harmonization of national
laws concerning carrying arms.
Those measures and mechanisms were reaffirmed
during the subregional conference on the proliferation
and illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons
in Central Africa, held in N’Djamena, Chad from 25 to
27 October 1999. During that conference, ECCAS
member
countries
adopted
the
following
recommendations: the harmonization of the national

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

legislations of Central African States in the fight
against the illicit proliferation and circulation of small
arms and light weapons; the creation of a uniform arms
register at the national and subregional levels and a
databank on the existing stocks of each country, arms
dealers and transport agents; a request for the
Secretary-General’s support of programmes for
disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration of
ex-combatants; a request for the assistance of the
Secretary-General for the countries in the subregion in
their efforts to restructure their armed forces and
police; the examination of regional projects to collect
arms, in cooperation with international institutions and
financial backers, as well as small-scale development
projects to promote the economic and social
reintegration of those possessing illegal weapons of
war; and the creation of a subregional office in Central
Africa of the International Criminal Police
Organization (Interpol) and a more active cooperation
between that body and the countries of Central Africa.
Within the framework of the programme of work
of the Advisory Committee during the period 2002 to
2003, the member countries of ECCAS also envisaged
the organization of a subregional seminar on the
implementation in Central Africa of the Programme of
Action adopted at the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, which was held here last year.
Also foreseen is the organization of a workshop
on the participation of ECCAS member States in the
creation of a United Nations Conventional Arms
Register and a United Nations register on military
spending.
As can be seen, the ECCAS member States are
fully conscious of the real danger posed by small arms
in an area that is attempting to end a very sad page in
its history.
Today, the presence on Angolan soil of thousands
of anti-personnel mines is sufficient to remind us that
the fight against that category of arms is a question of
day-to-day survival for populations anxious to recover
the happiness of a normal life.
For the leaders of Central Africa, now that most
of the States concerned can entertain real hopes for
peace and security, the problem is finding the human,
material and financial means to implement peacebuilding policies. Once all the peace agreements have
been signed; once the foreign troops have withdrawn;

and once national reconciliation has been achieved, we
will have to support all these developments with
measures to collect arms and to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate ex-combatants as soon as possible. The
States members of ECCAS are committed to devoting a
substantial share of their resources to such
programmes. They expect the international community
to assist them in establishing a definitive peace in their
subregion.
In conclusion, I congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on his excellent report on small arms, which
Mr. Dhanapala introduced with great eloquence this
morning, and assure him of the full cooperation of the
countries of Central Africa in the implementation of its
relevant recommendations, the majority of which mesh
perfectly with the initiatives and actions undertaken by
ECCAS.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Congo for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Israel. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to commend the Secretary-General for his report on
small arms and, in the same vein, to thank UnderSecretary-General Dhanapala for his remarkable
introduction of the report this morning.
The State of Israel views the illicit trade and
trafficking in small arms and light weapons first and
foremost as a humanitarian issue. Such activity
invariably leads to the loss of innocent life and affects
the basic right of people to lead their lives peacefully,
without fear of getting killed simply for being in the
wrong place at the wrong time.
The humanitarian dimension of this problem must
remain foremost in our minds as we conduct
deliberations on this matter. Our aim must be to
prevent not only the irresponsible flow of arms,
ammunition and explosives, but also the indiscriminate
attacks which inevitably result from illicit trade and
trafficking.
Our actions must also deal directly not only with
States that engage in this activity, but also with nonState actors — terrorist groups, criminal organizations
and others — that gain access to small arms and light
weapons. In the past year, the world has recognized the

13

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

threat that terrorism poses to freedom, security and
global stability. The international community has
resolved not only to combat terrorists directly, but also
to insist that States end the financial and logistical
support that makes terrorism possible. These efforts to
deny terrorists the means to carry out their attacks must
also include steps aimed at denying them access to
small arms and light weapons.
This may seem like an unattainable objective, but
in fact it is entirely within our ability to achieve. Israel
believes that the best way to curb the illicit circulation
of small arms and light weapons throughout the world
is, first, through strong national commitment and
determination. It is our view that States bear the
primary responsibility for ensuring that no weapons,
including small arms, are transferred from their
territory without proper oversight. States must
undertake adequate marking and recording procedures
for all weapons, stringent export controls and
appropriate domestic legislation to prevent the misuse
and proliferation of arms.
Action taken at the national level must be
supplemented by regional coordination and cooperative
international efforts. Arms proliferation is, after all, a
transnational
problem,
exploited
mainly
by
international terrorists and criminal organizations. If
States adopt clear and explicit commitments to bar
different entities under their jurisdiction from engaging
in the illicit traffic of arms, withhold assistance from
outside elements involved in this traffic, and cooperate
in international and regional frameworks, we can
greatly reduce the threat posed by these weapons.
The Programme of Action, adopted in July 2001
during the Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, represents
an important first step in this regard. All efforts should
be exerted to find ways and means to implement the
provisions of the Programme of Action, including
measures to pressure recalcitrant States to do more to
fulfil their obligations. We are pleased with the
progress that has been made, especially in several
regional initiatives which constitute an appropriate
framework for combating the illicit circulation of small
arms and light weapons. Still, more work needs to be
done to prevent arms from falling into the hands of
those who would use them for criminally destructive
purposes.

14

Israel is a country that, more than half a century
after its establishment, continues to face threats both
from States in the region as well as from terrorist
organizations with increasing access to conventional
weapons. Small arms in the hands of terrorist
organizations have exacted a high price in human
suffering, while also serving to obstruct efforts to
achieve a durable peace. Not only in Israel, but in other
parts of the world as well, terrorism has been a cause of
political instability and hinders social and economic
development. Clearly, small arms have not had small
consequences.
Moreover, the relative speed and ease with which
terrorist groups have built up significant stockpiles of
conventional arms even raises the spectre of their one
day being capable of deploying weapons of mass
destruction. It is imperative that we act now to prevent
even greater threats in the future.
In our region, we are particularly vulnerable to
the harmful effects of the illicit traffic in small arms.
Though the spirit and the letter of the Oslo agreements
greatly restrict the number and type of weapons
permitted to the Palestinian Authority, we remain
perpetually at risk due to the dangerous violation of
these accords.
In the early morning of 3 January 2002, the Israel
Defense Forces seized a ship called the Karine A,
carrying 50 tons of weapons and ammunition bound for
the Palestinian territories. The ship contained an
enormous cache of weaponry that would have
significantly elevated the ability of Palestinian
terrorists to kill and maim Israeli civilians. Among the
weapons found were a large number of rockets, mortars
and launchers; anti-tank weaponry, mines and
explosives; and other types of light weaponry,
including sniper rifles, assault rifles and hand grenades.
The Karine A and the weapons discovered aboard it
were financed by the Palestinian Authority with the
assistance of other States in the region.
The use of boats to carry weapons intended for
terrorist use, without any country accepting
responsibility, is a phenomenon that should be declared
unacceptable by the international community.
Furthermore, last April, in the course of
Operation Defensive Shield, Israel seized nearly 2,000
Kalashnikov rifles, almost 400 sniper rifles and over
2,000 long rifles from Palestinian terrorists. These
weapons are in addition to the pistols, mortars,

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

grenades, launchers, bombs and other explosive
devices that Israeli forces discovered. Much of this
weaponry was purchased with the help of other regimes
in the Middle East. It hardly needs to be mentioned that
these weapons are intended not for defensive purposes
but to escalate the terrorist campaign against the
citizens of Israel and that they serve only to create
ever-greater obstacles along the path to peace and
reconciliation. Many of the weapons seized were
subsequently destroyed.
We wish to take this opportunity to call upon our
neighbours and all the countries in the region to adopt a
responsible policy and to take the necessary measures
to stop the flow of arms from their territories to
terrorist groups. We expect the international
community to join us in that call. The result of this
flow of arms is the fuelling of the conflict by
increasing the amount of illegal arms in terrorist hands,
thereby adding to human suffering, animosity and
instability in the region. Terrorism, after all, is only
viable if countries allow, and even support, its
fortification by weapons transfers.
The Security Council, as the body now charged
with coordinating the international efforts against
terrorism, must also address the role of arms
proliferation in terrorist activities. Specifically, in the
context of the counter-terrorist measures it is requiring
of all States, the Council must issue a call for the
implementation of measures to prevent arms from
falling into the hands of terrorists.
Israel continues to face threats to its very
existence, as well as a regional build-up of
conventional weapons. We therefore have consistently
attached great importance to confronting overall
proliferation threats and challenges, including small
arms, and have placed counter-proliferation high on
Israel’s security agenda. We share the efforts of likeminded States to place this issue at the top of the arms
control agenda. We also believe that cooperation and
coordination at the international level should be
strengthened in the continuing fight against
proliferation.
Israel adheres to strict export control regimes.
Israel’s firm arms-transfer policy includes tight
controls aimed, inter alia, at the prohibition of exports
to regions or States under United Nations Security
Council sales embargoes, non-State entities, subversive
and underground movements, terrorist or guerrilla

groups, criminal organizations, or areas where there is
ongoing internal armed conflict between rival parties.
Moreover, Israel’s export control regulations
concerning the export of small arms and light weapons
obligate the exporter to apply for separate and specific
licences from the relevant authorities, including
negotiation permits and export licences.
In addition, Israel invests in research,
development and production of new technologies and
equipment to prevent the illicit smuggling of arms
along its borders and points of entry. Israel has an
extremely advanced marking and record-keeping
system, which is an integral part of the production
process. This marking is very reliable.
Israel is willing to work with other countries in
our region to coordinate our efforts and share our
experience in combating the illicit spread of small arms
and light weapons. We remain committed to working in
a cooperative, regional approach, as part of a shared
global commitment to end the tragedy caused by these
weapons.
Finally, Israel believes that the international
community should recognize the right of States to
acquire and produce small arms for self-defence and
the necessities of national security, as determined by
each State. However, the international community does
have the right to insist that the use of these weapons be
restricted to self-defence and national security purposes
only. Moreover, we have the full right — and, indeed,
the obligation — to demand that States ensure that
these weapons do not fall into unauthorized hands.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Costa Rica. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
long as weapons exist, it will be impossible to achieve
peace. Arms are a catalyst to armed conflicts.
The arms market has perverse consequences. In
1998 there were 588,000 deaths in various conflict
areas as a consequence of the use of small arms and
light weapons. In 41 countries, 300,000 child soldiers
take part in active combat, while insurgent and
paramilitary groups have recruited another 500,000. If
we add the number of displaced people and of those
whose fundamental rights have been affected by
violence, the total number of victims is intolerable.

15

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms and, in particular, its
emphasis on the need for the Security Council and the
General Assembly to coordinate their efforts to
regulate the traffic and use of these weapons. In this
context, we consider it essential for the Security
Council to cooperate in the full implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted by last year’s United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
War is a business. Regardless of how bloody or
unjust it may be, war is always a business. Ninety-eight
countries maintain arms industries that, by definition,
depend on war to exist. Among those States only 22
have published official reports on their sales and
transfers of weapons. Arms manufacturers profit from
war and, on occasion, do so at the expense of public
treasuries. The production of weapons is also highly
subsidized. Various Governments offer financial
incentives to their weapons industries through “offset
agreements” and “recoupement fees” in order to make
those industries more competitive on the global level.
The States with arms industries are therefore indirectly
responsible for wars.
Greater transparency in the international weapons
market is required. Currently, only 20 per cent of the
international legal market in small arms and light
weapons can be documented and traced through the
respective customs services. Sales licences, end-user
and final-destination guarantees and other measures to
control the arms market are totally insufficient.
Illicit parallel arms markets continue to exist,
thanks to the action, or inaction, of many Governments.
In 2001 alone, 54 States were linked to transfers or
resales of arms, in clear violation of existing
international arms embargoes.
This deadly trade, which does not respect
borders, requires international regulation. Therefore,
although we welcome the adoption of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its three Protocols, we regret that it does not
cover the sale or transfer of arms among States or nonState entities. Unfortunately, the Programme of Action
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects suffers from the same deficiencies.
Costa
Rica
fully
endorses
the
first
recommendation in the Secretary-General’s report to

16

the effect that the Security Council should support the
negotiation of an international instrument on the
transfer of small arms. Since 1997, my country has
been advocating the adoption of an international code
of ethics for arms transfers. The draft instrument,
which seeks to ban the transfer of military hardware
and personnel and to eliminate financial and logistical
support for those States whose armed forces, police or
paramilitary units participate in or contribute to the
violation of human rights, was prepared and endorsed
by 19 individuals and institutions — all Nobel Peace
Prize laureates — including our former President,
Oscar Arias Sánchez. We urge all Member States that
are committed to a stable and lasting peace to support
that initiative.
We also support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the Council resort more
frequently and resolutely to embargoes on arms and
ammunition and adopt strong measures to ensure full
compliance and verification. It is essential for the
Council to examine the possibility of imposing
sanctions on those States that flagrantly violate —
whether directly or indirectly — arms embargoes.
Likewise, all States must participate in the United
Nations Conventional Arms Register and publish
reliable information on their military expenditure and
arms transfers.
My delegation fully agrees with the SecretaryGeneral that the Security Council must examine and
respond to the harmful interrelationship among the
illicit transfer of weapons, drug trafficking and the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. In this regard,
we would like to recall the valuable and courageous
reports on the illicit exploitation of natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola.
We believe that it will be necessary to request
similar reports to evaluate the actual implementation of
arms embargoes and to study the sources financing of
the illicit arms trade.
Of the 138 States that have provided information,
51 devote more resources to their military budgets than
to education, health care and preventive health care. In
the twenty-first century, there are too many societies
that are armed, yet illiterate and sick. The fight against
the use and proliferation of these weapons requires the
demilitarization of our societies and the creation of a
true culture of peace in which the basic rights of all are
recognized.

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

In this context, the Security Council must not
only support efforts at disarmament but promote the
reduction of military budgets. We note the SecretaryGeneral’s seventh and eighth recommendations to the
effect that the Security Council should include
measures aimed at the disarmament and demobilization
of combatants within the mandate of peacekeeping
operations. We believe it necessary, however, for those
mandates also to seek the total disarmament of those
societies in which there is armed conflict, as a
necessary step towards stable and lasting peace.
Costa Rica fully supports the holding of the first
biennial meeting to be convened in accordance with the
Programme of Action of the Small Arms Conference.
We trust that the meeting will be held in July 2003 here
in New York.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Nigeria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): I am very happy to see
you, Sir, presiding over this meeting today. I should
like to congratulate you very warmly on your
assumption of the presidency for this month.
My delegation warmly welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report, which we consider very useful and
helpful.
The issue of the illicit traffic in small arms and
light weapons continues to be a matter of great concern
to my delegation, considering the fact that the use and
ready availability of those weapons are a major source
of insecurity and contribute to socio-economic
stagnation throughout the developing world, especially
sub-Saharan Africa, the region to which we belong.
They have become the most common means of
prosecuting armed conflicts, civil wars and criminal
acts in our societies. It is important to recognize that
while nuclear weapons — weapons of mass
destruction — may present a grave danger to the world,
it is small arms and light weapons that have been
responsible for the death of hundreds of thousands of
people in the world today.
The ever-expanding use of these weapons and
their consequences present the international community
with a new challenge. This is mainly because their
proliferation sustains conflicts, exacerbates violence,
contributes to the displacement of civilians and

undermines respect for international humanitarian law.
It poses a new threat to humanity in the form of
terrorism and organized crime. It has a negative impact
on women and the elderly and devastating
consequences on children. The world must seriously
face the grave challenges posed by these weapons if
our civilization and economic progress in the twentyfirst century are to be maintained.
Unfortunately, this problem has grown to such
immense proportions that it is practically impossible
for many countries in sub-Saharan Africa to focus
attention on issues of development without first
resolving the problem of the illicit transfer of these
weapons to their territories. Any action by the
international community that could put an end to this
negative phenomenon would, no doubt, constitute the
first major step towards helping Africa to achieve
sustainable and meaningful development.
My delegation is deeply concerned that, despite
the serious danger that the illicit use of these weapons
poses, there is currently no international treaty or other
legal instrument to control their use. We therefore wish
to reiterate the call made by my President,
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, to the General Assembly on
15 September 2002 for a legally binding international
instrument to control access to these weapons by nonState actors. We are, however, encouraged by the
attention the Council has so far given to this matter.
It is gratifying to note that there is increasing
multilateral cooperation on the issue of small arms and
light weapons. This was demonstrated last year with
the convening, here in New York, of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which adopted a
Programme of Action to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit trade in these weapons. The Programme of
Action contains a comprehensive set of measures to
address the problem. We note with appreciation and
satisfaction that that Conference — the first of its kind
on this issue — generated political will and momentum
for efforts to control these weapons. We urge the
international community to sustain that momentum for
progress. We also emphasize the need for full
implementation of the Programme of Action.
My delegation is also pleased with the successful
negotiation of the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, which was

17

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

adopted on 31 May 2001. Although the Protocol is
supplementary to the United Nations Convention on
Transnational Organized Crime, its adoption was a
positive development in the fight against the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
therefore appeal to all Member States to sign and ratify
the Protocol.
While these are welcome developments towards
combating this menace, we should not indulge in the
euphoria of victory, as there are still hurdles ahead.
Because of the multifaceted nature of the causes of
armed conflicts that partially prompt the proliferation
of these weapons, it is imperative that this problem be
tackled in a comprehensive and integrated manner. In
that regard, we wish to express our belief in the need to
build on the existing national and regional initiatives
and develop a common international approach to
control the illicit spread of these weapons. Equally
important is the need to address the underlying causes
of conflicts in general, including issues of poverty and
underdevelopment as well as socio-political issues.
My country, Nigeria recognizes the importance of
this subject matter, and has initiated action at various
levels to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. At the national level, Nigeria has put in place
practical measures to tackle the problem with the
establishment of the National Committee on Small
Arms and Light Weapons. Last year, Nigeria declared
the first day of the United Nations Conference on
Small Arms as Small Arms Destruction Day in
conformity with the decision reached at the Preparatory
Committee of the Conference.
At the subregional level, Nigeria joined other
countries members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in October 1998, to
declare a three-year moratorium on the import, export
and manufacture of small arms and light weapons. This
was accompanied by a Programme for Coordination
and Assistance on Security and Development in order
to address the security and development problems
associated with the proliferation of these weapons in
West Africa. ECOWAS has renewed the moratorium
for a second three-year period with effect from 5 July
2001. My delegation wishes to reiterate our call to the
international community to support the implementation
of the moratorium. We also urge other regions to
follow the example of ECOWAS by imposing similar
moratoriums in their respective regions.

18

At the regional level, Nigeria joined other African
countries in December 2000 to adopt the Bamako
ministerial declaration containing Africa’s common
position on the illicit proliferation, circulation and
trafficking in small arms and light weapons. We take
this opportunity to reaffirm our belief in the principles
enunciated in the declaration, including the one that
calls on the international community, particularly armssupplier countries, to limit the trade in small arms to
Governments and registered licensed traders.
As part of our efforts in this area, Nigeria, along
with South Africa, Mali, Kenya, Norway, Austria,
Canada, Switzerland, the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom, sponsored the African Conference on the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on Small Arms: Needs and Partnerships, which
took place in Pretoria, South Africa, from 18 to 21
March this year. The Conference brought to the fore
the need for the Security Council to pay particular
attention to this problem.
It is our strong belief that efforts aimed at
addressing the problem should be multidimensional if
they are to succeed. The international community
should demonstrate its sincere will to rid the world of
these weapons by enacting appropriate international
legislation to control arms transfers. This should
include mechanisms that would facilitate the
identification of such transfers. It is also important that
such mechanisms ensure appropriate sanctions against
manufacturers and suppliers that violate relevant global
regulations. This calls for transparency and confidencebuilding measures.
Of even greater importance is the need for us, as
members of the international community, to promote
conflict prevention measures and the pursuit of
negotiated solution to conflicts. Our emphasis should
be on promoting structures and processes that
strengthen democracy, human rights, the rule of law
and good governance, as well as economic recovery
and growth, as means of eliminating conflicts and
generating durable peace. It is evident from this that
our task in this area is enormous and calls for genuine
commitment and concerted action on the part of the
global community.
The President: (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Nigeria for the kind words he
addressed to me.

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

The next speaker is the representative of
Denmark. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The countries
of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia — and the associated countries,
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.
Mr. President, thank you for convening this open
debate of the Security Council. Currently more than
500 million small arms and light weapons are estimated
to be in circulation worldwide. The uncontrolled
accumulation and spread of these weapons have
devastating
political,
social,
economic
and
humanitarian consequences. The issue calls for urgent
international action. The European Union would like to
emphasize the importance of addressing the problem at
all levels: national, regional and international. Today’s
debate in the Council is therefore timely and, indeed,
necessary.
The EU actively seeks to alleviate the human
suffering caused by these weapons. First and foremost,
we need to counter the illicit trade and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. The European Union
played an active part in the 2001 United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We engaged
constructively in the elaboration of the United Nations
Programme of Action. We had hoped for a stronger
Programme. We especially would have liked to see
firmer commitments in regard to export controls,
stockpile management, marking and tracing, as well as
brokering. However, we must now look ahead. In this
regard, the EU welcomes the emergence of new
partnerships among States, civil society and nongovernmental organizations as a follow-up to the
Conference.
The European Union actively pursues the prompt
implementation of the Programme of Action. This is
not only a disarmament issue. The problem is multidimensional and should be addressed accordingly. We
remain committed to an effective, ambitious and
continuous follow-up process leading, through the

biennial meetings to be held in 2003 and 2005, to the
review conference to be held in 2006. The EU stands
ready to assume responsibility in this process. The
meeting in 2003 will be the first occasion to take stock
of the progress made. Stock-taking must be dynamic
and operational. The outcome should include proposals
for strengthening and further developing the measures
contained in the Programme of Action. Legally binding
commitments on marking and tracing, as well as on
brokering, should be further pursued. That must be
followed up in 2005. Only thus will we be able to
achieve concrete results and to further our initial goals
at the 2006 review conference.
The EU commends the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2002/1053) on small arms. We welcome his
recommendations. They are well founded and
constructive, and they merit implementation. We
remain convinced that initiatives by Member States, by
the General Assembly, by the Security Council and by
all other relevant bodies and organs must be mutually
reinforcing.
On behalf of the European Union I would like to
thank the Security Council for its decisions and actions
thus far with regard to small arms and light weapons.
The EU encourages the Security Council to continue its
ongoing efforts and to add impetus to implementation
at the operational level. As a first step, the EU would
propose that the Council concentrate its efforts on a
limited number of the recommendations. First, in order
to ensure concrete effects, the Council should
encourage Member States to enforce all its sanctions
resolutions, including those that impose arms
embargoes, and it should call for investigation of
alleged violations of those embargoes. Secondly, the
Council should continue to strengthen the provisions in
its mandates for peacekeeping operations on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, as well as measures for the
collection and destruction of illicit and surplus
weapons. Finally, the Council should establish
monitoring mechanisms under each relevant Council
resolution in order to further ensure implementation.
The European Union, for its part, stands ready to
contribute to, and to support efforts towards, a world
free of the illicit trade in and proliferation of these
weapons.
The EU Joint Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons constitutes the overall framework for EU
policy within that field. It stipulates a set of principles

19

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

and measures that the EU will pursue in relevant
international and regional forums, and it contains
provisions for technical and financial assistance. The
Union is continuously developing the Joint Action in
the light of experience. Thus far, we have had success
in a wide variety of projects, but we can improve —
and we will do so. Therefore, the EU, in July 2002,
decided to extend the scope of the Action’s application
to include ammunition. We look forward to and
welcome any initiatives on strengthening our common
efforts in the fight against the spread of small arms and
light weapons in an effective and lasting way.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
India. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Nambiar (India): We thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open debate of the
Security Council on small arms and for allowing us to
speak so early in the afternoon.
India is particularly aware of the complexity and
the lethality of the problems associated with the
accumulation, dispersal and transfer of illicit small
arms and light weapons. As we have stated in the past,
the trade in small arms is licit only if their export and
import take place through official, legal channels.
Arms exported by a Government that violates none of
its own laws are nevertheless illicit if they are sent to
non-State actors in another country, bypassing or
subverting laws there.
During the past decade, illicit weapons have been
the weapons of choice in an overwhelming number of
major conflicts. Annually, small arms claim between
300,000 and 500,000 lives, of which the overwhelming
percentage are civilian lives — many of those the lives
of women and children. In India, we are particularly
conscious of the lethality of such weapons. Over the
past two decades, more than 35,000 innocent people
have fallen victim to the depredations of terrorists
using illicit weapons. The seizures of small arms and
explosives by the Government of India make it
abundantly clear to us that that illicit pool is of a
magnitude and of a sophistication that require urgent
and serious attention on the part of all law-abiding
societies.
In his report on the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects (A/57/160), the
Secretary-General has provided an overview of the

20

activities undertaken under the auspices of the United
Nations to implement General Assembly resolution
56/24 V, adopted by the Assembly on 24 December
2001. That report, which covers the period from June
2001 to June 2002, includes actions taken to implement
the Programme of Action adopted at the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New
York in July 2001.
India is privileged to be playing a leading role as
Chairman of the Group of Governmental Experts
established by the Secretary-General to examine the
feasibility of developing an international instrument to
enable States to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons.
The Group of Governmental Experts has held the first
of its three mandated sessions, and it has been able to
identify a number of elements of common
understanding, on which work will continue at its
forthcoming sessions. The Group will submit its
findings to the Secretary-General during the fiftyeighth session of the General Assembly.
India welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document S/2002/1053, which
reflects recent initiatives taken by the Security Council.
We were also pleased to hear the statement by UnderSecretary-General Jayantha Dhanapala. The SecretaryGeneral’s report identifies areas where further action
by the Council is required in addressing the global
problem of illicit small arms and light weapons. It
emphasizes the key role of the Council in preventing,
combating and eliminating the uncontrolled spread of
such weapons. In his report, the Secretary-General has
listed a number of recommendations based on
suggestions made by Member States. We find many of
them to be very useful. Some of them are directly
addressed to the Council. We trust that the Council will
take appropriate further action with respect to the
recommendations that are directly within its
competence. We also hope that the Council will
consider ways of enhancing its cooperation with the
General Assembly on these issues.
We note other initiatives taken, including the joint
initiative by France and Switzerland to define a
political arrangement on cooperation with regard to the
traceability of illicit small arms and light weapons, as
well as to the voluntary furnishing of information by
States on implementation of the agreed Programme of
Action. India fully supports the first step of developing

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

a comprehensive tracing system and enhancing
cooperation among States towards that end. In this
connection, we see the need to strengthen the
effectiveness of the Interpol Weapons and Explosives
Tracking System. We similarly recognize the role
played by the Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism in highlighting how illicit small arms and
light weapons have actually prolonged conflicts and,
indeed, prevented the re-establishment of peace in
various conflict areas around the world.
A collective and cooperative initiative by the
international community needs the participation not
only of Governments, but also of concerned nongovernmental organizations and agencies and of
elements of civil society at large, in order to provide
the most effective framework to fight the scourge of
illicit small arms and light weapons. The SecretaryGeneral has commended not only the consolidation of
existing partnerships between States and civil society
organs around concrete actions, but also the emergence
of new partnerships.
The area of the linkages among the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, the illicit exploitation of
natural and other resources and the trade in narcotic
drugs is an important one. Over the past decade, the
Council has established embargoes to cut off the supply
of arms to non-State actors.
Where these have been bypassed, the Council has
authorized investigations which uncovered the criminal
networks established across continents which are being
used to sell diamonds and supply arms, as well as for
the export of drugs in furtherance of terrorist interests.
We would urge the Council to continue to take
initiatives to monitor relevant areas with regard to
embargoes and to tackle the problem in all its aspects.
The cooperation and sharing, among Member States
and among various bodies under the Council, of
information on arms traffickers that have violated
embargoes established by the Council would be a step
in building up a coordinated approach. This also
demands the attention of the Council, the General
Assembly and other relevant bodies of the United
Nations. For its part, the international community too
must generously support economic programmes of
rehabilitation to encourage the surrender of illegal
arms.
Perhaps only around 1 per cent of the global
supply of small arms is illicitly held, but that amounts

to more than six million weapons. That is an alarming
figure, considering that they are held by criminals,
terrorists, armed insurgents, secessionists and other
non-State actors. While three fourths of the global
trade in small arms is legal, illicit trade in weapons and
ammunition accounts for about $1.5 billion a year.
Further, small arms are now ever more easy to
use, lighter and more lethal, and their users need little
or no training to use them to devastating effect to their
societies and economies. Governments that desire to
protect their societies from this problem must take the
necessary national measures to introduce and monitor
vigorous standards and conditions on private holdings
of such weapons. All responsible States must undertake
an obligation not to supply such weapons to non-State
actors. Manufacturers and exporters should be subject
to the strictest controls. There should be the strictest
insistence on authenticated end-user certificates to
ensure effective control over the export and transit of
such weapons. The international community, for its
part, must ensure that the trade in arms must, as in the
case of the rest of the international trade, flow only
through channels authorized by both the exporting and
the importing Governments.
It is ammunition and explosives that kill. Arms
are only the means of delivery. This must be factored
into any work done by the international community to
tackle, comprehensively, the issue of small arms and
light weapons.
We welcome the initiative of the Security Council
in convening this open debate on small arms and light
weapons and trust that the Council will take effective
and practical steps to take forward the endeavours of
the United Nations in support of the implementation of
the Programme of Action adopted at last year’s United
Nations Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons
that would check the availability and use of illicit small
arms in fuelling and sustaining conflict and terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of South Africa.
I invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to
make her statement.
Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): I wish to make use
of this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. It gives my delegation
particular pleasure to see the representative of a fellow
African country, Cameroon, presiding over the debate

21

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

on the important issue that is on the agenda of today’s
meeting of the Security Council.
South Africa also wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on small arms, document
(S/2002/1053), and wishes to express its appreciation
of the Security Council’s continued interest in this
matter.
My delegation notes with some concern that, just
over a year after the adoption of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, we are still faced with the proliferation and
excessive accumulation of those weapons.
The Programme of Action on small arms that was
adopted in July 2001 sets out the steps that we as
Member States need to take at the national, regional
and global levels in order to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects. With its adoption we
recognized and highlighted the problems associated
with those weapons by placing them on the
international agenda, but we have now gone beyond
that stage and must move towards long-term, concrete
action. South Africa believes that the Programme of
Action remains the only globally recognized
framework that we now have for the implementation of
the commitments that we as Member States made in
July last year.
The proliferation and excessive accumulation of
small arms and light weapons around the world — and
particularly in Africa, where they are still the weapons
of choice in intra-State conflict — have not abated.
These internal conflicts on our continent are by their
very nature particularly violent in character; and the
impact that they have on civilian populations is
catastrophic. Not only do women, children and the
elderly fall victim to violence, but those that are able to
flee are often forced to do so, with the result that those
internally displaced people are no longer economically
active. The adverse impact that this has on social and
economic development in these countries is
incalculable and often takes decades to overcome.
In Africa, our New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) includes a peace and security
initiative that maps out the promotion on our continent
of long-term conditions for development and security.
In that context, we as Africans aim to build our
continent’s capacity to manage these conflicts by

22

strengthening our existing regional and subregional
institutions to deal with conflict prevention,
management
and
resolution;
peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace enforcement; post-conflict
reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction; and
combating the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.
The heads of State or Government of the African
Union have this year also expressed their concern that
no single factor has contributed more to socioeconomic decline in Africa and to the suffering of
civilian populations than the scourge of conflicts
within and between States. In that regard, they adopted
a Protocol to the Constitutive Act of the African Union
whereby a Peace and Security Council was established
in the Union, as a standing decision-making organ for
the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts. The Peace and Security Council will serve as
a collective early warning body to facilitate prompt and
effective responses to crisis situations in Africa.
We are encouraged by the developments in
Angola this year and, more recently, in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. Yet, at the same time, we are faced
with enormous challenges. I have just referred to a
comprehensive approach to post-conflict peace
initiatives, as set out in NEPAD. To that end,
diplomacy and concrete efforts to disarm, demobilize
and reintegrate ex-combatants are integral to this
approach. Our experience in Southern Africa has
showed that, paradoxically, illicit transfers of small
arms pose a potentially bigger threat to neighbouring
countries when a country is emerging from civil strife
than while it is involved in such strife. Accordingly,
South Africa fully supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendations
relating
to
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration initiatives and the
need to include measures relating to such efforts in the
texts of peace agreements.
South Africa believes that, of all the levels at
which the Programme of Action should be fully
implemented, none is as important as the need to focus
on national implementation measures. Without a
concerted effort to implement— where they do not
exist or are not functioning effectively — systems that
are aimed at controlling legal arms transfers and
thereby contributing to preventing and eradicating
illicit arms transfers, our collective endeavours to do so
at the regional and global levels will be futile.

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

In this context, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that States should
establish the necessary legislative and administrative
measures, including the use of authenticated end-user
certificates, to ensure effective control over arms
transfers. South Africa has adopted a strict policy on
this issue, and the legislative framework for this policy,
the National Conventional Arms Control Bill, has been
approved by our National Assembly and is nearing the
final stages of adoption.
My delegation also supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that efforts be made to
develop an international instrument to trace illicit small
arms and light weapons. In this context, South Africa is
pursuing these efforts through its participation in the
group of governmental experts established by General
Assembly resolution 56/24 V, entitled “The illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects”, to
examine the feasibility of developing such an
international instrument. It is our hope that this expert
group will come up with concrete recommendations at
the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
We are also encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation for enhanced interaction
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council on the issue of small arms. While we also
recognize that both organs of our Organization have
distinct mandates and roles, we would caution against
embarking on separate or parallel courses of action on
this issue that would duplicate our undertakings in
terms of the Programme of Action.
Finally, South Africa also supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations regarding arms embargoes
and related Security Council sanctions. South Africa
believes that not only is it incumbent upon all Member
States to respect and abide by these, but that their full
implementation will rigorously curtail the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. The
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
Protocol on the Control of Firearms, Ammunition and
Other Related Materials calls upon its member States
to enact the necessary legislation and other measures to
sanction the violation of Security Council arms
embargoes, and our domestic draft legislation, to which
I have just referred, also contains such a provision.
In conclusion, South Africa believes that the
Security Council plays, and will continue to play, an
indispensable role in preventing, combating and

eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects and in the implementation of
the Programme of Action on small arms. Accordingly,
we trust that the Council will remain seized of this
matter.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Indonesia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia): Mr. President, on behalf
of the delegation of Indonesia, I would like to express
my appreciation to you for convening this meeting on
what is, for us, a very crucial subject. We would also
like to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his lucid report and to Under-Secretary-General
Dhanapala for introducing it. The report has
highlighted the role of the Security Council in
combating the global menace posed by the illicit trade
in small arms, which has been taken into account in its
consideration of conflict-prevention, peacekeeping and
peace-building activities.
The
report
also
contains
numerous
recommendations which warrant our careful attention.
My delegation wishes to note in particular the
recommendation to consider modalities to enhance the
interaction between the General Assembly and the
Security Council, especially in the context of the
Programme of Action adopted by the July 2001 United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
We are focusing our attention on the issue of
small arms in the Security Council today because the
only thing that continues to be small about small arms
is probably their physical size. However, these arms
continue to be big in stature, as they are big business
and bring big profits. As a result, they continue to be a
big problem. In every corner of the world, especially in
the developing world, and particularly in areas of
armed conflict, small arms continue to cause
horrendous misery to families and are a significant
cause of humanitarian distress. The deaths, injuries,
forced displacement and the loss of homes, property
and jobs they cause defy rational explanation.
There are also new areas of concern that merit the
close attention of the international community. Many
humanitarian agencies are reconsidering the previously
sacrosanct principles of neutrality and impartiality as
small arms proliferation endangers their activities and

23

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

personnel. The humanitarian impact of small arms is
escalating in magnitude and severity, largely as a result
of the eruption of new conflicts facilitated by the
continuing availability and use of small arms. Such
impacts are difficult to quantify because of poor or
non-existent data-collection facilities and insufficient
international attention and concern.
This is a grim picture in every respect. It is a
combination of humanitarian, security and economic
problems that demand the utmost in international
cooperation. It is reassuring that the basis for such a
response already exists. The July 2001 United Nations
Conference on Small Arms referred to earlier adopted a
Programme of Action, which is to be implemented at
the national, regional and global levels.
Today, Indonesia reiterates its support for, and its
commitment to, the Programme as a first step in a
comprehensive scheme to address this problem
definitively. In our view, at this stage, the Organization
should focus on the implementation of measures
contained in the Programme before any new or
additional measures are agreed upon. Furthermore, the
issue of small arms is one in which the potential for
multilateral action must be not only recognized but also
self-evident.
Following that Conference, the Government of
Indonesia convened a workshop in Bogor last
November to map out its national response. The
primary aim was to introduce the Programme of Action
to participating stakeholders, including governmental
and non-governmental institutions, and to promote its
internalization. It was also aimed at identifying the
concrete legal, administrative, institutional and
preventive measures that Indonesia can take in
implementing the Programme.
As a result, there now exists a national consensus
that its implementation should be pursued in a gradual
manner, taking national capacity into consideration. It
would ultimately depend upon strengthening national
capacity-building through international cooperation,
which is essential when national resources are limited.
In addition, the establishment of a national focal point
has recently been suggested to coordinate the
implementation of the Programme of Action. There is
also a need for the establishment of a national database
to assemble information on the production, registration,
circulation, mapping and transfer cycle of small arms
and light weapons. Regional and bilateral cooperation,

24

especially with neighbouring States, are essential in
this regard.
At the global level, Indonesia is aware of the need
for States and the World Customs Organization to
enhance cooperation with the International Criminal
Police Organization to identify those groups and
individuals engaged in the illicit trade of small arms.
Equally important is the promotion of such cooperation
and coordination among States, regional and
international organizations, as well as civil society,
including
non-governmental
organizations,
in
combating this menace. My delegation is also aware of
the value of education and public-awareness
programmes on the problems posed by illicit trade in
small arms by promoting dialogue among relevant
constituencies for a culture of peace.
These are imperatives that are close to the heart
of Indonesia, and on which we intend to work in unity
with other States and the United Nations so as to
ensure that the problem of small arms, and their
needless humanitarian consequences, are addressed in
the shortest possible time. It must be recalled that this
issue is so important that it forms an integral part of the
Millennium Declaration, which called for concerted
action by the international community.
Before concluding, as referred to earlier by the
representative of Japan, my delegation wishes to
inform members that Indonesia, in cooperation with the
United Nations Department for Disarmament Affairs,
will host a regional seminar to consider the
implementation of the Programme of Action, followed
by a workshop on transparency in armaments, in
February 2003.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Argentina,
whom I invite to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We also welcome this opportunity to take up
the item of small arms and light weapons. We thank the
Secretary-General for his report on this item.
The presence of more small arms and light
weapons than are necessary for defence and security in
various parts of the world, particularly the illicit
trafficking in small arms, often associated with

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

instability, is an age-old problem and complex in
nature. To resolve this matter, we must have an
integrated and proportionate approach, based on
security and development.
Fortunately, valuable proposals and processes are
under way at various levels, but what we need now is
cooperation at all levels. This will be a key element in
efforts to combat illicit trafficking, and also to prevent
and curb the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.
The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted last July,
crystallized the political will of the international
community to tackle this item. It also laid the basis for
dealing with the humanitarian and economic
dimensions of the problems caused by small arms and
light weapons. Member States thereby undertook to
cooperate with the United Nations system to actually
implement the arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council under the Charter.
At the same time, the Council was urged to look,
in each individual case, at the possibility of including
in the mandates and budgets of peacekeeping
operations, where necessary, relevant provisions on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of ex-combatants.
We welcome the innovative steps taken by the
Security Council to enhance compliance with arms
embargoes — for example, the monitoring mechanisms
and the panels of experts.
Turning to the observations and recommendations
in the Secretary-General’s report, I would like to offer
the following comments: we support the idea of
drafting an international instrument to enable States to
identify and trace small arms and light weapons in a
timely and responsible way, and we think it appropriate
that States, as required, use the Interpol weapons and
explosives tracking system and to provide technical
and financial support to it.
I would take the opportunity of asking for more
details about the small arms advisory service that the
Secretariat is considering setting up using
extrabudgetary resources. We would be interested in
knowing what exactly this advisory service would be.
We definitely believe the Security Council and
the General Assembly should study ways of improving

interaction on matters relating to small arms, so as to
promote the preparation of long-term strategies within
the context of conflict prevention and peace-building,
and also within the context of the Programme of
Action.
We believe that Recommendation 5 is
fundamental in the sense that it would call on Member
States to apply all the Security Council resolutions on
sanctions. We also welcome the request for regular
reports by some of the sanctions Committees to
Member States on the measures adopted to implement
the resolutions.
We agree that the Security Council should
continue its efforts to determine existing links between
illicit small arms and light weapons trafficking, the
illicit exploitation of natural resources, among others,
drug trafficking and armed conflict. We also believe
the Council could prepare innovative strategies to
tackle this phenomenon, and we think it appropriate
that the Council help in detecting the manufacture of
and illicit trafficking in such weapons. We would draw
attention to the work done by the panels of experts on
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Sierra Leone in this connection.
Recommendations on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants should, in our
opinion, be complemented with conflict-prevention
measures, and also measures to prevent the recurrence
of conflict. For, after all, weapons are only the tools
that exacerbate it. We would reiterate the advisability
of using authenticated end-user certificates. This is a
commitment that Member States have already
undertaken to provide under the Programme of Action.
It would be one of the measures for action at the
national level.
Swift and strict implementation of embargoes by
the Security Council, and adoption of coercive
measures against Member States that violate these
embargoes, would be a significant contribution to
combating the scourge of small arms and light
weapons. Argentina strongly favours transparency in
armaments as a way of promoting stability and
reducing tensions. In our view, the concept of
transparency also applies to small arms and light
weapons.
We fully agree with those that maintain that
States themselves have the primary responsibility for
handling the problems caused by small arms and light

25

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

weapons. Therefore, we believe that emphasis should
be placed on the responsibility and cooperation
dimension between Member States and the various
bodies of the United Nations system, within the context
of their respective fields, to strengthen any action
aimed at controlling and eradicating the illicit arms
traffic in those weapons at the global level.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Argentina for his kind words
expressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Westdal (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the Secretary-General’s report on small arms
and the action it recommends to curb their
proliferation.
We especially value its recognition that human
security, the safety of people and their communities, is
the central goal of small arms policy and action; it is
the point of controlling licit flows of those arms,
curbing illicit trafficking and destroying excess
weapons. That is why, to make them effective,
embargoes against weapons must be respected and
truly imposed.
We are gratified that several of the
recommendations we made in the Security Council
debate on small arms last year have been incorporated
in the report’s recommendations. We also wanted
funded provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) in Security Council peacekeeping
mandates and protection for children in peace
agreements. We had also emphasized that control of
natural resources like oil and diamonds could fuel
deadly violence. We also commended Interpol’s
Weapons and Explosives Tracking System, which the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police helped develop. In all
those respects, we think we’ve been heard.
(spoke in English)
The priority now, a year after the United Nations
Conference, is to implement the Programme of Action.
We want the biennial meetings in 2003 and 2005 and
the next full conference in 2006 to have real impact
worldwide against small arms proliferation. We think
that that necessitates international conviction and
action to contend with the problems of all small arms
trade, not just its illicit dimensions.

26

There has been heartening progress over the last
year, notably in developing legislation, in promoting
technology for marking and tracing, in coming to grips
with harmful brokering and in weapon collection and
destruction. We want the meeting next year to swell
that momentum by fostering productive cooperation
between States, regional organizations and nongovernmental organizations.
For our part, Canada has been active. With host
countries and partners, we sponsored seminars and
encouraged non-governmental organizations in San
Jose, Pretoria, Manila and several Central Asian
centres. Presiding over the G-8, we promoted local,
national and regional security sector reform in the G-8
Africa Action Plan. We underwrote the Canada/West
Africa Peace and Security Initiative to professionalize
institutions responsible for the protection of public
safety. We supported small arms and human security
projects in South and South-East Asia and helped study
the socio-economic impact of small arms availability
and use in Pacific Island States and the links between
foreign direct investment and small arms-related crime
and violence.
Through the Biting the Bullet series, we
supported essential public briefings on arms
embargoes. We have also been proud to support the
truly outstanding work of the Geneva-based Small
Arms Survey, producing global baseline data for policy
formulation and results measurement, emphasizing the
devastating human impact of small arms proliferation.
While we are pleased to cite significant early
success in implementing the Programme of Action, we
must not forget that the United Nations Conference was
unable to address several key dimensions of the
problems we confront, including the regulation of
civilian possession and transfers to non-State actors.
We thus believe policy and action against small arms
proliferation should be based on, but not limited to, the
Programme of Action.
In that context, we particularly welcome those
elements of the Secretary-General’s report that
re-energize debate and transcend the Conference
agenda. Several, noteworthy, warrant our robust
support: the establishment of an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons; legislative,
administrative and related measures to ensure effective
control over the export and transit of small arms and

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

light weapons, a critical responsibility of all States; the
effective monitoring and enforcement of United
Nations arms embargoes, including coercive measures
applied as needed to regimes and individuals; enhanced
transparency in arms transactions, which is particularly
timely, given the tenth anniversary this month of the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms; and
recognition of the link between the spread of illicit
small arms and human rights violations, which is
essential to any comprehensive understanding of the
impact of small arms on human security.
Canada’s view is that the Secretary-General’s
report enhances our comprehension and our prospects
for effective action against the cruel contagion of small
arms and light weapons proliferation. We think the
report will enrich our debate and deepen our
commitment for years to come.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Switzerland. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
represents a threat to human security in certain regions
of the world. Switzerland expresses its satisfaction at
the success of the 2001 United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. The biennial meeting in 2003 will
present the first opportunity to examine the progress
achieved in implementing the United Nations
Programme of Action.
Over the last few months, Switzerland’s
international efforts have been concentrated on four
aspects of the problem of small arms: marking and
tracing, support for centres of competence, promotion
of innovative approaches such as dealing with nonState actors, and in particular, national and regional
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on small arms. In that last category, I wish to
mention Switzerland’s support for the recent
conference in Pretoria on the implementation of the
Programme of Action in Africa and our financing of
seminars in Latin America. Switzerland welcomes the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2002/1053)
and
recommendations on small arms of 20 September,
presented by Under-Secretary-General Dhanapala, and
notes with satisfaction that the efforts deployed to date

by Switzerland fall within the lines of action the report
prescribes.
A
certain
number
of
the
report’s
recommendations, in our view, are of particular
importance. In his recommendation 1, the SecretaryGeneral expresses the wish that we support efforts to
elaborate an international instrument that would allow
States to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons in a timely and reliable manner. The FrenchSwiss initiative, previously mentioned by the French
delegation, falls into that category. In that context, I
also wish to recall the work of the United Nations
Group of Governmental Experts on Tracing Small
Arms and Light Weapons. Switzerland expects that it
will provide a useful contribution to the elaboration of
a binding international instrument in this field.
For Switzerland, the issue of small arms is an
important aspect of integrated conflict-prevention
strategies, peace-building and development cooperation.
One of the great challenges in implementing the United
Nations Programme of Action will be to make the issue
of small arms a theme cutting across other political
questions. Switzerland welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s insistence on the necessity of an integrated
approach, in particular in recommendation 4. In the
same vein, recommendations 7 and 8 seek to extend the
mandate of United Nations peacekeeping operations to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, as well as to specific measures
concerning the collection and destruction of illicit or
surplus small arms. Switzerland has already undertaken
intensive activities in this respect, for example in
Mozambique and Sierra Leone.
Finally, recommendation 5 refers to an aspect of
the problem which Switzerland considers a priority.
The Secretary-General underlines the role of
information on small arms and invites Member States
to pursue their efforts in this context. For some years
now, Switzerland has supported, together with other
States, the Small Arms Survey project in Geneva,
which led, earlier this year and for the second time, to
the publication of a yearbook which we consider very
useful: Small Arms Survey 2002: Counting the Human
Cost. Switzerland will continue in the future to support
this essential work. I have the pleasure of announcing
that, following what was done in English in
Johannesburg, the French version of the yearbook will
be presented to the public in New York on 24 October.

27

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Jamaica. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Neil (Jamaica): To begin, I take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. In view of the many
preoccupations of the moment, you obviously have a
difficult task on your hands, but you have our
confidence and our support in guiding the work of the
Council.
It was a little over a year ago that the Council
considered issues relating to small arms and light
weapons, when Jamaica was still a member of the
Council. It was an important initiative and a
recognition that illegal traffic in those weapons plays a
significant role in the continuation and prevalence of
conflicts, which have such disastrous economic, social
and humanitarian consequences. It was rightly
recognized by the Council on that occasion that there
needed to be some practical recommendations on ways
in which to deal with the illicit traffic in small
weapons. Those proposals are now before the Council,
and I wish to commend the Secretary-General for his
report contained in document S/2002/1053 and to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs
for the comprehensive briefing he provided this
morning on this issue.
We have reviewed the report of the SecretaryGeneral and the twelve recommendations contained
therein. In general, they are useful and constructive
proposals, although in some areas action could be taken
further. There is obvious need to lift the profile and
level of attention given to this issue in the United
Nations system. Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the report are
instructive in highlighting the role of small arms and
light weapons in conflicts during the 1990s and
especially in relation to their heavy toll on civilian
lives. When we add their use in criminal and terrorist
activities, the statistics can be even more frightening.
We therefore would have liked to see the
recommendations go further in advancing international
action and in increasing the obligations of Member
States, particularly those engaged in the manufacture
and trade of those weapons. There is need for greater
control and internal regulation of the production and
transfer of small arms and light weapons. Jamaica
supports the early elaboration of an international

28

agreement that would tighten those controls and
provide mechanisms for the registration, identification
and tracing of small arms. The process, which is
currently in the hands of the Group of Experts, needs to
be speeded up to arrive at an early draft international
agreement for consideration and adoption by the
international community.
The recommendation for increased interaction
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council on ways in which to deal with the illicit traffic
in small arms and light weapons obviously needs to be
pursued. An integrated approach would avoid
duplication of mandates and would also ensure greater
effectiveness, particularly in the provision and sharing
of information and in the development of effective
coordinated strategies.
We have continually emphasized the linkages
between the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and narco-trafficking, terrorism and
transnational organized crime. Those linkages are now
well recognized. While acknowledging the tremendous
work done on those areas by various expert groups,
there is need for more action by Member States to
tighten controls on the manufacture and transfer of
weapons. That is made even more necessary in these
times as a result of the impact of globalization, which
has facilitated illegal transactions across borders and
has increased the need for regulation and
improvements in detection. There has to be more
accountability and stricter methods of control at the
source and at the points of origin. Additionally, in the
case of the States that are most affected, there is need
for the provision of material and technical assistance
for the development of training and monitoring
mechanisms to control transit of those weapons across
borders.
With regard to punitive measures, we support
more consistent action at both the international and
national levels. Those involved in the illegal arms
trade — suppliers, purchasers, brokers, financiers and
facilitators — should be exposed and punished.
Recommendation 11 refers to the use of coercive
measures. We are not sure of the scope which is
contemplated under this proposal, but it would be
important that these be applied across the board, and
not on a selective basis, wherever and whenever
governmental complicity has been proved.

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

With regard to the role of the Department for
Disarmament Affairs, significant work is being done in
conjunction with other relevant United Nations
departments and agencies in the implementation of the
Programme of Action. The Coordinating Action on
Small Arms mechanism is playing a useful role in
promoting the implementation of the Programme of
Action, along with other United Nations departments
and agencies, especially the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme. Jamaica is also
of the view that the establishment of a small arms
advisory service would enhance this coordination
through the provision of relevant advice and the
formulation of relevant programmes. We therefore
support this initiative and we encourage the provision
of the necessary resources and assistance required for
such a service.
As the incidence of war and conflict continues to
be a disturbing factor in the international environment,
the challenges posed to international stability and the
humanitarian consequences caused by the problem of
small arms must remain high on the international
agenda. Efforts to eliminate the illegal traffic should
continue at all levels in order to ensure peace and
stability in the world. The Security Council has a
critical part to play and Jamaica can be relied on to
give its support to the Council in taking decisive
action.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Namibia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and on convening this important
meeting. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on small arms and for the valuable
recommendations contained therein. My appreciation
also goes to the Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs for introducing the report.
Although slow progress has been made, in
particular since the international community started to
address the problem of small arms in a comprehensive
manner, the easy availability of small arms worldwide
continues to create havoc throughout the world,
especially in Africa. They threaten peace and security
and are responsible for countless numbers of deaths
and injuries. Small arms are now estimated to kill half

a million people every year. They have a devastating
impact on every part of society, in particular vulnerable
groups, such as children and women.
Furthermore, small arms have a profound impact
on the social and economic development of countries.
Despite the urgent need to fight poverty and diseases,
such as HIV/AIDS, a lot of money continues to be
spent on the production and accumulation of these
weapons.
The United Nations last year took a strong stand
in addressing the scourge at the Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. The Conference adopted by consensus the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. The success in the
implementation of the Programme of Action can now
be seen in the national reports and implementation
activities of Member States. The Programme of Action
is indeed not an end in itself, but the starting point of
comprehensive national, regional and international
efforts to address the problem.
We were, however, disappointed that the
Conference failed to achieve agreement on two core
issues relating to the problem of small arms and light
weapons, namely, strict control over private ownership
and the supply of small arms to non-State groups.
These issues are so critical to the curtailment of small
arms that the international community will have to
address them at one point or another. My delegation
looks forward to the biennial meeting to be held in
2003 and the Review Conference to be held by 2006 to
take stock of progress and to consider further and more
effective measures to combat the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons.
With regard to the implementation of the
Programme of Action, several initiatives have been
taken in the subregion of the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC), such as the
adoption of the SADC Protocol on Firearms,
Ammunition and Other Related Materials. Namibia has
already ratified the SADC Protocol and this week held
a national conference on its implementation. The main
objective of the conference was for civil society
organizations and government officials to discuss the
creation of a long-term sustainable national plan of
action for arms management and disarmament that

29

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

would be in compliance with the international and
regional obligations agreed to by Namibia.
My Government also hosted the United Nations
Workshop on Transparency in Armaments in Windhoek
in June this year. The Workshop was sponsored by the
Governments of Canada, Germany, Japan and the
Netherlands and was attended by Government officials
from countries in our subregion. The Workshop
succeeded in creating greater awareness and
participation in arms transparency instruments.
The Security Council has, in the implementation
of its mandate to maintain international peace and
security, helped to prevent the flow of arms to conflict
areas through the imposition of embargoes and other
measures. The effectiveness of the Council measures
has been strengthened by panels of independent experts
and monitoring mechanisms. In the southern African
subregion, these efforts produced positive results
against UNITA by reducing its military capacity.
Apart from stopping arms from reaching conflict
areas, it is equally important to eradicate arms that are
already in circulation in conflict situations. In this
regard, it is crucial for the Council to include in the
mandate of peacekeeping operations clear provisions
regarding the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, as well as specific
measures for the collection and disposal of illicit and
surplus small arms and light weapons. However, in
order for these programmes to be consistent and
successful, their financing needs to be strengthened
through the expansion of measures under the budget for
peacekeeping operations so that they are not entirely
dependent upon voluntary contributions.
My delegation welcomes all the recommendations
and observations in the Secretary-General’s report.
While many are already being implemented to a certain
degree, it is clear that they should also be expanded
and strengthened in order to have the maximum effect.
In conclusion, no country, region or organization
can alone resolve the problems caused by small arms.
Indeed, a collective effort is required, and those that
lack the capacity should be provided with the tools to
do so. We therefore hope that the General Assembly
and the Security Council will continue to address the
issue of small arms within their respective mandates.
Namibia remains committed to fully implementing the
measures contained in the Programme of Action
adopted at the United Nations Conference on Small

30

Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as
those adopted by the Security Council aimed at the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Namibia for his kind words addressed
to me.
Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I
would like to inform members of the Council that it is
my intention to hold consultations at the ambassadorial
level following this meeting.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Fall (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
presidential statement adopted by the Security Council
on 24 September 1999 contains the following
observation regarding the important issue under
consideration today:
“The Security Council notes with grave
concern that the destabilizing accumulation of
small arms has contributed to the intensity and
duration of armed conflicts. The Council also
notes that the easy availability of small arms can
be a contributing factor to undermining peace
agreements, complicating peace-building efforts
and impeding political, economic and social
development. In this regard, the Council
acknowledges that the challenge posed by small
arms is multifaceted and involves security,
humanitarian and development dimensions.”
(S/PRST/1999/28, second paragraph)
As the Council is aware, and as the Group of
Experts established in 1997 has stated, light weapons
are so defined
“because they are light and can be transported by
a single or few individuals, by an animal or in a
car”.
An estimated 500 million small arms are said to
be in circulation around the world. Easy to handle,
inexpensive and durable, small arms and light weapons
fuel criminality, undermine social development and
give rise to innumerable humanitarian catastrophes. As
the Secretary-General has noted, small arms were the
weapons of choice in 46 of the 49 major conflicts that
bloodied the planet in 1990 — which was 12 years ago,
and therefore well before the genocide in Rwanda. In

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

that period, small arms and light weapons were
responsible for the deaths of 4 million people, 90 per
cent of whom were women and children. That figure is
in addition to the 5 million persons handicapped and
the tens of millions of people internally displaced as a
result.
Although they are not the direct cause of conflict,
small arms and light weapons are nevertheless the main
factor in prolonging, perpetuating and aggravating
conflict. They are therefore among the primary factors
responsible for delays and deadlocks in the resolution
of conflicts and in the implementation of painstakingly
negotiated agreements.
In Africa these weapons are a real calamity, as
they result in unspeakable, yet striking and observable,
suffering. They also undermine national reconstruction
efforts in many countries, promote every sort of
trafficking and sap energy from legitimate economic
and social development. This is particularly the case in
the West Africa subregion, where these weapons are
routinely recycled from one conflict to another by
criminal gangs operating with the extra-continental
complicity of veritable merchants of death and the
active or passive complicity of notorious and pathetic
warlords who are both shadowy and feared.
Aware of the gravity of this new plague
contributing to the proliferation of flashpoints of
tension — and in particular to the nourishing of many
irredentist movements — the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), over which my
country currently presides, has placed the fight against
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects at the top of its Community-wide policy
agenda.
The resolute commitment of West African
countries led to the adoption by the ECOWAS summit
held in Abuja in 1998 of the Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa. The
Moratorium, which was endorsed by the Organization
of African Unity at Lomé in July 2000, has been
strengthened by the creation of a coordination and
assistance programme in the area of security and
development. The programme was created in close
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) in order to create and disseminate
a culture of peace, stability and shared security
throughout the ECOWAS region.

It goes without saying that the initiatives that
have been launched in our subregion and in Central
Africa at the initiative of Cameroon to halt the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons must be
integrated in a comprehensive, coordinated and
coherent manner into a large-scale international
campaign to maximize the impact of these initiatives,
for the sake of the well-being of all human kind.
As the Council is also aware, Secretary-General
Kofi Annan — who, because of the massacres they
provoke, has aptly equated small arms and light
weapons with weapons of mass destruction — has
condemned the paradox that,
“unlike the case of chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons, no global non-proliferation
regime for light weapons has yet been established
by the international community”.
Nevertheless, the Senegalese delegation is
pleased to note that the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects was held in New York in July 2001.
The Conference led to the adoption of an important
Programme of Action that has served to strengthen the
common African position on the basis of such
approaches and regional initiatives as the Bamako
moratorium.
While welcoming the central role of the United
Nations in the success of that meeting and calling upon
the Security Council to continue to actively consider
the thorny problem of light weapons, Senegal would
also like to point out that if we really want to put an
end to this terrible scourge, the international
community will have to encourage, support and
perhaps even demand the implementation of at least
five steps that are both radical and beneficial. I shall
now describe them briefly.
The first step should be to reinforce the legal
instruments to control the proliferation of light
weapons and combat cross-border criminality; to
strengthen regulations with regard to arms transfers;
and to support the implementation of the code of
conduct that has been proposed to the United Nations
by the Nobel Peace laureate group.
Secondly, commercial transactions and arms
brokerage activities should be carried out in a
transparent manner, and annual reports on arms

31

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

transfers, including those of light weapons, should be
published.
Thirdly, programmes for disarming, demobilizing
and reintegrating former combatants should be
promoted; national and regional capacities should be
strengthened to supervise such disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
Fourthly, cooperation among producer and
consumer States should be intensified and enhanced;
producer States should officially renounce small arms
transfers to consumers in countries or areas where a
disarmament process is under way or a moratorium is
in place.
Fifthly, a dual system of tracing and marking such
weapons should be established.
It is thus clear that there is a long, steep, winding
path ahead of us. The review conference, planned for
2006 at the latest, must yield tangible and meaningful
progress if we do, indeed, wish to prevail in the bitter
united struggle against the proliferation of small arms,
with all its various ramifications and networks that are
growing and prospering in the tentacular grip of this
elusive force of devastation, this vile, multinational
enterprise of crime — international terrorism.
Given that the stability of States and the wellbeing of peoples throughout the world, particularly in
Africa — and, indeed, the very survival of humanity —
are in jeopardy, this meeting of the Security Council
under the eminent presidency of the Permanent
Representative of that land of symbiosis, Cameroon,
should give added impetus to our efforts to achieve our
important objectives.
For several reasons of which you, Sir, are very
well aware, the delegation of Senegal welcomes the
fact that you are presiding over the Security Council
during this crucial month of October 2002 — a month
that will remain etched into the collective awareness of
all of us — we the peoples of the United Nations.
While conveying to you all my compliments and my
sincere wishes for success, I should like to express my
full conviction that you will honourably carry out the
sacred, fruitful and lofty duty entrusted to your
outstanding country at this very complex and sensitive
moment in the history of humanity — the nexus
between what has gone before and what is yet to come.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Senegal for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Kenya. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ligabo (Kenya): It is with great pleasure,
Sir, that my delegation extends its appreciation to you
for convening a public meeting of the Security Council
under the agenda item entitled “Small arms”. My
delegation welcomes and fully supports the report of
the Secretary-General on this item, document
S/2002/1053, particularly its recommendations on how
to deal with the question of illicit small arms and light
weapons. The report, which was excellently introduced
by the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Dhanapala, points
out that the spread of illicit small arms and light
weapons is a global threat to human security and
human rights. The report also underscores the fact that
preventing, combating and eliminating the uncontrolled
spread of these weapons constitutes one of the key
tasks of the Security Council in discharging its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The world has come a long way — from apparent
apathy to a deliberate and conscious effort to address
the problems of small arms at the global level. That
effort seeks to mitigate the enormous and ugly
consequences that have continued to deny mankind the
benefit of living free from threats and fear. My
delegation is therefore convinced that the diversity of
experience described at this public Security Council
meeting will broaden our approach to the problems
posed by illicit small arms.
Since the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in July 2001, Kenya, as a country
ravaged by the effects of illicit small arms, has been at
the forefront in the war against the proliferation of
illicit weapons. As noted by the Secretary-General in
his report, there is no doubt that the United Nations
Programme of Action adopted in July 2001 provides an
adequate basis for further work at the national, regional
and global levels, although there is a recognition that
the primary responsibility for addressing the problem
lies with States themselves.
I should like to share with the members of the
Security Council the experience of our subregion on

32

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

this issue. As members may recall, the 10 countries of
the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa signed
the Nairobi Declaration in March 2000 and mandated
the Kenyan Government to coordinate regional
activities in combating the circulation of illicit small
arms and to convene a Ministerial Review Conference
on the Implementation of the Nairobi Declaration.
On 7 and 8 August 2002, the States parties to the
Nairobi Declaration held the First Ministerial Review
Conference on the Implementation of the Nairobi
Declaration. The Conference brought together the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda, the Sudan, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Uganda. The Conference
reviewed progress made in the implementation of the
provisions of the Nairobi Declaration and came up with
specific
recommendations
on
how
existing
international and regional initiatives could be
harnessed for the realization of the objectives set out in
the Declaration. With regard to priority actions and
guidelines on regional and national implementation
plans, the Ministers agreed to establish national focal
points and make them operational by the end of 2002
and to develop national action plans to combat the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
Conference also reaffirmed the political will of
Governments in the Great Lakes region and the Horn
of Africa to tackle the proliferation of illicit small
arms.
At the national level, Kenya will continue to
work in Nairobi together with a group of friends of the
Nairobi Declaration, comprising development partners,
led by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, and
non-governmental organizations and representatives of
the United Nations system, to harmonize strategies and
assistance to address the scourge of illicit small arms.
The problem of the illicit circulation of small
arms is multifaceted. To address it effectively, we need
to find out how, and by and for whom, these weapons
are manufactured, traded and used. How do we deal
with the driving force behind the demand for small
arms? The unresolved question concerning the role
played by State and non-State actors in the
proliferation of small arms is whether it is an
appropriate time to comprehensively address this
problem.

My delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his timely decision to send a
fact-finding mission to Kenya in August 2001 to study
and evaluate the scope and magnitude of the problem
of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
We appeal to the Secretary-General to look into the
recommendations of that mission with a view to
implementing them. We are encouraged by the recent
initiative of the Security Council on identifying areas
where further action is required by the Council in
addressing this global scourge. We support the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General to the
Security Council to support efforts aimed at developing
an international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small
arms and light weapons.
Kenya welcomes with growing optimism the
progress made in negotiations to settle long-standing
conflicts in the southern Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Burundi. Kenya
will continue to spearhead efforts to resolve the
conflicts in our subregion; I am happy to inform the
Council that a peace conference on Somalia will be
held in Eldoret, Kenya, on 15 October 2002.
Furthermore, the southern Sudan peace process is
scheduled to resume in Machakos, Kenya, later this
month. Kenya’s determination to support these efforts
is predicated on a clear understanding that the
resolution of these conflicts will immensely contribute
to the reduction of the flow of illicit small arms in our
subregion.
In conclusion, I wish to commend the
Secretary-General once more for his report, which
contains innovative measures to deal comprehensively
with this problem. I further wish to appeal to all
members of the Security Council and the international
community at large to extend political, financial and
technical support to regional initiatives in a spirit of
true partnership, bearing in mind that we have a duty
and responsibility to prevent, combat and eradicate the
stockpiling of and illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons. We should be a beacon of hope with
which future generations will be proud to identity. For
the sake of posterity, let us collectively work hard to
tame the ferocity of this menace.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

33

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Musambachime (Zambia): I wish once again
to salute you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting, which provides yet another
opportunity for Member States to express their views
on how the United Nations can best provide leadership
in the search for peace and stability in the world. I
recall that this is the second open meeting since your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. Given your immense
diplomatic skill, I am confident that you will steer the
deliberations of the Council on this item to a fruitful
conclusion. Like your predecessor, my good friend the
Permanent Representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Stefan
Tafrov, you are committed to maintaining dialogue
with Member States in order to enhance transparency
and democracy in the work of the Security Council.
This method should be maintained.
I also wish to commend you, Mr. President, for
your selection of the topic under discussion. The issue
of small arms requires the urgent attention of the
United Nations, as these weapons are used in many of
the conflicts around the world and are a cause of a very
high loss of life, especially of women and children.
My delegation welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral presented by the Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs this morning. We welcome his
recommendations, which are well founded and
instructive and which merit implementation as quickly
as possible.
My delegation would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects,
document A/57/160, which we found to contain useful
information, assumptions and conclusions.
In July 2001 the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects adopted a high-profile Programme of
Action that helped to galvanize international efforts to
curb this scourge during the past year.
As part of the efforts to implement the
Programme of Action, my country has taken a number
of important steps at the national and regional levels.
One such effort is the “guns for money” programme, in
which the Zambia Police Service offers up to an
equivalent of $55 to all voluntary hand-overs of
illegally held arms. The response to this programme
has been overwhelming. A large number of illicitly
acquired arms have been recovered.

34

At the regional level, Zambia has continued to be
active in the Southern Africa Development Community
programme on small arms and light weapons within the
framework of the Southern African Regional Police
Chief Cooperation Council. This effort, which started
in 1995 in response to growing illicit trade and
trafficking in small arms and their ammunition, is
assisting Governments to coordinate their efforts at the
regional level. The continuation of the programme,
however, depends on the availability of funds. Zambia
would welcome any financial and technical support
from the cooperating partners in order to strengthen
these efforts.
As you are aware, demobilization and
disarmament efforts are currently taking place in
Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo and
Rwanda. For this process to succeed, the disarmament
component should have an effective and attractive arms
recovery programme that can prevent combatants from
trading their small arms for necessities and encourage
them instead to hand them over to the authorized
authorities for money. My delegation would like to see
increased support to the buy-back and other arms
recovery programmes in order to motivate the
combatants to surrender to the authorities more of their
arms, thus enhancing demobilization and disarmament
of the former combatants and their reintegration into
social life.
Zambia believes that, as a follow-up to the United
Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons, the
adoption of an international instrument to trace illegal
trade is imperative. In this regard, Zambia calls for the
early conclusion of the work of the Group of
Governmental Experts on the issue which met in
Geneva last July, under the auspices of the United
Nations. It is my Government’s hope that the
recommendations of the Group will help speed efforts
to develop an international instrument that could
provide a legal framework to trace the illicit trade
around the world in the small arms and light weapons
that fuel conflicts in Africa and other developing
regions.
Zambia supports all efforts at the regional and
subregional levels to ensure strong momentum in the
follow-up to the Programme of Action as we prepare
for the biennial meeting of States on small arms and
light weapons, the first of which is scheduled in 2003.
So that many delegations will be able to attend that
event, Zambia requests that it be held in New York,

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

where many of the countries affected by the problem of
small arms are represented. In addition, my country
wishes to appeal to those countries that made pledges
to implement the Programme of Action to make good
on their commitments to provide financial and
technical assistance and support to the Secretariat in
order to facilitate the participation of the least
developed countries, many of which are among the
hardest hit by the negative impact of small arms and
light weapons.
The course and the conduct of inter-State and
intra-State wars in Africa clearly indicate that small
arms and light weapons are a major cause of political
instability. My delegation is concerned that all the
global efforts to curb such weapons may not be
successful unless the current trend to concentrate
attention on officially held arms is checked. There is a
need to establish a mechanism that will control private
illicit transfers, which account for the bulk of the illicit
trade. Such a move would be an effective way of
preventing the supply of small arms to non-State
actors.
Regional and international initiatives must be
encouraged if the fight against small arms is to be
successful. My Government is committed to working
with the rest of the international community at the
regional and international levels. One of the most
effective and practical methods of dealing with the
problem of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is to destroy recovered weapons. Zambia
hopes that all Member States can adopt that method
because of its demonstrated effective impact on
society.
International cooperation can also be encouraged
at the level of South-South cooperation. Developing
countries can pool their resources and coordinate
regional efforts; we should not always look to the
North for resources. South-South cooperation driven by
common threats and objectives could be very
instrumental in curbing the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects. In Africa, the effort
should be extended to the relevant bodies of civil
society in each country, including non-governmental
organizations, which could spearhead awareness
campaigns. The United Nations, through the
Department for Disarmament Affairs and its regional
centres, should remain at the forefront of that particular
effort. The success of the 2001 Programme of Action

depends on multilateral efforts strengthened through
greater coordination and cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Zambia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Malawi. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lamba (Malawi): First of all, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation will support you fully in completing the
agenda that you have set. Also, I wish to thank you for
convening this, yet another important open debate on
the question of small arms and light weapons as they
affect global peace and security — particularly in the
Western and Great Lakes regions of Africa, where
small arms continue to fuel conflicts and instability.
Indeed, my own country, Malawi, has not been spared
the ghastly consequences of these lethal weapons.
My delegation joins previous speakers in
commending the Secretary-General for his informative
report (S/2002/1053) and for his sound proposals for
moving more concretely towards effective containment
of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. In
the same vein, my delegation calls upon the Security
Council and the General Assembly to close ranks with
regional and subregional organizations and with other
multilateral and civil society organizations to ensure
the successful enforcement of previously agreed
actions, including the United Nations Programme of
Action on small arms and light weapons, in order to
stem the rising tide of the illicit trade in these
dangerous weapons.
The problem of small arms was first encountered
in Malawi in the early 1980s, when the country started
to experience an influx of refugees from neighbouring
countries where civil wars were raging. Malawi, which
has enjoyed relative peace and stability since its
independence in 1964, suddenly found itself
confronting the infiltration and the use of illegal small
arms. That situation led to an increase in criminal
activities such as murder, armed robbery and car thefts
by armed gangs, most of whom were alien to the
country. While the Malawi Government is doing its
utmost to keep in check the illicit flow and circulation
of small arms, the country — like many others in
Africa — continues to be held to ransom by those who

35

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

are bent on spreading fear and insecurity, using these
destructive weapons for their narrow self-interest.
The proliferation and misuse of small arms has
become a global problem and concern that calls for
urgent action. While weapons of mass destruction —
such as nuclear weapons — exist mostly in the
developed world, small arms and light weapons are
present and used throughout the world. In most
developing countries, it is these latter weapons, more
than nuclear weapons, that threaten peace and security.
They are easy to acquire. Post-conflict situations often
leave behind huge quantities of weapons that end up in
unauthorized and dangerous hands.
An urgent and compelling need exists, therefore,
for a tough United Nations protocol, for
implementation by Member States, to regulate or
prohibit the possession and use of small arms.
However, no United Nations measure can be effective
without the cooperation of supplying nations. Even if a
mechanism created through national legislation
succeeded in retrieving small arms in circulation, arms
manufacturers would have to come under a tough
regime of international standards to be established by
the United Nations to regulate acquisition and to
enhance oversight and accountability. Many guns in
developing countries remain unregistered and therefore
unregulated.
The proliferation of small arms, which generates
violence and socio-economic destabilization, is no
doubt a great threat to peace and security, which are the
prerequisites for meaningful development in any
country. Realizing the menace to Malawi of the effects
of small arms, the Government is working closely with
other States members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to implement a
range of measures for monitoring and facilitating
cross-border operations within the subregion. That is in
line with the SADC protocols on firearms, ammunition
and related materials signed by heads of State or
Government at the SADC summit held at Blantyre,
Malawi, in August 2001.
Malawi reaffirms its support for the outcome of
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held
in July 2001, and looks forward to more active
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on small arms and light weapons at the national,
regional and global levels.

36

It is important to develop closer, mutually
reinforcing linkages between the Programme of Action
on small arms and light weapons and the SecretaryGeneral’s broad ranging recommendations presented
today, in order to enhance implementation of the
Programme of Action and strengthen global vigilance
and decisive action against the illicit production and
flow of surplus small arms and light weapons.
In response to the widening problem posed by
small arms in Malawi, law enforcement agencies have
carried out regular surprise operations designed to
recover many of these illegal weapons. Furthermore,
through the assistance of the donor community,
capacity-building programmes for law enforcement
agencies, such as the police, customs, border guards,
and the armed forces, are being conducted in order to
prevent, combat and eradicate the proliferation of these
illegal arms. The country is also finalizing the
enactment of national legislation for the regulation of
small arms and light weapons with a view to containing
their ownership and minimizing their wanton and
illegal use.
I would like to conclude by pointing out that the
problem of illicit arms cuts across borders and no one
country is, therefore, insulated from their horrific
effects. There is need, therefore, to step up collective
efforts and collaboration in the global fight against this
scourge. In this connection, my delegation looks
forward to a more comprehensive review and
monitoring of the performance of the existing measures
and the adoption of other far-reaching mechanisms to
take
into
account
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations, which are constructive and call for
deeper reflection by all States. Malawi undertakes to
play its part in strengthening international resolve and
commitment to combat and eradicate the proliferation
of small arms through intensified cooperation with the
United Nations and all Member States.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Malawi for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
for Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
is gratified by your decision to convene this debate on
the issue of small arms, an issue which has been a
source of major human suffering during the past

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

decade. We also appreciate the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the subject, which contains many important
recommendations.
The post-cold war era has witnessed conflict and
strife at levels unprecedented in recent history. The
consequences of these armed conflicts were made
worse by the easy availability of small arms and light
weapons, increasing the intensity of the conflict,
causing higher casualties, and making peacekeeping
more complicated and risky.
Having participated proudly in several important
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Pakistan is
fully aware of the complexities arising from the
widespread presence of small arms and light weapons
in regions where such missions have been conducted.
We are also cognizant of the need for sound planning
and
implementation
of
strategies
regarding
de-weaponization and re-integration as part of
peacekeeping and peace-building operations.
During the long war against foreign occupation,
Afghanistan became a repository of millions of small
arms and light weapons. After the Soviet withdrawal,
Pakistan became a victim of this proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. Realizing the magnitude of
this problem, the Government of Pakistan resolved to
take strong action to cleanse our society of this
menace.
Last year, we therefore updated the Antiterrorism Act and this year we have banned several
organizations, some of whose members were involved
in extremist or sectarian violence and terrorism.
We have adopted a comprehensive strategy under
which over 150,000 small arms and light weapons have
been confiscated or voluntarily surrendered by the
possessors of these arms. At the same time, the
Government has stopped issuing licences for new
weapons, while a ban on the display of weapons has
also been imposed and is being implemented
vigorously.
We are confident that our efforts will produce
good results, cleansing our society of the repercussions
of the two decades of conflict in Afghanistan. The kind
of national measures that we have undertaken could,
we believe, be helpful to several other countries that
may find themselves in similar circumstances. We
would be happy to share our experiences with other
developing countries.

Pakistan applauds and welcomes the several
regional initiatives that clearly recognize and seek to
address the problem of small arms in all its dimensions,
including
human
security,
development,
law
enforcement, de-weaponization and arms control. It is
obvious that only such a comprehensive approach that
takes into account socio-economic factors can
effectively address the problems associated with small
arms and light weapons.
We are happy to note the successful United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was held
in July last year. The Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference may not be perfect, but it is a
significant step forward. In our view, efforts must now
focus on the implementation of this Programme of
Action.
The Secretary-General’s report in document
S/2002/1053 reviews the comprehensive measures
being pursued to control small arms and their adverse
impact on society and on peace and security. The report
speaks of the “mixed results” achieved by the Security
Council’s embargoes so far in curbing the flow of small
arms and light weapons in conflict areas. We endorse
many of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report, including the need for
effective enforcement of sanctions.
At the same time, measures to control small arms
must, in our view, give priority to a more effective role
for the United Nations, and especially for the Security
Council, in the resolution of the underlying causes of
conflict. The causes of war are, in our view, more
important than the instruments of war.
We must also, seek to uphold and implement two
principles that were endorsed by the General Assembly
in its resolution 50/70B on small arms and have been
endorsed subsequently each year. These two principles
are the right of States to exercise self-defence in
accordance with the Charter, and the right of peoples
struggling against foreign occupation to exercise the
right to self-determination.
We cannot forget the hundreds of thousands of
patriots who made the ultimate sacrifice for the cause
of freedom and liberty, which has enabled our nations
to be here at the United Nations.
Pakistan honours the 80,000 Kashmiri heroes
who have been killed by an occupation army of

37

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

700,000 in their decade-long struggle for selfdetermination. These three elements — peaceful
resolution of disputes, the right of self-defence and the
right of self-determination — must be appropriately
reflected in the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral and in the debates and considerations of the
Security Council in the context of small arms.
The General Assembly has asked the Conference
on Disarmament in Geneva to negotiate principles for
conventional arms control at the regional and
subregional levels, such as the principle of
undiminished security of States and elaboration of the
concept of sufficiency in armaments. The adoption of
such principles can make a useful contribution to
specific negotiations for conventional arms control in
various regions of the world, including the control of
small arms.
Finally, let me add a word on behalf of the
delegation of Colombia, which has asked me to inform
the members of the Security Council that the non-paper
that has been referred to by many delegations was sent
to the presidency for circulation as an official Security
Council document last night. We understand that it will
also be posted on their Web site.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala, to respond to the
questions posed and comments made at this meeting.
Mr. Dhanapala: The hour is late, and I shall be
brief.
Let me begin by thanking all those who
participated in this public debate for their very
constructive proposals and for advancing the cause of
the reduction of small arms and light weapons in the
current stage of their proliferation.
I believe that the debate has provided a major
impetus to the movement that has begun within the
United Nations on the control of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and in the
implementation of the decisions that have been taken.
If I may respond to some of the points that have
been raised, the Conventional Arms Register as it
exists now is a voluntary transparency measure that is
confined to seven categories of conventional weapons;
it does not include small arms or light weapons. From
time to time a group of experts meets in order to
review the operation of this Register, as it will do next

38

year. In that exercise, there will no doubt be
consideration given to the possible expansion of the
Register to include small arms and light weapons.
With regard to the marking and tracing issue, the
recommendation that was included in the SecretaryGeneral’s report was intended to encourage the efforts
of the group of experts to reach a consensus on this
issue, so that we may have progress with regard to a
legal instrument on the question of marking and
tracing.
The 2003 biennial meeting that was presaged in
the Programme of Action adopted at last year’s
Conference is being prepared carefully, and I know that
the Ambassador of Colombia — Ambassador Reyes,
who presided over the 2001 meeting — will convene a
consultation on 18 October in order to discuss the
detailed arrangements for this meeting.
With regard to evaluation missions, the
Department for Disarmament Affairs is ready to
undertake them, but, again, the subject of resources
comes up, and that is why we have appealed for extrabudgetary resources under the small arms advisory
service.
Coordination among all programmes, agencies
and departments within the United Nations system is
undertaken through the Coordinating Action on Small
Arms (CASA).
I would also like to reassure those who expressed
reservations about the possibility of established
priorities in the disarmament agenda being disturbed by
the focus on small arms and light weapons. Indeed, this
is already taken care of. Preambular paragraph 17 of
the Programme of Action states very specifically that
we recognize that
“these efforts are without prejudice to the
priorities accorded to nuclear disarmament,
weapons of mass destruction and conventional
disarmament.” (A/CONF.192/15)
Many questions were raised about the small arms
advisory service that has been proposed in one of the
recommendations. The main purpose of this unit is to
enhance the effectiveness of CASA, enabling the
United Nations better to assist Member States in the
implementation of the Programme of Action adopted
by the July 2001 Conference. The specific objectives of
the small arms advisory service are, first, to ensure
optimal coordination and harmonization of the

S/PV.4623 (Resumption 1)

Organization’s activities in the field of small arms;
secondly, to ensure that such activities are consistent
with, and build upon, the political framework reflected
in the Programme of Action; and thirdly, to provide
relevant information on small arms and light weapons
and other related issues to Member States and all
interested entities as appropriate.
It will serve as a permanent secretariat for CASA,
providing advisory services to Member States and to
United Nations agencies as requested and assisting
them in the formulation and implementation of
projects, particularly with regard to the conduct of
assessment missions and monitoring activities.
The financing of this advisory service will be
covered from the United Nations regular budget
through the provision of the Chief of Branch, who will
supervise the work of the unit, and a P-4 staff member.
Other outstanding costs will be covered either through
contributions to the Department for Disarmament
Affairs’ Global and Regional Disarmament Trust Fund
or through the provision of associate experts by
Member States. The national points of contact will be
the primary partner of the small arms advisory service
in the task of the collection and circulation of
information about the implementation by States of the
Programme of Action adopted at last year’s
Conference.
This will be a two-way street. The national points
of contact will send information on national activities
to the small arms advisory service, and they will also
make requests for assistance, which will be responded
to. The service will keep national points of contact
informed of developments and activities by other
States, United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations and about the availability of resources
and expertise, and provide assistance as requested. We
have a detailed document outside this Chamber
providing information about the small arms advisory
service that is available to all delegations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr.
Dhanapala for the clarifications he has kindly provided.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.25 p.m.

39
