United Nations

S/PV.5860

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5860th meeting
Wednesday, 26 March 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Ms. Villalobos
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Kumalo
Mr. McKenzie Smity
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country
(S/2008/181)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-28372 (E)

*0828372*

S/PV.5860

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in that country (S/2008/181)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to the Representative of
the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Shola Omoregie.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Omoregie to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure an invitation to the
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
Permanent
Representative of Brazil, Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti.
It is so decided.

2

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Viotti
(Brazil), took a seat at the Council table.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting today in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/181, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Shola Omoregie, and the
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau,
Mr. Shola Omoregie.
Mr. Omoregie: Mr. President, the report before
the Council, contained in document S/2008/181, is the
thirtieth report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
that country (UNOGBIS).
The report focuses in particular on developments
linked to the mobilization of resources and the
increased engagement of international partners with
Guinea-Bissau. Of particular note are the signing of the
agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
in January for Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance and
the launch, also in January, of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s engagement in Guinea-Bissau.
I would like to say just a few words now to
update the Council on developments that have taken
place since the report was published. In this regard, I
would like to start on a happy note.
Last night, President João Bernardo Vieira, who
had heretofore been evasive on the subject of the date
of the country’s next legislative elections, announced
that the elections will be held on 16 November 2008.
This announcement, on the eve of this meeting of the
08-28372

S/PV.5860

Security Council, will no doubt significantly reduce the
tensions that have been building in the country in the
past few days.
Meanwhile, preparations for the forthcoming
legislative elections are moving forward very slowly. It
was only recently that the Government opted for the
biometric voter identity card registration process. Its
decision was backed on 16 March by the parties
signatory to the Political and Government Stability
Pact on which the Government is based. A voter
registration exercise involving the issuing of biometric
cards would take five to six months. The voter
registration exercise, which should have been carried
out in January and February, is still behind schedule,
mainly because of the impasse over arrears from
previous elections estimated at $1.7 million which
should have been paid to the national and regional
electoral commissions.
On 9 March, the Central Committee of the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (PAIGC) declared null and void the
decision taken by its leader, Carlos Gomes Jr., on
29 February, to withdraw political confidence in Prime
Minister N’Dafa Cabi, who is the Third Vice-President
of the PAIGC. The Central Committee’s decision and
support by the two other members of the Stability Pact
alleviated disquiet among national and international
actors that uncertainty over Mr. Cabi’s position might
have an impact on the positive momentum of the
cooperation activities with the international community
currently under way.
The PAIGC will be electing a new leader at its
Congress which will take place from 3 to 6 April. The
outcome of this contest will determine whether this
current momentum will be sustained or seriously
undermined.
The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Government, with support from UNOGBIS and the
United Nations country team, are working closely to
prepare short-term projects for early funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund, within the framework of a
peacebuilding priority plan for Guinea-Bissau. In this
initial phase, the projects implemented help build the
confidence of national partners, yield immediate and
visible dividends in the process of peace consolidation,
and serve as a catalyst or impetus for the medium- to
long-term assistance that will be provided by the
Peacebuilding Commission under the wider umbrella

08-28372

of the strategic framework for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau.
The National Assembly passed the amnesty bill
after a second reading on 4 March. It will now be
submitted to President Vieira for ratification. This law
is seen by its proponents as facilitating reconciliation
and paving the way for security sector reform, and
President Vieira and the military worked very hard for
its passage.
The census of active personnel in the armed
forces, funded by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), ended on 19 March. The data,
which are being processed and are expected to be ready
by the end of this month, will inform decisions on the
scope of future demobilization and retirement
programmes. The census is a precondition for the full
support of donors for the security sector reform. A
census of veterans and security bodies will also need to
be conducted.
On 17 March, the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) organized, with
financing by the Government of the United Kingdom, a
consultation on security sector reform for the Security
Sector Reform Steering Committee, which includes the
United Nations and key multilateral and bilateral
donors as members. The purpose of the consultation
was to raise security sector knowledge capacity and
assess the need for updating of the Government’s
security sector reform strategy. Its conclusions focused
on the need to update the strategy in order to enhance
efforts to combat narcotics and organized crime,
strengthen national capacity, increase the role of
non-State
actors
and
devise
an
effective
communication and awareness strategy.
The OECD followed that consultation with two
days of consultations with the Technical Coordinating
Committee on 18 and 20 March. These consultations
focused on raising capacity and applying best practices
to security sector reform in the Guinea-Bissau context.
The consultation exercises identified the following
challenges to security sector reform implementation.
First, there is a weak parliamentary oversight and
control system. Second, there is a need for better aid
coordination. Third, national capacity-building is
required in key sectors. Fourth, there is a lack of
support for civil society organizations. Fifth, a
coherent communication and sensitization policy on
security sector reform is lacking. And, finally, there is

3

S/PV.5860

a need to link security sector reform more coherently
with the national anti-narcotics and poverty reduction
strategy frameworks.
To conclude, I would like to highlight some key
points.
First, the first quarter of 2008 has seen strong
activity that illustrates the tangible progress by the
Government in engaging the international community.
In particular, the arrival of missions from the
Peacebuilding Commission and of teams of technical
assistants from the European Union, particularly in
connection with the security sector reform, is creating
expectations among the population of tangible peace
dividends.
Change management is a long and delicate
process in which expectations must be managed. A
failure to manage these expectations would result in
disillusionment that might ultimately jeopardize the
long-term commitment necessary for implementing
these reforms.
There is also a danger that the upsurge in donor
activity may mask the reality that Government poverty
reduction and security sector reform strategies are still
massively underfunded. The international community
therefore needs to remain engaged. While we are all
aware that security sector reform is a key structural
requirement, Guinea-Bissau continues to face massive
social problems that need urgent solutions. It is
important that the international community also
earmark assistance so that the Government may
implement its poverty reduction strategy.
We must acknowledge the need for better donor
coordination in all sectors receiving overseas
development assistance. The need to strengthen the
existing coordination structure is particularly evident
in the security sector in view of the arrival of various
technical assistance teams to assist with the reform of
that sector.
As a follow-up, it may be necessary for the
donors to consider creating a multi-donor security
sector reform trust fund in order to ensure a strategic
coherence, identify gaps and develop a common donor
vision. I have already informed partners that I intend to
submit proposals to enhance our coordination efforts in
the country.
I have also sought the cooperation of other
departments and donors to map out the various security

4

sector activities in Guinea-Bissau, with a view to
articulating possible value-added roles for the United
Nations and non-United Nations entities involved in
supporting the police and other law enforcement
agencies of the country.
Depending on the outcome of a mapping resource
meeting at headquarters here in April, I envision the
possibility of a multicomponent assessment mission to
Guinea-Bissau in the near future to evaluate the
situation on the ground and identify the nature of any
assistance that could be rendered. The Council would
be informed of the outcome of the assessment mission.
The legislative elections are a key benchmark on
the level of democratic maturity in the country. It is
disappointing that preparations for the elections have
been impeded because of resource problems,
particularly with regard to arrears from previous
elections. President Vieira wants to be sure that all
conditions are met in order that elections are
financially, technically and politically feasible.
Now that President Vieira has announced the date
of the elections, it is important that the country’s
partners provide resources to enable elections to be
held in November and to prevent the national
stakeholders from using the lack of funds as a pretext
not to move forward.
Finally, the Government of Guinea-Bissau is very
concerned about the emerging threat of terrorism in the
country. The recent case in January, in which two
Mauritanian nationals were arrested in Bissau in
connection with the murder of four French tourists in
Mauritania and the subsequent threats of reprisals
against Guinea-Bissau have led to concern by
authorities that there is a terrorist threat in the country.
The Government has requested international
assistance to strengthen its capacity to control its
borders in order to combat this emerging threat. The
arrest of the Mauritanians was an example of
coordinated criminal intelligence exchange between
the authorities of Senegal and Guinea-Bissau and also
demonstrates the risk posed by porous borders.
Subregional cooperation should be encouraged and
supported in addressing the threats of terrorism
especially in a region with porous borders.
of

The President: I now give the floor to the Chair
the Guinea-Bissau Configuration of the

08-28372

S/PV.5860

Peacebuilding Commission, Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti.

international attention to assist the country
consolidating peace and promoting development.

Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I would like to
thank you for the invitation to address the Security
Council on the current situation in Guinea-Bissau and
to inform on the progress made by the Peacebuilding
Commission in support of peacebuilding efforts in that
country.

While in Bissau, I had the opportunity of
witnessing the distress and adverse living conditions of
the population, which threaten ongoing efforts to
sustain peace and stability. On the other hand, as many
authorities emphasized, the country has a great
potential and is confident that, with international
support, it will be able to attain political stability and
sustained economic growth.

Following the recommendation of the Council,
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission agreed to place the country on the
Commission’s agenda. A country-specific configuration
for Guinea-Bissau was created, which I have the
honour to chair. The objective of our work is to assess
the main challenges and priorities for peacebuilding, in
close contact with the authorities of Guinea-Bissau as
well as to launch a strategic framework to address the
most critical peacebuilding issues in the country.
Soon after the establishment of the countryspecific configuration, I conducted an exploratory
mission to Guinea-Bissau. The field visit had the
objective of getting first-hand information on the
current situation in the country and to initiate a
dialogue with the Government and relevant
stakeholders on the priorities for peacebuilding.
The mission also aimed at explaining the purpose
and the process of the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission with the country and at ensuring that the
principle of country ownership is observed from the
very beginning of the process.
During my visit, I had a discussion with the
Prime Minister and met the Foreign Minister, the
Secretary of State for International Cooperation, the
Ministers of Finance, Economy, Justice, Interior, and
Defence and the Minister of the Presidency, the Army
Chief of Staff, representatives of civil society
organizations, members of the diplomatic community
resident in or accredited to Guinea-Bissau and the
United Nations country team.
I left the country with the impression that there
was a general expectation that the Peacebuilding
Commission can be a turning point in the political and
economic transition in Guinea-Bissau. In particular, the
Government was looking forward to engagement with
the Peacebuilding Commission as a catalyst for
increased international support and for sustained

08-28372

in

After I reported the results of my visit, the
country-specific meeting on Guinea-Bissau had the
opportunity to undertake a discussion based on a
mapping of resources and gaps for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau. This exercise proved to be extremely
useful in highlighting the various programmes
undertaken in the country and the situation of aid flows
as well as in identifying funding gaps within existing
strategies and challenges not covered by any existing
strategy.
The discussion was complemented by an
examination of the situation of Guinea-Bissau on the
basis of a background paper prepared by the
Peacebuilding Support Office, as well as by the
consideration of a draft outline for the strategic
framework for peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.
A high-level delegation of the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, headed by Prime Minister Martinho
N’Dafa Cabi, travelled to New York and made a
presentation to the Peacebuilding Commission on the
country’s priorities and challenges for peacebuilding.
The Representative of the Secretary-General in
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Shola Omoregie, also addressed
the meeting. The presence at United Nations
Headquarters of such a high-level delegation was a
clear demonstration of the importance that the
Government attaches to ongoing peacebuilding
initiatives and illustrated once again its willingness to
work together with the Commission towards
consolidating peace and stability.
On the day of the visit, the country-specific
meeting unanimously decided to advise the SecretaryGeneral to declare Guinea-Bissau eligible for support
from the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. I
conveyed that decision to the Secretary-General, who,
in turn, officially announced the eligibility of GuineaBissau for Peacebuilding Fund support. The declaration
of eligibility triggered the process of establishing a

5

S/PV.5860

national steering committee in Guinea-Bissau, which
will be in charge of analysing the specific projects to
be financed with resources from the Peacebuilding
Fund.
Following my field mission to Guinea-Bissau, the
presentation by the Prime Minister, the various
interactions with the Government and the preliminary
discussions in the Commission, the country-specific
meeting has been gaining a better understanding of the
priorities for peacebuilding.
The challenges in the country include the areas
identified by the Security Council, that is, building
governmental capacity, promoting public sector
reform, strengthening the rule of law, combating drug
trafficking, implementing security sector reform and
assisting the electoral process. Challenges also include
the recurrent problem of salary arrears, improving the
living conditions of the military, combating drug
trafficking and organised crime, promoting human
resources development and youth employment,
addressing the needs of the vulnerable groups,
rehabilitating the infrastructure, in particular the
energy sector, and adopting measures to jump-start the
revival of the economy.
In
setting
a
strategic
framework
for
peacebuilding, the PBC will now define the specific
mix of measures and the sequencing of the actions it
will undertake within each of the priority areas to
support existing strategies and programmes, identify
gaps and generate synergies among programmes,
taking into account the progress achieved thus far in
each of the peacebuilding priority areas. It is widely
acknowledged that a key to addressing peacebuilding
challenges in the country is the need to strengthen the
Government’s capacity to break the vicious circle in
which institutional, political and economic instability
are intricately linked.
The Peacebuilding Commission intends to tackle
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau through a two-track
approach, interweaving immediate projects and rapid
actions with medium- and long-term perspectives.
There is growing recognition that, given the daunting
array of challenges that Guinea-Bissau faces,
peacebuilding priorities should be ranked according to
the degree of urgency, importance and value added to
peace consolidation efforts.
The strategic framework will outline the
commitments of the Government of Guinea-Bissau and

6

those of the various stakeholders, including civil
society, the private sector, political parties, the United
Nations system, the members of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the international financial institutions,
bilateral and multilateral donors and regional and
subregional organizations. At the same time, it will
provide a basis for further engagement with the
country, a mechanism for effective coordination and a
means of marshalling additional resources, which are
so vitally needed.
As part of the process of developing the strategic
framework, the Peacebuilding Commission intends to
conduct a field mission to Guinea-Bissau, which will
take place in early April 2008. Previous experiences in
the Peacebuilding Commission have shown that field
trips are invaluable to getting a better understanding of
the country’s challenges in the area of peacebuilding.
We trust that the Peacebuilding Commission will
be in a position to provide further advice on
peacebuilding priorities and challenges in GuineaBissau in the coming months. We hope that, as our
work evolves, the Peacebuilding Commission will
make a difference in ensuring a brighter future of
political stability and economic prosperity for the
people of Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Her
Excellency Mrs. Viotti for her briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Alfredo
Lopes Cabral, Permanent Representative of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I am grateful
to the members of the Council for having agreed to my
request to participate in this meeting.
My purpose today is to thank the members of the
Security Council on behalf of my Government for
having responded favourably to the request of our
Government to inscribe Guinea-Bissau on the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The Council’s
response once again today should be interpreted as its
agreement that our country deserves the attention of
the international community and to have the
Peacebuilding Commission focus on its case in
particular in order to determine how we can work
together to ensure that the situation changes for the

08-28372

S/PV.5860

better. I would therefore like to say how pleased I am
with the choice of the Brazilian Ambassador as Chair
of
the
Guinea-Bissau
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission. Members of the Council
will have noted from the briefing she has just delivered
the excellent quality of the work done to date and how
closely the whole of the Commission, the GuineaBissau configuration, officials of Guinea-Bissau and
international partners are working together to ensure
that we can put in place a new process that can provide
more sustained attention to Guinea-Bissau.
We have taken note of the latest report
(S/2008/181) of the Secretary-General. We are very
pleased that he has recognized the efforts that have
been made in Guinea-Bissau, which have led to
substantial progress. In that regard, I do not think it an
exaggeration to say that we are moving in the right
direction to strengthen democracy. We now have in
place an inclusive Government comprised of numerous
parties. We are on our way to establishing an inclusive
democracy, for we want a participatory democracy in
Guinea-Bissau. We therefore agree with the SecretaryGeneral that further efforts must be made to ensure that
we can strengthen democracy in our country. There are,
however, some conditions to be met in order to do that.
We are a poor country with problems and are in
need of international assistance. I shall not refer to the
content of the report, as members are familiar with it. I
would simply like to say that we need the international
community to help us move ahead with reforms,
including the reform of the security and public
administration sectors, in order to give new impetus to
democracy and good governance alike. We also need
the international community’s assistance for our
approach to human rights, which should not simply be
theoretical but should ensure respect for human rights,
civic protection and the access of all to genuine justice.
I should therefore like to dwell for a few
moments on the amnesty law that has been voted on in
Guinea-Bissau’s National Assembly. This law does not
mean that we want to promote a policy of impunity —
quite the contrary. The amnesty law should be seen as
part of an effort at national reconciliation. Of course,
we will spare no effort to ensure that the crucial issue
of impunity is resolved and that those who have
committed crimes are brought to justice and receive the
punishment they deserve under the law.

08-28372

I would also like to refer to the upcoming
elections. As the Representative of the SecretaryGeneral pointed out a few moments ago, the date for
those elections has been set. The fact is that it is not up
to the country’s President to unilaterally set the date for
elections. There is a democratic process in place,
which the Council and the international community
support and which we have followed. It is up to the
National Electoral Commission to assess the situation
and, after having consulted the political parties, to
make a recommendation to the President. I am pleased
that the President yesterday promulgated the law
setting 16 November as the date for the elections.
In conclusion, I would like to say that we are
pleased with the cooperation we have established with
the Peacebuilding Commission, and especially with its
Guinea-Bissau configuration. That configuration is
being led with great skill and determination and with
the sensitivity for which our Brazilian friends are
known — sensitivity which comes from their
awareness of the situation in Africa in general and in
Guinea-Bissau in particular. I am therefore hopeful
that, under the leadership of our colleague Ambassador
Viotti of Brazil, we will be able to work with the
members of the Council to ensure that good
governance becomes a reality in Guinea-Bissau, that
democracy is strengthened in our country and that the
elections — which constitute a decisive step towards
strengthening democracy — take place.
I also hope that our case can receive greater
attention and interest and that the international
community will assess the situation in Guinea-Bissau
anew, so that concerted efforts can be made to improve
the situation. The ultimate objective of the efforts of
the international community and our own efforts at the
national level is to improve the living conditions of our
people and ensure that we can at last live in a truly
democratic country at peace with itself.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank His
Excellency Mr. Cabral for his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite the
members of the Council to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

7
