47

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the $.,cond Committee

tern, and its resolutions 2810 (XXVI) of 14 December
1971 and 2970 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Expressing its satisfaction with the efforts directed
towards the implementation of resolutions 2659 (XXV)
and 2970 (XXVII),
Reaffirming its conviction that the United Nations
Volunteers programme has the potential to render
valuable service to the developing countries, particularly the least developed among them,
Reaffirming that the involvement of youth in the
collective efforts of the United Nations system will
enhance international understanding and co-operation
between nations and constitutes an important additional source of trained manpower in the over-all
development efforts in the United Nations system,
Taking note of the co-operation provided by the
volunteer organizations, in particular the International
Secretariat for Volunteer Service, to the United Nations Volunteers programme in its early phase,
Bearing in mind that, after the initial phase, the
programme ultimately should assume the principal
responsibility for its own recruitment,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme concerning the
United Nations Volunteers programme34 and expresses
its satisfaction with the progress of the programme;
2. Endorses the action plan for the future development of the United Nations Volunteers programme as
outlined in paragraphs 28 to 31 of the report;
3. Requests the Administrator and the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
to continue to provide the United Nations Volunteers
programme with every possible assistance to ensure its
rapid expansion and progressive integration into projects assisted by the United Nations;
4. Further requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the
United Nations system, as well as the resident representatives of the Programme, to continue their efforts
to promote, with the agreement of the countries concerned, the use of United Nations volunteers in projects a~sisted by the United Nations and to co-ordinate
all voluntary activities in those projects with the Coordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme;
5. Requests the Co-ordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme to continue to pay special attention to the recruitment of a larger proportion
of volunteers from developing countries;
6. Endorses the measures being taken by the United
Nations Volunteers programme to assume the responsibility for its own recruitment. working directly with
sponsoring agencies and organizations interested in
participating in the programme;
7. Requests Governments, international organizations and individuals to contribute to the Special Voluntary Fund for the United N:.itions Volunteers;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
to report, through the Governin~ Council of the Programme and the Economic and Social Council, to the
34 E/5342.

General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
progress made in implementing the provisions of the
present resolution.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973
3126 (XXVIII). Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly
1. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its fifteenth 35 and sixteenth36 sessions;
2. Takes note also of the comments made by delegations during the consideration of these reports.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3127 (XXVIII). Multilateral food aid

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the progres...;;
report37 submitted l:.y the United Nations/F AO
Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme on the implementation of the recommendations contained in its report, issued in 1970, regarding
food aid and related issues during the Second United
Nations Development Decade.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3128 (XXVIII). United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, in resolution 3001 (XXVII)
of 15 December 1972, to hold a United Nations
Conference~Exposition on Human Settlements,
Noting the importance and priority given to the
problems of human settlements by the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972,38
Noting further the full support for the ConferenceExposition expressed by the Committee on Housing,
Building and Planning at its eighth session, held at
Geneva in October 1973, the comments of the Committee regarding the Conference-Exposition and the
offer of its expertise,39
35 Official Records of the Economic and Social Co;mci/,
Fifty-fifth Session. Supplement No. 2 ( E/5256 and Corr. I ! .
:io Ibid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5365/Rev.1).
:i1 WFP/IGC: 23/20. Transmitted to ,the mernliers of \he
Economic and Social Council by a note of the &crctarvGeneral (E/5318/ Add.1).
:is See Report of the United Nations Con.faencc on the
Huma11 F11i-ironme11t (United Nations publication. Sak~ No.
E.73.11.A.14).
~ 9 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifr_v-sixr/1 S, , . :,.,n. Suprlement No. 2 (E/5.1-17).

48

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Ses~ion

Having considered the recommendations of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme at its first session 40 arising from the report of
the Secretary-General41 prepared in response to General
Assembly resolution 3001 (XXVII) and from the report of the meeting of experts held at Vancouver,
Canada, from 8 to 12 May 1973, 42 as well as the comments of the Economic and Social Council thereon, 411
Stressing the urgent need for early and co-ordinated
action by members of the international community to
safeguard and improve the quality of life in human
settlements in view of accelerating urbanization
throughout the world, which is often accompanied by
rural depopulation,
Bearing in mind the importance to the over-all objectives of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade44 of
the improvement in the quality of life in human settlements in developing countries as an integral component
in the process of development,
Welcoming the co-operative participation of the
United Nations Environment Programme and the Centre for Housing, Building and Planning in the detailed
planning for the Conference-Exposition,
Requesting that the Secretary-General take into
account, in the preparations for the ConferenceExposition, the results and recommendations of other
international conferences, including the World Population Conference to be held in 1974,
l. Decides that the United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements will take place in
Vancouver, Canada, from 31 May to 11 June 1976;
2. Endorses in general the recommendations put
forth by the Governing Council o.C the United Nations
Environment Programme regarding the purposes, objectives and method of financing of the ConferenceExposition;
3. A f]irms that the main purpose of the ConferenceExposition should be to serve as a practical means to
exchange information about solutions to problems of
human settlements against a broad background of environmental and other concerns which may lead to the
formation of policies and actions by Governments and
international organizations;
4. Requests the Secretarv-General to assume the
over-all responsibility for the Conference-Exposition,
bearing in mind the views expressed during the debates
of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme at its first session;
5. Establishes a Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference-Exposition on Human
Setticments, to advise the Secretary-General, consisting
of highly qualified representatives nominated by the
Governments of the following Member States: Argentin:•, Australia, Austria. Brazil, Burundi ~anada, Central African Republic, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Czechoslovakia, Domi11ican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, German Democratic
Hq,ublic, Germany (Federal Republic of), Ghana,
::ir.:ccc, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Tran. Iraq, Italy.,

Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Republic,
Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, Romania, Sierra Leone, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern In:land, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Yugoslavia, Zaire and
Zambia;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to set up immediately a small conference secretariat, drawing
upon the resources of the United Nations system,
especially those of the secretariat of the United Nations Environment Programme and the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, and to :1ppoint at an
early date a Secretary-General who will report through
the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme and work in close co-operation with
the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Soci,11
Affairs, the executive secretaries of the regional cco-nomic commissions and the executive he;ids pf the
specialized agencies;
7. Invites the specialized agencies, the lntern:ttion~l Atomic Energy Agency and the regional economic commissions to collaborate closely with tlic
Secretary-General in the preparations for the Conference-Exposition and to assist, as appropriate. in tlic
work of the Preparatory Committee, in order to he fullv
able to share in the results of the Conference-Expo~ttion and in the action following therefrom;
8. Urges the intergovernmental and non-governme!1tal org~nizations concerned to lend every possible:
1Ss1stance m the preparations for the Conferen,·,· Exposition;
9. Requests the Secretary-General ,md the regional
economic commissions, in collaboration with the Pr\'.paratory Committee, to take the necessary steps, as
~art of t~e preparations for the Conferencc-E-xposi t10n, to brmg to global attention the n:1turc and relative
importance of the problems of human settlements;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to suhmit hril·[
progress reports, through the Governing C"ouncil , if
the United Nations Environment Programme, tn tlh'
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth and thirtieth
sessions.
2199th p!enar_v meetin.~
13 Decelllbcr 1973
3129 (XXVJIJ). Co-operation in 1h1· fit>lrl of tlw
environnu•nt concernin;.i; ~iatural r1•!mu1Ti·-1
shared hy two or mort• Stah's

Fxccutivc D,:,:ctor on the ,reeling
,_·,f cx1xrt~. ~ee UNEP /GC/L.2.

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming principles 21, 22 and 24 of the DccLu:1tion of the United Nations Conference on the H11m:111
Environment/" held at Stockholm from 5 tn J 6 Jm,
1972,
Recalling its re-solutions 2995 ( XXVTl). '.:' 1)' /'.
(XXVII) and 2997 (XXVII) of 15 Dcccmhcr 1<r/.:
relating to co-operaticm herween States ir; the liL·lcl
the environment, t0 international re:,ponsihilit,
States in regard to the c11, ironrncnl and id the ,i~t.:
Iishment of the Gon:rnim~ Council uf the Unit,:,.! N.•
tions Environment Prograrnme, n:spcctiwiy.

4 c See U[/icial Records of the General Assembly, Twentyeighth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/9003 and Corr.l),
chap. XTIT. See also E/ A(',6/SR.666.
H Resolution 262.6 (XX Vi.

4 5 See Report of the United Nation.I' Conf Prencc on t/1,.
Human Environment (United Nations publication, Sales No ..
E.73.II.A.14), chap. I.

40 O;ii,·i<1i

l?ecords of the General Assembly, Twenty-ei_r>hth
(A/9025), annex I, decision 4 (I).

\c•.si,,n, S11['{'lemc11t No. 25

,, l lNEf', (iC',16 anJ Alld.i
-1~ F,,1 1J1c r-"rort of 1hc
