S/PV.7965

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7965th meeting

Monday, 12 June 2017, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Amendola
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2017/473)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-16553 (E)
*1716553*

S/PV.7965

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2017/473)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic; Mr. Andrew Gilmour, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights; Mr. Marco Impagliazzo,
President of the Community of Sant’Egidio.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Gilmour,
who is joining us via video-teleconference from
Washington, D.C.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/473, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): Today,
the Security Council is considering the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in the Central African
Republic (S/2017/473).
This meeting is taking place at a very important
point in time. It affords us an opportunity to express
the international community’s concern regarding the
Central African Republic and ending the political and
security crisis in the country. Armed violence there
continues to impact millions of people. It is therefore
with a heavy heart that I address the Council today,
although there should be no doubt about the strength
and determination of our commitment.
2/13

12/06/2017

Our hearts are heavy and in pain following
the recent wave of violence, which has once again
caused so much death and destruction by scattering
innumerable civilians into exile and homelessness and
plunging of many families into mourning. The intensity
and premeditated nature of the attacks, as well as the
targeting of ethnic and religious minorities, serve to
remind us most horribly of the darkest episodes of
the political and security crisis in the Central African
Republic. However, what is both troubling and revolting
is the systematic and relentless aggression against
peacekeepers. I stand before the Council today, struck
by the indescribable suffering inflicted on civilians,
mainly by reason of their identity, and by the repeated
attacks on peacekeepers.
I want to address all the victims, be they Central
Africans or Blue Helmets, and especially those of the
Kingdoms of Cambodia and Morocco. I once again
extend to them the heartfelt tribute of the SecretaryGeneral and the Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), as well as my own tribute. These
painful events clearly demonstrate the depth of the
Central African crisis, which reflects the structural
shortcomings of the Central African State.
(spoke in English)
I would like to give the Council a brief overview
of the main developments since the publication of the
report. The situation in Bangassou remains extremely
precarious. The violence that erupted on 13 May,
which was likely carefully planned, progressed in a
disturbing fashion. Armed groups backed by political
spoilers demonstrated their intention of carrying out
a de facto ethnic cleansing of the town. MINUSCA
is providing protection to some 17,000 internally
displaced persons, 4,000 of whom are Muslims from
the Tokoyo neighbourhood of Bangassou. There is
also disturbing evidence of systematic targeting of
ethnic Fulani. Some among the displaced community
are living in deplorable conditions. Meanwhile, nearly
3,000 persons have sought refuge in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The situations in the southern central prefectures of
Ouaka and Mbomou remain complex, as reinforcements
of the coalition of the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique have been moving in support of the
purge of the Unité pour la paix en centrafrique. The
unholy alliance with some anti-balaka elements has
17-16553

12/06/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

created an extremely volatile situation. There has
been of targeting Muslim civilians in a number of
towns. The end of the African Union Regional Task
Force’s operations is also a source of major concern, as
various armed groups are competing to fill the ensuing
vacuum. I also remain deeply concerned about the
evolving situation in Bria, where approximately 80 per
cent of the civilian population — approximately 4,000
people — have been displaced due to the clashes that
began on 16 May. On 25 May, MINUSCA launched
an integrated operation to create an environment that
enables displaced people to return to their homes. Yet,
the situation remains volatile.
Similarly, an outbreak of violence in the northwestern prefectures of Ouham and Ouham Pendé,
related to armed groups competing for control of
lucrative transhumance roads, was averted through a
tripartite local mediation initiative at the end of May,
with the facilitation of MINUSCA.
The security situation in Bangui remains relatively
calm, thanks to continuous and integrated political
and military efforts. The joint task force in Bangui has
reinforced its positions and conducted several shows of
force. Coordination mechanisms between MINUSCA
and relevant national defence and internal security
institutions have also proven effective. At the same
time, the Mission has continued to engage community
leaders in support of the Government’s efforts to
defuse tensions.
Lately, MINUSCA has been under harsh public
criticism in the Central African Republic. The
accusations are in fact an expression of the frustration
over the State’s flagrant lack of capacities. It also
reflects the population’s impatience over the persistent
insecurity, which is unfortunately largely self-inflicted.
Sadly, much of this criticism mirrors the deep divisions
that persist in the country, with each side expecting
MINUSCA to fight its perceived enemy. This also
shows the need to move quickly with a strong a national
reconciliation agenda.
Even in the face of those cynics who would disparage
MINUSCA publicly, our resolve remain stronger than
ever before. As a result, the Central African Republic
is on a path towards incremental peace. If we stay the
course, we will come progressively closer to achieving
the Mission’s end state, but we must recognize that
this will not be enough. We are now deeply inside a
critical phase of mandate implementation, which is

S/PV.7965

why MINUSCA must stay the course to consolidate
progress towards peace, even as we must recognize the
magnitude of the adversity we face today.
Within the United Nations, the Secretary-General
has directed a redoubling of efforts in order first
and foremost to help advance the political process,
in combination with enhancing security efforts,
increasing international engagement in response to the
humanitarian crisis, boosting national reconciliation
efforts and ensuring the delivery of peace dividends
and a promotion of economic recovery. In this context,
all constructive peace efforts need to be energized. The
Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation, whose
last inclusive meeting took place on 8 and 9 June in
Bangui, can provide an essential forum where the
Government and armed groups could not only discuss
the modalities of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme but also broader issues related
to peace and stability in the country.
The African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
remains an essential element for facilitating an
inclusive national dialogue with the support of the
subregion. Recent contact between the Government and
the African Union and other parties are in this regard
encouraging. The subregion should continue to play a
critical role in ensuring that this mediation progresses
and that its outcome contributes to long-term stability in
both the subregion and in the Central African Republic.
The ongoing work of the Community of Sant’Egidio
could represent a useful contribution to this effort. All
concerned Central African parties should seize these
opportunities to have discussions in good faith with
the legitimate national authorities on concrete steps
towards achieving sustainable peace in their country.
Meanwhile, violence and the killing of innocent
civilians must cease now.
MINUSCA will continue to project a robust
posture towards armed groups while investing in
structures that build resilience. Nevertheless, we need
to be realistic about the degree to which the State may
quickly achieve a level of autonomy that allows State
institutions to manage by themselves, that is, without
significant support. The State is without infrastructure
and has limited human capital. Innovative approaches
will continue to be needed to ensure stability in the
medium term.

17-165533/13

S/PV.7965

The situation in the Central African Republic

MINUSCA is, for its part, applying a fully
integrated approach to preventing conflict and
sustaining peace, and nowhere is this more visible than
in Bambari. The town has remained calm since robust
measures described in the report were taken to enable
the gradual restoration of State authority, including via
close coordination between the Government and the
United Nations.
The report before the Council mentions other
critical milestones that should not be overlooked,
including the successful convening of the Consultative
Follow-up Committee, in which all 14 armed groups
participated. It is now incumbent upon them to generally
embrace the peace process. I congratulate the Central
African authorities on the timely establishment of six
national institutions, as required by the Constitution,
which helps the country avoid a constitutional crisis.
I am also pleased to note that the National Assembly
has been very productive in terms of legislation while
exhibiting vibrant political activity in its first year.
The Government has sent signals that it is very eager
to see the Special Criminal Court fully operationalized
as soon as possible and the Prosecutor of the Court
arriving in Bangui on 25 May.
The joint human rights mapping report by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and MINUSCA, covering the period from 2003 to 2015,
was launched on 30 May. I am grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Gilmour for his visit to the Central
African Republic on this important occasion. The report
is an important piece in support of the fight against
inpunity and makes critical yet realistic proposals with
a view to advancing transitional justice in the Central
African Republic. It should be seen as an important
contribution to long-term stability and sustainable
peace in the country.
(spoke in French)
At this critical juncture in the process of establishing
a rule of law in a peaceful and reconciled with the United
Nations and living in harmony with its neighbours, it
is essential that all national and international actors
working towards this noble objective speak with one
and the same voice. This meeting provides an excellent
example of the remarkable momentum of international
solidarity that the Central African Republic is enjoying.
We already had the illustration last November in
Brussels. The European Union, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the African Development
4/13

12/06/2017

Bank, the French Agency for Development and even
the International Organization of La Francophonie all
have developed programmes with the Central African
Government. This unprecedented momentum is the
bearer of rich promises. But it will be the responsibility
of the Central Africans alone to ensure that they do
not waste, but instead make this priceless capital
grow, in order to make the legitimate aspirations of the
Central African people for greater stability and shared
prosperity a reality without further delay.
Mr. President, you will agree with me that the
situation is critical and that, if we are not up to the
task, the judgment of history will be uncompromising.
A national awakening is more essential than ever. A
high sense of patriotism and the unity of the Central
Africans around the vital strategic objectives contained
in the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan are
needed. The Framework for Mutual Engagement sets
out the terms of the contract of trust between the Central
African Republic and its strategic partners. Under the
direct authority of President Touadera, the Framework
for Mutual Engagement could be a major instrument
of coordination and strategic direction to accelerate the
implementation of the important reforms desired by
the Government.
(spoke in English)
I am deeply concerned that the already dire
humanitarian situation confronting the country is at
risk of worsening if the Central African authorities
cannot facilitate the return of displaced people and
refugees to their homes. More than half of the Central
African population — or 2.2 million people — need
assistance or are food insecure. This figure represents
the highest per capita caseload in the world and bears
restating with ever more urgency.
It is vital that all international partners honour their
pledges to the Central African Republic and harmonize
that support for consolidating the peace dividends and
maintaining a robust posture, which MINUSCA is of
course prepared to take, with sufficient resources to
enable it to achieve its mandate. Continued engagement
with the international peacebuilding architecture in
support of the country’s stabilization and recovery is
also critically important.
To that end, and with the Council’s support, I
pledge to continue to lead MINUSCA in expanding the
limits of what peacekeeping can achieve. The Mission
is working closely with United Nations agencies and
17-16553

12/06/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

investing resources in mechanisms that promote
national resilience. MINUSCA is constantly monitoring
the volatile and unpredictable security situation with
increased anticipation and mobility in positioning its
forces to protect civilians and prevent the outbreak of
widespread violence. Yet, knowing that there will be
no military solution to the current crisis in the Central
African Republic, all efforts must be exerted in support
of a mediated political solution.
I sincerely thank the Council for recognizing
the serious efforts made by MINUSCA to fight
and eventually end sexual exploitation and abuse.
Improvements in tracking, reporting and coordinating
responses to violations are paying off in the form of
better assistance to victims and a dramatic reduction in
the number of new allegations. Zero tolerance works,
but I will not be satisfied until there are zero cases,
as well as an end to impunity for those grave abuses,
including in troop- and police-contributing countries,
or vis-à-vis civilian staff.
(spoke in French)
I understand the scope of the task we face and, I
must admit that given the relentless evidence of the
forces of destruction, it makes sense to think that the
cynics feel vindicated, but we must recall the trajectory
of the Central African Republic so that we do not get
distracted or discouraged. No person or institution alone
can succeed, but together there is no doubt that we will
so that the Central African Republic can permanently
break the vicious circle of conflict and finally, with force
and conviction, embrace the greatness commensurate
with its rich heritage and immense potential.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gilmour.
Mr. Gilmour: I am grateful for the opportunity to
provide an update on the human rights mapping report
in the Central African Republic. The report, which
was mandated by the Security Council in July through
resolution 2301 (2016), is nearly 400 pages long and
covers the major violations and crimes committed in
the country from 2003 to 2015. It was launched jointly
by the Central African authorities and the United
Nations in Bangui two weeks ago. I attended the launch,
together with the leadership of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).

S/PV.7965

The objective of the report is to help the Central
African Republic authorities and the international
community fight impunity for the years of massive
abuses in the Central African Republic and prevent the
resurgence of conflict. Our aim is also to advance the
implementation of MINUSCA’s core tasks to develop
comprehensive transitional justice mechanisms in line
with the 2015 Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation
principles, to support the Special Criminal Court, and
to help develop national vetting mechanisms for defence
and security forces.
By documenting incidents throughout 13 years of
multiple conflicts in the Central African Republic, the
report constitutes the start of a process of collecting
evidence of the violations committed. It details 620
incidents, including horrific accounts of entire villages
being burned to the ground; multiple gang rapes
of women and girls, extrajudicial killings; deaths
following severe torture or ill-treatment in detention
centres; serious violence against civilians on the
basis of religion, ethnicity or as reprisal for perceived
support for other armed groups; the recruitment of
thousands of children as child fighters; and attacks on
both humanitarian actors and peacekeepers. The vast
majority of incidents were attributed to the ex-Séléka
and the anti-balaka groups, as well as the Central
African defence and security forces.
Unfortunately, some of those abuses appear to be
resuming today, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has so eloquently detailed just now.
That is a rather alarming development. It is therefore a
timely moment to send an unequivocal message to the
perpetrators of such violations — as we did through the
mapping report — that their actions are being watched
and carefully documented, and that they will be held
accountable. During my visit, there was unanimity
among the many Central Africans I spoke to regarding
their utter rejection of any amnesty for perpetrators of the
most serious crimes, which is in line with the principles
of the Bangui Forum. Building on the momentum of
the report, we hope that some of the perpetrators of
the most serious violations will be arrested in the near
future, which would demonstrate a true resolve to
fighting impunity and is what the Central Africans are
vocally demanding of us all, particularly in relation to
the big fish, as they are called — those who ordered and
carried out the most unspeakable atrocities.
The mapping report provides a set of
recommendations to inform the prosecutorial strategy

17-165535/13

S/PV.7965

The situation in the Central African Republic

12/06/2017

of the Special Criminal Court, a central mechanism
that will help reverse the impunity trend in the Central
African Republic. I had an encouraging meeting
with Special Prosecutor Muntazini Mukimapa, who
recently arrived in my country. The legacy of human
rights abuses in the Central African Republic is so
vast that judicial mechanisms will obviously not be
the only avenue to administer justice. The mapping
report also provides guidance for the development of a
comprehensive approach to transitional justice, which
will help identify the appropriate mechanisms for truth,
reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence. All of
that, we believe, will support reconciliation efforts,
given that continued impunity is one of the primary
root causes of the ongoing violence.

In order to build on the positive momentum that the
launch of the Mapping report has created, I really hope
that the Council can support the Central Africans and
MINUSCA’s incredible efforts in such truly difficult
circumstances by providing the means to implement
its mandate to protect civilians, fight impunity and
support institution-building, without which we simply
cannot succeed in our common goals.

Finally, the mapping report also highlights essential
preconditions that must be met before transitional
mechanisms can be functional — measures to protect
victims and witnesses and conditions to ensure that
all individuals can participate in the process. Human
rights defenders and leaders of women’s groups and
religious communities with whom I met in Bangui and
Bambari have been courageously documenting human
rights violations with few guarantees of security. Their
courage should be matched with support from the
United Nations and other international partners.

The Community of Sant’Egidio, over which I
have the honour of presiding and which is an advisory
member of the Economic and Social Council — is an
international institution that is present in more than
70 countries and has long experience in mediation
and dialogue for peace all over the world, especially
in Africa, starting with the General Peace Accords for
Mozambique, signed in Rome 25 years ago in 1992.
Sant’Egidio is itself partly African, since it has several
thousand members in some 30 African countries. We
have an exceptional long-standing relationship with
the United Nations, with whom we have just signed
an agreement in the form of an exchange of letters of
intent to strengthen our collaboration in the areas of
peace, conflict prevention and crisis stabilization.

Beyond transitional mechanisms, institution­
building — especially the establishment of the new
National Human Rights Commission and the reform of
security and defence forces to allow them to carry out
their protection responsibilities — are key priorities
in that regard. We are encouraged by the support
of partners, particularly the African Union and the
European Union in that respect.
As my visit to the severely overcrowded Ngaragba
prison in Bangui made clear, rule-of-law infrastructure
requires increased capacity, and prisons must be
constructed and run in a more humane manner and with
adequate food. That is not the case at present, a matter
that I raised with the Prime Minister. While police,
justice and corrections officials have begun to deploy
in several parts of the country, they continue to lack
many of the resources necessary to carrying out their
functions. I believe we must step up efforts to build the
capacity of police, justice and corrections authorities,
especially in the areas most affected by the conflict.
Re-establishing such services is crucial if we are to
avoid fuelling further resentment.
6/13

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Gilmour for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Impagliazzo.
Mr. Impagliazzo (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your invitation to
address the Security Council.

The Central African Republic is a priority for
Sant’Egidio, which has been involved with the country
since 2003, in the promotion of peace and dialogue
among its various components. I would like to briefly
mention our recent initiatives, such as the November
2013 republican pact, which the Council described in
resolution 2127 (2013) as
“a credible framework to promote an inclusive
national dialogue between all political, social and
religious parties of the country” (resolution 2127
(2013), para. 7).
The Council went on to request the transitional
authorities to implement it.
In line with the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, that initiative aimed to
extend the authority of the State, maintain its territorial
17-16553

12/06/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

integrity and foster the promotion and protection of
human rights as well as disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation (DDRR). Moreover, in
2014, Sant’Egidio worked to foster dialogue between
religious communities, in particular to end the isolation
to which the Muslim community was subjected after the
fall of the Séléka regime. During 2015, an awarenessraising campaign was carried out for the political forces
to support the electoral process and to encourage the
acceptance of the election results. Sant’Egidio also
facilitated Pope Francis’ visit to Bangui in November
2015, and, in particular his meeting with representatives
of the armed groups present in the capital at the time,
by asking them to voluntarily strengthen security in the
neighbourhoods that the Pope was scheduled to visit.
As noted, that visit had a strong positive impact on the
stability of the country and on ending the isolation of
the Muslim community, and a new impetus was given
to the process of national reconciliation.
Since President Touadéra’s election in January 2016,
all of Sant’Egidio’s efforts have been aimed at enabling
the democratically elected authorities to exercise their
mandate throughout the country. In that regard, since
November 2016, with the authorization of the Head
of State of the Central African Republic, and while
informing Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Onanga-Anyanga, at every stage — whom I
would like to commend and thank for his interesting
briefing — representatives of the 14 armed groups
visited Rome at various times — both those who had
joined the DDRR process and those who opted out, in
particular the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique (FPRC).
The meetings remained confidential and did not
encroach on the other consultations under way. It
should be noted that sanctions were not imposed on
any of the participants in the meeting in Sant’Egidio
between representatives of the FPRC and the Unité pour
la paix en Centrafrique fighting for control of Bria. In
some cases, the Government of the Central African
Republic itself facilitated the travel of representatives
to such meetings, which are supposed to assist, support
and complement the efforts of the Government of the
Central African Republic and its President.
That endeavour spawned a positive dynamic. In
the coming days, Sant’Egidio intends to bring together
representatives of all 14 armed groups and envoys of
the Central African Government tasked by President
Touadéra to analyse the critical points of the DDRR

S/PV.7965

process and the political dialogue. Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Onanga-Anyanga will also be
present at that meeting. It is through those meetings
that the international community will be able to reap
the benefits of efforts that are confidential and that
are compatible with and complement other ongoing
initiatives that can finalize the ceasefire and ensure
that all groups take part in the DDRR process. It will
be possible to work on critical points on the issue of
transitional justice and on guarantees governing the
access and protection of humanitarians, in accordance
with the mandate of the United Nations in the Central
African Republic.
Based on our experience, we believe that, first,
direct dialogue between the presidency and its
Government, on one hand, and the representatives of
the armed groups, on the other, is absolutely necessary
and a part of African ownership of the process. In that
regard, the full implementation of the African mediation
initiative could further assist in advancing that process.
Secondly, reaching consensus on the final terms of
DDRR, restoring sovereign functions to the State and
ending the isolation of institutional actors are absolutely
urgent, in particular following the spate of violence in
recent weeks.
To that end, the aim of the meetings is to help to
rebuild trust among Central Africans, in particular
non-institutional actors — the armed groups.
Our experience in the field and our methods of
complementarity, confidentiality, flexibility and direct
dialogue have met with proven success. As underscored
last Friday by Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman, over the years, Sant’Egidio has demonstrated
“its ability to bring non-governmental actors and,
in particular armed groups to the negotiating table”.
Finally, this exercise could help break the deadlock
in the national dialogue and accelerate United Nations
operations as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Impagliazzo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Amendola (Italy): First of all, I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Onanga-Anyanga for his comprehensive briefing.
We commend the United Nations Multidimensional

17-165537/13

S/PV.7965

The situation in the Central African Republic

Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic for its tireless efforts in halting violence and
protecting civilians. Its strong position against the
armed groups prevented them from further expanding
their control over the majority of the country. I would
also like to seize this opportunity to reiterate our
condolences on the loss suffered by the Mission.
I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour
for his briefing. We welcome the United Nations
mapping project documenting serious violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights committed in the country from
2003 to 2015. That could become an important tool for
the special criminal court, which we hope will soon be
fully operational.
Italy is concerned about the significant deterioration
of the security situation in the country. Over the past
few months, it has had a severe impact on the civilian
population. It risks derailing the progress achieved over
the past year. In that fragile security environment, the
already dramatic humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, with increasing numbers of newly displaced
people and refugees.
The worsening security situation in the country
proves that the political process is not moving forward.
It is positive that the meeting held in Bangui in
April of the Consultative Follow-up Committee on
Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and
Repatriation was attended by representatives of all 14
armed groups. Nonetheless, it seems that that platform
is not sufficient to stop the fighting. That is the reason
that other actors have stepped in to support and
complement the reconciliation process led by President
Touadéra. In that regard, we welcome and commend the
efforts led by Sant’Egidio, on which President Marco
Impagliazzo just briefed the Council. The commitment
and the process in which Sant’Egidio is involved is
for us a secure point of reference for the political
decision-making process.
We remain fully supportive of the African
mediation initiative and we hope that in the coming
weeks the African Union will be able to put in place
a road map to which the Council could give voice its
support. Italy believes that that is the key to ensuring
close coordination of the various initiatives, bearing in
mind that President Touadéra, who was democratically
elected by the people last year, must remain the pivot of
the Central African political scene. We therefore call on
8/13

12/06/2017

the authorities, on one side, and all the armed groups,
on the other side, to step up their efforts and address the
root causes of the conflict. For its part, the international
community has to concretely and significantly help the
Central African Government in the different sectors.
In that regard, we welcome the action plan of the
Secretary-General and fully support the priorities
outlined by Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga.
Italy remains an active player in the humanitarian
development sector through its development cooperation
and supports the pledges made at the Brussels
Conference. We hope that all the relevant parties will
swiftly proceed with creating the conditions for pledges
made at the Brussels Conference to be eventually
turned into reality. In that regard, just a few days ago,
the European Union and the Government of the Central
African Republic signed a programme of support for
the Central African Republic worth €302 million over
the 2014-2020 period, by which the European Union
showed a clear commitment to stepping up its support
for the authorities and the people of the country.
The European Union also plays a major role in
complementing the efforts of MINUSCA on the ground.
The European Union’s Military Training Mission in
the country is providing an invaluable contribution to
security sector reform. In fact, it has just completed
the training of the first battalion of the Central African
Republic armed forces. But any kind of international
support and any discussion on the priorities for the
future of the country could prove to be useless without
a real political agreement, as our friends mentioned
before in their briefings.
At this critical juncture for the history of the
country, the Central African Republic should make an
effort in the direction of long-lasting peace.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank Mr. Gilmour, Mr. OnangaAnyanga and Mr. Impagliazzo for their briefings.
The Central African Republic has swung between
consolidating the achievements made since the
election of President Touadéra, in particular the recent
headway made in Bangui and Bambari, and a serious
deterioration in humanitarian and security conditions
in other parts of the country, including deadly attacks
against the staff of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). On the latter point, we are
deeply concerned about the threats against Mission staff
17-16553

12/06/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

and the number of incidents that directly affected them.
The security of MINUSCA staff should be at the centre
of our attention. I also want to point out that attacks
against Blue Helmets could constitute war crimes and
that the perpetrators must be held accountable before
the courts.
The complex state of affairs in the country reflects
the many challenges that lie before the Government of
the Central African Republic, in particular with regard
to the development of solid national institutions and
the expansion of State authority throughout the entire
country. Uruguay acknowledges that the efforts made
by President Touadéra and his Government in the first
year of his term have paved the way for considerable
progress to be made, including the establishment of
various national institutions, as required under the
Constitution, and headway in the ongoing dialogue
with the various armed groups. With regard to that
issue, we would like to underscore the convening,
on 20 and 21 April, of the fourth meeting of the
Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation, in
which the 14 main armed groups participated. We
encourage all armed groups to engage with the dialogue
process and to use the platform to voice their claims in
a peaceful way.
It is essential that the international community
continue to nurture and support the efforts of the
Government of the Central African Republic to achieve
peace and stability in the country. By the same token,
the action of the international community at the
Brussels Conference in November 2016 constituted
a clear expression of international solidarity and a
commitment to learning from the lessons of the past
and to not giving up. In recent months, a number of
initiatives to support the peace process have taken
place, including the African initiative, led by the
African Union and other subregional organizations, as
well as the efforts of the Community of Sant’Egidio.
In that regard, for any effort to be successful, proper
consultations must be held with the Government and
should aim at complementing the measures that are
already being made by national authorities in the search
for reconciliation and peace in the country.
The implementation of MINUSCA’s sexual
exploitation and abuse action plan has been successful,
with a decrease in the number of cases recorded.
However, there is still a lot to be done in order to weed
out the scourge once and for all. Uruguay reiterates

S/PV.7965

its support for the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse.
In conclusion, allow me to convey my greetings to
all MINUSCA staff, who day in and day out play a key
role in the country. I would also like to pay tribute to the
six Blue Helmets who died the line of duty as a result of
cowardly attacks, which we vigorously condemn.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his briefing. We also
thank Mr. Andrew Gilmour and the representative of
the Community of Sant’Egidio.
We share the concerns about the continuing
instability in the Central African Republic, especially
in the area of security. As we can see, intercommunal
strife continues in the country. Criminality and
banditry are widespread. There are bloody clashes
taking place on religious and ethnic grounds. Intense
skirmishes between armed groups continue as they
fight over territory, key trade routes and resources. The
situation is further complicated by the fact that State
administration and security bodies are either paralysed
or simply absent in many parts of the country. As
was the case before, Bangui is the only island of
tranquillity in the country. Clashes between non-State
armed groups in the central and eastern regions of
the country and insurgents’ attacks on civilians and
humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers not only
undermine the security situation, but also impede
national reconciliation.
Clearly, given such a complex military and political
situation in the Central African Republic, the stabilizing
role of the United Nations peacekeeping Mission cannot
be overemphasized. Blue Helmets, who put their own
lives at risk, are trying to put out the flames engulfing
the country. We pay tribute to their heroism and their
determination to help the people of the Central African
Republic and to achieve peace.
At the same time, we must acknowledge that, in
confronting the challenges facing the country, the
Administration of President Touadéra has so far not
been able to count on its own armed forces, which in
fact exist on paper only. Two battalions made up of
1,500 troops will conclude their training at the end of
2017. It will take years for reliable armed forces to form
in the country. The international community must pay
attention to the need to strengthen the capability of

17-165539/13

S/PV.7965

The situation in the Central African Republic

the Central African army in order to achieve lasting
security in the country.
In addition, we would like to point out the need to
balance the due diligence policy in the area of human
rights with supporting the security sector of the Central
African Republic. The task of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic is to help stabilize the
country. However, without urgent reforms, the Blue
Helmets will not be able to transfer responsibility to
the armed forces of the country. The peacekeepers in
the Central African Republic will not be there forever.
We must remember that.
We are concerned about the further deterioration in
the social, economic and humanitarian situation in the
country and the continuing severe lack of financing for
humanitarian needs. Today, the country faces another
problem in the humanitarian sphere, namely, illegal
armed groups who continue to attack humanitarian
workers. Last year, 31 per cent of such attacks
throughout the world took place in the Central African
Republic. We call on all parties to the conflict to ensure
unimpeded humanitarian access on the ground. On their
part, the authorities should create conditions conducive
to the voluntary, safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes.
The Central African Republic authorities have the
overarching task of getting the country’s judicial bodies
to function. In the circumstances it will be essential
to focus on restoring national capacity. The use by
peacekeepers of temporary emergency measures and
the protracted process of establishing a special criminal
court do not constitute a panacea for the country’s
problems where combating impunity is concerned.
After almost two years this institution is still not
functioning, and there have been serious problems with
its financing. On top of that, the global experience has
been that various types of courts involving international
participation have generally been relatively ineffective
and very costly.
We would also like to draw attention to the fact
that one of the demands of the armed groups regarding
a general amnesty is meeting with hostility not
only from the Government — thereby delaying the
national dialogue — but also from many international
stakeholders. In that regard, we urge Bangui not to
rush into a final decision. After all, amnesty does not
imply impunity, and a promise to grant it does not
10/13

12/06/2017

devalue the achievements of the Bangui Forum on
National Reconciliation in 2015. If we are to advance
the process of reconciliation and the healing of wounds,
it is essential to ensure that all the parties are motivated
to participate. If not, we run the risk of the conflict
continuing for years.
The Central African Republic needs major reforms
and modernization in every area of life. The process
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation must receive extra impetus, which can
be achieved only with international assistance and,
most important, regional and subregional mediation.
In that connection, we note the mediation efforts of
the African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States. However, it is clear that the
potential for stronger regional support for the country’s
national dialogue is far from being fulfilled. As we
have seen from other examples of successful conflict
management in Africa, it is regional mediation that to a
great degree has a defining role to play in encouraging
the parties to conflicts to undertake direct dialogue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia would like to thank Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic, for his
briefing. We also thank Mr. Andrew Gilmour,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, and
Mr. Marco Impagliazzo, President of the Community
of Sant’Egidio, for their valuable participation.
We are concerned about the continuing violence
perpetrated by armed groups in the Central African
Republic, which affects not just the parties directly
involved in the conflict but is also seriously harmful to
the civilian population, in particular those who are most
vulnerable, including women and children. It is also
making the humanitarian situation even worse. In that
regard, Bolivia condemns the attacks by armed groups
on civilians and on the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). We acknowledge the difficult
challenges that the country is facing in the process of
restoring stability, which must be achieved through
inclusive dialogue and serious, sustained commitment
from the parties to the conflict.
We deeply regret the deaths of MINUSCA personnel
and citizens of the Central African Republic that have
17-16553

12/06/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

occurred as a result of the violence. We commend
the work of the men and women of MINUSCA,
who are fulfilling their mandate in a hostile and
unstable environment. We also firmly condemn any
sexual exploitation or abuse by any of the parties to
the conflict, including Mission personnel. Bolivia
demands that anyone accused of sexual exploitation
be duly investigated by the appropriate authorities and
prosecuted in accordance with the seriousness of the
crime, in order to ensure that such violence does not
go unpunished.
The violence in the Central African Republic has
had serious humanitarian consequences. According to
information provided by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, approximately 50 per cent of
the population has been affected by clashes between
armed groups. One in four health-care facilities have
been destroyed and two out of three people have no
access to health services. Food insecurity affects one
in four people and a disturbing total of 2 million are
now at risk. One in five people have also been forcibly
displaced. In April alone more than 40,000 people were
internally displaced as a result of the violence in the
north-eastern and south-eastern regions of the country.
According to the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2017/473) the total number of displaced persons
increased from 401,000 in February to 426,000 in
March. Violations of international human rights law
and humanitarian law have exacerbated the situation.
Hundreds of men, women and children have become
victims of sexual violence, human trafficking or
arbitrary arrest or detention. Bolivia urges all armed
groups to lay down their weapons. We call on all
the parties to the conflict to set aside their sectarian
interests, whatever they are, in order to avoid creating
obstacles to productive dialogue and to enable them to
build on efforts to restore stability to the country.
In view of the difficult period that the Central
African Republic is going through, which can only
get worse if instability continues and peace is not
established, we urge the international community to
contribute to the support needed for the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process
for former combatants. We welcome the efforts of
regional organizations, including the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, as well as of neighbouring countries and the
Community of Sant’Egidio, which will continue to

S/PV.7965

be crucial to supporting the political initiatives for
peace and cooperation aimed at a lasting reconciliation
process through African solutions for Africans, in
full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Central African Republic. We
also support the National Recovery and Peacebuilding
Plan and the Framework for Mutual Engagement
between the Central African Government and the
international community.
In conclusion, we believe that we must continue to
help to lay the foundation for lasting stability in the
Central African Republic and to support all relevant
initiatives, with the full and committed support and
agreement of the international community, based on
respect for the law, justice, reconciliation and peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): I would first like to commend the Bolivian
presidency for conducting the work of the Security
Council during its busy programme for the month of
June. I commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing today, all of whose
points my delegation fully endorses. I also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights for
his briefing and the President of the Community of
Sant’Egidio for all the work it is doing in the Central
African Republic.
The Secretary-General’s comprehensive and detailed
report (S/2017/473) makes for disturbing reading with
regard to the violent clashes between armed groups
that have led to the serious deterioration of security
conditions and have once again led to panic and the
displacement of populations in most of the prefectures
where those groups hold sway. We are concerned
because the reach of these armed groups extends
throughout our territory.
What can we add to everything that has been
described in the report? I believe that it is in all of our
interests, especially the Security Council’s, to support
the concrete and important work that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
is doing under the leadership of Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga. My delegation acknowledges all the support

17-1655311/13

S/PV.7965

The situation in the Central African Republic

that the Council has given our Government in its efforts
to find all possible ways and means to restore peace in
the Central African Republic.
Despite the increased presence of MINUSCA in
the field to deter rabble-rousers, the situation remains
a matter of concern. Armed groups have overtaken the
entire territory. Areas that were previously spared are
being deliberately attacked by these groups. Mission
convoys, international forces and civilians are targeted.
I offer my deepest sympathies to the brotherly and
friendly countries that provide the contingents whose
members have been savagely murdered or wounded. We
reiterate our sincere condolences to the Governments
and families of all these brave soldiers who, in saving
lives, have lost their own. We thank them for their
dedication to the cause of peace in an extremely
dangerous, complex and difficult context. Attacks
on civilians for any reason are not only unacceptable
but intolerable.
I welcome the initiative of the African Union Peace
and Security Council to ask the Security Council to
include the issue of the disarmament of the Lord’s
Resistance Army in the mandate of MINUSCA. To
that end, it would be highly desirable for the Mission’s
military strength, which currently stands at 10,471 men,
with an authorized strength of 10,750, to be increased,
alongside that of the police forces, to address that new
task if it is approved.
Apart from all that MINUSCA has already done
in the area of security, with a dynamic and muscular
posture, it is time to endow it with even greater resources
in order to meet the threat posed by armed groups.
The presence of armed groups complicates the search
for peace. I agree with the Secretary-General that we
must give priority to the search for a political solution.
It is in that sense that the President of the Republic
continues to promote dialogue with armed groups
through the vigorous action of MINUSCA that led to
the participation of 14 armed groups on 14 April in the
Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation.
In his speech at the opening of the 4th meeting of the
Committee, the Head of State proposed three key points
to the participants. He told them that the killings must
cease, that frank dialogue must be engaged on all issues
of concern, and how the dialogue should be convened.
It was in that context that His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadéra accepted the offer of the African
12/13

12/06/2017

Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region to endorse the African initiative for peace
and reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
The support of Angola, the Republic of Congo and
the Republic of Chad, as well as that of international
partners — in particular the United Nations, the
European Union and the International Organization of
la Francophonie — are of vital importance to the search
for lasting peace.
Too many crimes have been committed and continue
to be committed in the Central African Republic, and
the parents of the victims expect justice to be done. They
are waiting for the Government to act. They also look
to the United Nations and the international community.
Efforts to combat impunity continue thanks to the
progress made towards the operationalization of the
Special Criminal Court. It is gradually being set up
with the appointment of most of its members. We urge
brotherly and friendly countries to help us appointing
the judges it still lacks.
There is one not insignificant point that I should
like to bring to the attention of the Council concerning
the rapid impact projects or programmes initiated by
MINUSCA, such as training centres, work-for-pay
programmes, income-generating projects, and so on. It
is essential to make the most of all these programmes,
which will employ young people who are idle and at
risk of being recruited by or returning to armed groups.
Unfortunately, some delegations in the Fifth Committee
of the General Assembly would like to see the end of
funding in the MINUSCA budget for these programmes.
I cannot conclude my remarks without expressing
my sincere gratitude to the Special Representative and
Head of MINUSCA and the Force Commander for their
determination to carry out the mission entrusted to
them — that of restoring peace in my country. Their
courage is a comfort to the people who have been
plagued by this interminable crisis. I welcome the
excellent cooperation and understanding between the
Government and MINUSCA on all issues involving
the search for an end to the crisis. I pay tribute to all
the men and women who participate in the Mission. I
cannot fail to mention the role played in the subregion
by Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, in support
of the Central African Republic.
17-16553

12/06/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

I agree with the Secretary-General that time is of
the essence if we want to avoid another relapse in the
Central African Republic, as many already foresee.
I would therefore like to thank the international
community; all the bilateral and multilateral partners of
the Central African Republic that made pledges at the
Brussels Conference, especially those that increased
their announced pledges; as well as those that were not
in Brussels and subsequently decided to support the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. We do not

S/PV.7965

take for granted the ongoing financial support of the
Peacebuilding Fund in many projects. The Government
and the people of the Central African Republic express
their deep appreciation to them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

17-1655313/13
