A /76/PV.23

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

23rd plenary meeting

Thursday, 28 October 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Blanco Conde
(Dominican Republic), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 76 (continued)
Report of the International Court of Justice
(a) Report of the International Court of Justice
(A/76/4)
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/196)
(c) Note by the Secretariat (A/76/431)
Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate the President of the General
Assembly on his election and to associate myself with
the statement made by the representative of Azerbaijan
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(see A/76/PV.22).
Nicaragua thanks the President of the International
Court of Justice for her detailed report (A/76/4), which
shows that the workload of the principal judicial organ
of the Organization has increased despite the global
effects of the pandemic. In the period covered by the
report, the Court issued nine orders, held four public
hearings and delivered four judgments, all within the
approved budget for the period in question. With regard
to the budgetary issue, the delegation of Nicaragua is
pleased to note that this year, as was the case last year,
there was no impact, particularly on key areas for the
administration of justice, such as the appointment of

experts by the Court, and that the Court was again able
to avail itself of this power, in accordance with article
50 of its Statute.
Similarly, the adaptation of other procedural aspects
to the new reality is commendable, as is the amendment
of the rules of procedure clarifying the Court’s power
to conduct hearings and read judgments by videoconference, along with the consequent drafting of
guidelines for the parties on the organization of such
virtual or hybrid hearings, while taking care not to
affect the equality of arms or due process. In particular,
our delegation would like to recognize the effectiveness
and practicality of the reduced length of oral hearings,
the reduction of annexes to a maximum of 750 pages
and the full digitization of the documents provided by
the parties. Meanwhile, Nicaragua takes note of the
establishment of a special committee of three judges
to monitor the implementation of provisional measures
ordered by the Court, and acknowledges the contribution
that those measures will make to strengthening the rule
of law at the international level.
As of 31 July, there were 14 cases pending before
the Court, including one new contentious case, to
which eight Latin American nations are State parties.
Nicaragua takes this opportunity to reaffirm that in
all the cases to which it has been party, it has always
faithfully complied with its international obligations,
and that it expects reciprocity in that regard.
Nicaragua also welcomes the establishment of
the trust fund for the Fellowship Programme of the
International Court of Justice, one of the main objectives

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-30948 (E)

*2130948*

A/76/PV.23

of which is involving young people in the activities of
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, and
in particular to facilitate the participation of young
people from developing countries such as those in Latin
America and the Caribbean. In addition, we note with
satisfaction the actions taken to improve coordination
between the Court and the Secretariat, which has
allowed for greater and more effective dissemination of
judgments, orders, scheduling of hearings and reading of
judgments. Similarly, we note the Court’s effort to make
practical use of available social media, contributing to
the promotion of the teaching, study, dissemination and
wider understanding of international law.
In conclusion, we call for increased voluntary
contributions to the trust fund to assist States in the
settlement of disputes through the International Court
of Justice. In that regard, we regret the trend to put the
burden the costs of certain proceedings on the disputing
countries, most of them developing countries, as the
report suggests.
Nicaragua again invites other Member States
to bear in mind, when approving budgets, that the
peaceful resolution of disputes is the foundation of
the maintenance of peace and the rule of law at the
international level. Without the work of the Court,
the international judicial system would collapse and
confidence in it would disappear.
Mr. Lefeber (Netherlands): Let me first thank
Her Excellency Ms. Joan Donoghue, President of the
International Court of Justice, for her presentation of
the report of the International Court of Justice (A/76/4)
and the outstanding work of the Court as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands is, as ever, proud to be the host country
of the Court.
With 15 pending cases, ranging from disputes
concerning the demarcation of boundaries and the
use of watercourses to those concerning the alleged
use of force and violations of human rights, the Court
has a full docket. The increase in the Court’s caseload
and the diversity of cases brought before it, both in
terms of the parties to the disputes and the subjects of
those disputes, demonstrate the increasing confidence
vested in the Court by the international community.
The outlawing of the use of force, and the corollary
obligation to settle disputes by peaceful means, is one
of the great achievements of the United Nations, and
the International Court of Justice has had an essential
2/30

28/10/2021

role in that process. The observance of its decisions by
the parties to contentious cases as well as the authority
attached to its advisory opinions by the international
community attest to the quality and gravitas of
the Court.
My Government would like to recall the importance
of the acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
Court by all States Members of the United Nations.
We therefore once again encourage all Member States
that have not yet done so to accept the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court by issuing a declaration under
paragraph 2 of article 36 of the Statute, and to do so
with as few reservations as possible. In that context,
I would like to reiterate that in my Government’s own
declaration accepting the compulsory jurisdiction of
the Court, limitations to the jurisdiction of the Court
in contentious cases involving the Kingdom of the
Netherlands have been eliminated as far as possible. Our
only reservation to the jurisdiction is temporal — the
Netherlands will accept all disputes arising out of
situations or facts as long as they took place no earlier
than 100 years before the dispute was brought before
the Court.
To ensure that the Court continues to be a true
world court with general jurisdiction, acceptance of the
Court’s jurisdiction as expressed through a declaration
under paragraph 2 of article 36 of the Statute is to be
preferred. Only when given a broad mandate will the
Court be able to fulfil its mandate as the primary judicial
organ of the world community. A compromissory
clause in a treaty may limit the jurisdiction to such an
extent as to force the Court to declare itself without
jurisdiction when a legal dispute is complex, or it may
force the Court to consider only part of a dispute. In
the opinion of my Government, such situations should
be avoided.
The Netherlands welcomes the establishment of the
trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the
International Court of Justice. The Judicial Fellowship
Programme provides a unique opportunity to young
jurists to gain professional experience at the Court and
improve their knowledge of the peaceful settlement of
disputes through law. That opportunity should be open
to eligible candidates from all countries, including from
developing countries. In that regard, the trust fund is
of crucial importance. The Netherlands supports the
trust fund and is proud to confirm that it will make a
financial contribution of €100,000 in 2021.
21-30948

28/10/2021

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
raise the issue of the importance of reasoned decisions.
In view of ensuring the continuing cooperation of
States parties with the Court and their compliance
with the Court’s decisions, reasoned decisions and
the resulting transparency are increasingly important.
The Court provides the reasoning for its decisions on
provisional measures and for its judgments. However,
my Government considers that reasoning should also
be provided for other decisions, including matters of
procedure that involve a weighing of interests, such as
requests for access to, or the production of, documents.
That would apply in particular when a request is denied.
The enhanced transparency would enable States parties
to better predict what is expected of them in terms of
procedural requirements. That in turn should improve
the efficiency of the Court and the sound administration
of justice. Taking into account the Court’s increasing
workload, my Government therefore respectfully
suggests that the Court consider making the reasons
for decisions that affect the States parties involved
available to them.
Mr. Devillaine (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by conveying my country’s greetings to
the President of the International Court of Justice,
Judge Joan E. Donoghue, and through her to the other
judges of this high court. At the outset, we would like
to express our condolences on the death of Judge James
Crawford. We appreciate the enormous contribution of
this eminent jurist to international law, and we thank
him for his service to the Court.
Chile welcomes the full report (A/76/4) presented to
the Assembly on the significant activities carried out by
the Court, in particular those relating to the reporting
period in 2020 and 2021. We want to underline that
the development of international law is particularly
well served by the broad diversity of issues that have
been addressed by the Court in both its jurisdictional
and advisory functions. That attests to the intensive
and valuable work that it has done in carrying out its
important duties.
We note that the increase in the Court’s activities,
as set out in the report, is in our view an accurate
reflection of the trust that States have placed in its
robust institutional framework, particularly given the
voluntary nature of resort to the Court. We firmly
believe that States value the jurisprudence that the
Court has developed as a result of its activities, which
is the subject of increasing interest in academic

A/76/PV.23

centres worldwide. It is vital for the strengthening of
its competence that States have a full guarantee of its
impartiality and independence, values and principles
that we believe are clearly reflected in the Court’s
proceedings. Chile highlights that commitment to
credibility by referring issues of the greatest legal
importance and relevance for its consideration and
resolution. We currently have pending before the Court
a Dispute over the Status and Use of the Waters of the
Silala (Chile v. Bolivia).
We would like to highlight that during the specific
period covered by the report, the Court handed down four
judgments and nine procedural orders for the settlement
of various contentious cases that are in process. We
want to emphasize those tremendous efforts, given the
complex situation that the pandemic has created with
respect to the Court’s work. Despite the difficulties of
carrying out their tasks in such a situation, the work of
the judges and staff did not diminish.
We greatly value the lofty responsibilities of the
International Court of Justice and its mission. As Chile
has said many times in the Assembly, the Court’s
work must reflect the pre-eminence of international
law in order to ensure the legitimacy of the system
for the settlement of legal disputes. As the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, the Court plays a
fundamental role in the interpretation and application
of international law as an instrument for strengthening
the peaceful coexistence of States. In that context,
full and good-faith compliance with the international
obligations emanating from its decisions is as an
imperative for our country, to which we fully adhere
in compliance with the provisions of Article 94 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
We would like to highlight in particular the efforts
and measures adopted to enable the Court to continue
to perform its functions, taking into account this time
of health emergency. The first is the amendment to the
Court’s rules clarifying that hearings and readings of
its judgments can be conducted by video-conference
when necessary for health, security or other compelling
reasons. The Court therefore began to hold its sessions
by video-conference in June 2020, and subsequently in
hybrid format.
The second aspect that Chile would like to
highlight is the Court’s Judicial Fellowship Programme,
which enables universities in developing countries to
nominate candidates from among their law graduates

21-309483/30

A/76/PV.23

to continue their legal training at the Court for 10
months. That major initiative, which Chile welcomes,
is financed through a trust fund established in 2021 and
administered by the Secretary-General, which seems
to have a promising future, following the first round
of contributions. We urge the Court to continue this
important programme. We believe it to be an innovative
and interesting way for the Court to contribute to
deepening legal knowledge, making it possible for it
to disseminate its work beyond States and ministries
and thereby showing the importance of its function
and ensuring a fuller understanding of international
law. Such initiatives bring society as a whole closer to
the work of the Court, an aspect that has long been of
particular concern to the United Nations.
In conclusion, as we have done when speaking on
reports such as this on previous occasions, we would
like to echo the voices of support for the Court and
trust that the United Nations, of which the International
Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ, will
continue to provide it with the human and material
resources it needs to continue to carry out its work with
due attention to its requirements, so that the Court’s
vital role can continue to be fully discharged.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to start by
thanking Judge Donoghue, President of the International
Court of Justice, for her presentation and informative
report (A/76/4) on the activities of the Court. We are
delighted to see her here in the General Assembly,
something that has not been possible in the past two
years owing to the coronavirus disease pandemic. I also
want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to Judge
James Crawford, who served the Court with distinction
before his passing in May. Judge Crawford was a
leading public international law scholar and jurist of
his generation and made a substantial contribution to
international law.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/76/
PV.22), and I would like to make the following points in
my national capacity.
The International Court of Justice was established
as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
Over the years it has played an indispensable part in the
peaceful settlement of disputes through its judgments
in contentious cases and advisory opinions on legal
questions brought before it. The Court has in its current
4/30

28/10/2021

docket an impressive workload of 14 cases. They
deal with a variety of subjects, including territorial
and maritime disputes, environmental protection,
diplomatic missions, consular offices and human
rights, among other things, and involve Member States
from all five geographical groups. Those facts attest to
the universal character of the Court. They demonstrate
the renewed confidence and trust that Member States
have in the Court’s leading role in the interpretation
and application of international law. It is therefore
essential to continue to ensure the quality of the Court’s
pronouncements, its efficiency and the impartiality of
its judges so that it can live up to its exemplary mandate.
In that regard, we warmly welcome the Court’s efforts
to continually review its procedures and working
methods, such as monitoring the implementation of its
provisional measures, enhancing case management and
allowing the use of technology in its hearings.
In a broader perspective, the Court contributes
through its jurisprudence to solidifying the role of
international law and the rule of law as a foundation for
peaceful coexistence among States. International peace
and security cannot be maintained without full respect
for international law and the rule of law. There is ample
space to increase cooperation between the Court and
other main organs of the United Nations, especially
the General Assembly and the Security Council, in
realizing those purposes of the United Nations. The
obligation to settle disputes by peaceful means requires
States’ good-faith implementation of the Court’s
judgments, awards, orders and other decisions once
they have consented to the process.
Last but not least, it is in our common interest to
raise awareness of the use of judicial bodies as a means
for the peaceful settlement of disputes and building
national capacity to that end. We welcome the Court’s
public outreach activities and in particular its interest
and investment in young people. We support all efforts
to make the Judicial Fellows Programme and other
educational opportunities more accessible to young
academics from developing countries. A trust fund
has been dedicated to that purpose in accordance with
resolution 75/129. We hope that it will soon be brought
into operation and make a meaningful contribution
to helping practitioners in international law from
developing countries to study and practice.
Viet Nam reiterates its consistent position
regarding the principles of international law, including
the peaceful settlement of disputes. We have great
21-30948

28/10/2021

respect for the work of international legal bodies in the
promotion of friendly relations among nations and the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
have participated in and contributed to the work of the
Court in several legal processes. I would like to take
this opportunity to renew our strong commitment to
upholding international law and to assure the Court of
our full support.
Ms. Zolotaryova (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes the
report of the International Court of Justice covering the
period from 1 August 2020 to 31 July 2021 (A/76/4). As
the principal judicial body of the United Nations, the
Court has been an authoritative forum for the peaceful
settlement of disputes for 75 years. During that time, it
has considered more than 100 inter-State disputes and
received more than 25 requests for advisory opinions,
proving that there is no alternative to the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
The Court demonstrates that it keeps up with the
times not only through the variety and number of cases
under its consideration but also through its efforts to
address current challenges. This year’s report confirms
that over the past two decades the Court’s workload has
continued to grow. The geographical spread and varied
subject matter of the cases are also a clear sign of the
importance and universality of the judicial authority
and the general character of its jurisdiction. During
the pandemic the Court remained fully accessible and
operating, although naturally some of its proceedings,
including written submissions, may have been affected
by some postponements. We welcome the Court’s
ability to adapt its working methods and enable its
effectiveness in such difficult times.
The decisions of the Court are of paramount
significance in promoting and establishing the rule
of law, as well as becoming sources of international
law that both States and international organizations
can rely on to manage day-to-day behaviour. Other
adaptations of the Court’s procedures and working
methods, such as its adoption of a new article 11 of the
Resolution concerning the Internal Judicial Practice of
the Court, also reflect its effort to take into account
the trends it encounters in its work. The introduction
of new methods of internal judicial control over the
implementation of provisional measures under article
11 is therefore another confirmation of the serious and
binding nature of the provisional measures ordered
by the Court. As such, its efforts to strengthen their
implementation can only be commended.

A/76/PV.23

Ukraine welcomes the Court’s activities designed
to ensure that its decisions are well understood and
publicized worldwide. It is particularly important to
draw the Court’s communications to the attention to
the Security Council, which is directly mandated under
the Charter of the United Nations to secure compliance
with the Court’s decisions. That requirement is clearly
defined by the provisions of the Charter and the
Court’s Statute, the Rules of Court and the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. Ukraine strongly
believes in international law. We are therefore pleased
to note that the trust fund established for the Judicial
Fellowship Programme has been successfully launched.
We hope it will help to further enhance and strengthen
the Court’s capacity.
There is no room for doubt that provisional measures
ordered by the Court as a matter of urgency and for
the purpose of safeguarding the rights of the parties
are binding. It is the Court’s practice to reaffirm and
emphasize, through its orders on provisional measures,
based on article 41 of the Statute, the international
legal obligations created for the parties to whom the
provisional measures are addressed. Unfortunately,
not all States respect the Court’s orders or take real
measures to implement those orders in good faith.
Following its occupation of Crimea, Russia launched
a wide-ranging campaign of cultural erasure directed
at the Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian communities.
It has engaged in the collective punishment of entire
ethnic groups in Crimea. People in Crimea continue
to be unlawfully detained and to disappear, culturally
important gatherings are suppressed, education in the
Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian languages is restricted
and media from those disfavoured communities are
intimidated. That constitutes a massive violation of
the International Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Racial Discrimination. In that regard, I would
like to recall the Court’s order of 19 April 2017 for
provisional measures in the case brought by Ukraine
against the Russian Federation on the interpretation
and application of the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination (Ukraine v. Russian
Federation). In its decision, the Court required Russia,
among other things, to
“refrain from maintaining or imposing limitations
on the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to

21-309485/30

A/76/PV.23

preserve its representative institutions, including
the Mejlis”.
More than four years have passed, and it has become
apparent that Russia does not believe that it is obliged
to suspend its discriminatory ban on the Mejlis under
the plain language of the Court’s order. Moreover, on
1 June, in the case of the so-called mass riots in 2014,
the so-called Supreme Court of Crimea, controlled
by Moscow, sentenced the Chairman of the Mejlis of
the Crimean Tatar people, Mr. Refat Chubarov, to six
years in prison in absentia. And the editor-in-chief of
the newspaper Qırım, Bekir Mamutov, was fined by
the Russian occupation authorities for publishing a
report by the Secretary-General (A/75/334) that merely
mentioned the Mejlis.
In the other part of the order, the Court ordered
the Russian Federation to “ensure the availability of
education in the Ukrainian language”. We know that
this provision has not been implemented either. That
order continues to be ignored, despite its binding
nature. The failure of the Russian Federation to
comply with it is reflected in the relevant General
Assembly resolutions. Moreover, the General Assembly
has strongly condemned the Russian Federation’s
continuing total disregard for its obligations under
the Charter and international law regarding its legal
responsibility for the occupied Ukrainian territory.
By ignoring the International Court of Justice’s order,
Russia has continued to violate a binding decision,
revealing a deplorable attitude to the Court, the Charter
and international law.
In his recent report entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol, Ukraine” (A/76/260), which was
submitted pursuant to resolution 75/192, the SecretaryGeneral called on the Russian Federation to uphold its
obligations in Crimea under international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. In the Joint
Declaration of the International Crimea Platform, held
in Kyiv on 23 August, the participants also urged the
Russian Federation to bring an immediate end to all
violations and abuses of human rights of the residents
of Crimea and to provide full and unimpeded access
to Crimea for established regional and international
monitoring mechanisms, in particular the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
and the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
as provided for in their existing mandates, which cover
6/30

28/10/2021

the entire territory of Ukraine, including Crimea. In
that regard, we urge the international community to
insist that Russia abide by international law, including
the binding rulings of the International Court of Justice.
Ukraine will not change its firm commitment to the
rule of law and the peaceful settlement of disputes and
will not stray from the path of using all available legal
mechanisms to hold accountable States that violate the
rule of law. During this session, considering the ongoing
deterioration of human rights in Crimea, Ukraine is
planning to submit for the consideration of the Third
Committee and the General Assembly a revised draft
resolution entitled “Situation of human rights in the
temporarily occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine”, based on last
year’s resolution 75/192 and the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Ukraine would
greatly appreciate Member States’ valuable support and
sponsorship of the updated document.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica mourns the untimely loss of
Judge James Crawford, who was undoubtedly one
of the most brilliant minds in public international
law of recent decades. We trust that his legacy will
live on and influence a new generation of judges and
practitioners. We would also like to congratulate Judge
Joan E. Donoghue on her election as President of the
International Court of Justice. My delegation welcomes
the leadership of a woman in such an important
institution for the administration of justice, the only
international court of a universal nature with general
jurisdiction. I also want to take this opportunity to
thank her for the report on the activities carried out by
the Court during the period from August 2020 through
July 2021 (A/76/4). Her presence in this Hall will not go
by unremarked.
Costa Rica commends the measures taken by the
Court to address the effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic on its important activities. As detailed
in the annual report, public hearings were held by
videoconference or in hybrid format, and despite the
circumstances, four judgments were issued in pending
cases. Its ability to deliver judgments and hold oral
hearings this year is testimony to the Court’s dedication
to the cause of international justice and the maintenance
of peaceful relations among nations.
21-30948

28/10/2021

The peaceful settlement of disputes between States
Members of the United Nations is an essential purpose
of both the Court and the larger United Nations. To
maintain that, it is crucial that the United Nations and
its Member States — all of which are de facto parties
to the Court — support the Court in the fulfilment of
its core mandated tasks of adjudicating disputes and
providing legal guidance to the General Assembly and
other United Nations bodies. That support requires the
United Nations and the Assembly to ensure that the
Court continues to address efficiently and objectively,
and with absolute legal and procedural independence,
the cases submitted for its consideration and the
advisory opinions requested. That is only possible to
the extent that the Court is guaranteed the necessary
resources to fulfil its mandate.
The Court is currently considering 14 cases of
the most diverse nature, such as complaints regarding
treaty violations, requests for the definition of maritime
boundaries, territorial disputes and requests for the
definition of the continental shelf, among others.
Similarly, since its creation more than 70 years ago
as the judicial organ of the United Nations, the Court
has played a fundamental role in the development,
interpretation and dissemination of customary
international law. Costa Rica would like to highlight
two aspects that should be strengthened in order to
reinforce that role.
First, the Court’s jurisdiction over States before
it is voluntary in nature. Without the consent of the
States involved, the Court cannot exercise its judicial
function, which considerably limits its action. In the
event of a dispute, if one of the parties does not accept
compulsory jurisdiction, the matter cannot be settled
by the Court. It is therefore essential that Member
States act to encourage jurisdiction binding on States
parties to a dispute, either by express declarations of
acceptance or by including clauses in bilateral treaties.
Although 193 countries are officially parties to the
Statute of the Court, only 73 have made declarations
recognizing the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction in
accordance with paragraphs 2 and 5 of article 36 of the
Statute. In that regard, Costa Rica, which has accepted
compulsory jurisdiction without reservation since 1973,
calls on States that have not done so to recognize that
jurisdiction as compulsory in all the relevant disputes
and above all to always be willing to resort to the Court
when bilateral negotiations prove unsuccessful.

A/76/PV.23

Our second concern relates to reporting on disputes
accepted for decision by the Court. Since the nature and
complexity of the matters submitted to the Court has
been evolving, transparency is a very important aspect
for Costa Rica. We believe that the reports submitted by
countries on compliance with any provisional measures
imposed by the Court pending a final judgment,
especially in cases with clear and compelling human
rights implications, should be made public.
A basic requirement for strengthening the rule of
law and the Court itself is to ensure that States that have
accepted compulsory jurisdiction demonstrate respect
for the judgments of the Court and agree to abide by its
decisions in good faith. Such compliance must be in full
in order to guarantee the integrity of each process and
consolidate the Court’s indisputable role in ensuring the
just and peaceful resolution of disputes between States.
In that regard, the United Nations should consider the
possibility of following up on the Court’s decisions and
highlight cases of non-compliance in order to avoid
situations where States that have accepted compulsory
jurisdiction then choose to ignore the court’s judgments
and thereby compromise the rule of law. On the same
subject, Costa Rica would like to acknowledge the
Court’s adoption of a new article 11 of the Resolution
concerning the Internal Judicial Practice of the Court.
And we welcome the creation of the ad hoc committee
provided for in the article in order to follow up on the
implementation of provisional measures imposed by
the Court. That is a great step forward.
Over the years, since it resolved its first dispute,
concerning the Corfu Canal, the Court has made
significant contributions to the development of
international law through its judgments and advisory
opinions. Costa Rica has been a party to several cases
heard by the International Court of Justice, particularly
between 2005 and 2018. Our experience bears witness to
the many virtues and advantages of submitting disputes
with other States to the Court. As a country without
an army, dependent for its security on multilateral
instruments and international law, Costa Rica would
like to take advantage of today’s debate to reaffirm its
support for the work of the Court, both in its function
of a settler of disputes and in its advisory role, both of
which have been of great value to the Assembly and the
entire United Nations system.
It would not be possible for Costa Rica to live
in peace and tranquillity without the confidence
that comes from adherence to the rule of law and

21-309487/30

A/76/PV.23

the protection derived from adopted international
instruments and other concrete signs of respect for the
United Nations and its institutions. We reaffirm our
absolute support for the work of the Court in clarifying
the legal obligations of States and in settling disputes
between nations without resorting to weapons or the
armies that wield them.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Greece would like to
express its gratitude to Judge Joan Donoghue, the
President of the International Court of Justice, for her
detailed presentation of the Court’s annual report to the
General Assembly (A/76/4), as well as for the high level
of activity once again sustained over the past year.
Greece is a strong supporter of the Court as a
mechanism established by the Charter of the United
Nations for the peaceful settlement of inter-State
disputes in accordance with international law, thereby
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security in general. Greece has always been a
staunch proponent of the principle of the peaceful
resolution of inter-State disputes and the prohibition
of the threat or use of force by States in accordance
with paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the latter being a jus cogens rule and
a cornerstone of the preservation of peace and stability
throughout the world. We are also mindful of the Court’s
critical role in preventing conflicts through its delivery
of advisory opinions on legal questions referred to it by
duly authorized United Nations organs and agencies,
thereby strengthening legal stability and certainty,
which in turn contribute to the prevention of disputes.
In that respect, as early as 1994 we actively
demonstrated our trust and confidence in the
International Court of Justice by accepting the
compulsory jurisdiction of the Court under paragraph
2 of article 36 of its Statute. That acceptance was
subsequently reviewed, and in 2015 we submitted a new
declaration of acceptance of the Court’s jurisdiction that
is still in force. Similarly, Greece acknowledges with
deep appreciation the Court’s outstanding contribution,
through its jurisprudence, to the determination of
the applicable rules of law and more generally to the
development of international law and the promotion of
the rule of law.
We attach great importance to the prominent
position that the Court holds in today’s international
justice system. Indeed, the International Court of
Justice is the only international court with both general
8/30

28/10/2021

and universal jurisdiction, as evidenced by the diverse
geographical spread of the cases decided or currently
pending before it and the wide variety of the subjects
they cover. In the same vein, the considerable increase
in the Court’s workload over the past 20 years, as
indicated in its annual report, is illustrative of the trust
and confidence that States from different regions of
the world have in it, as well as of the vitality of the
institution itself. In that regard, Greece would like to
highlight and pay tribute to the Court’s response to the
coronavirus disease pandemic in making the necessary
arrangements to adapt its working methods in a timely
manner, which has enabled it to perform its judicial
functions efficiently, despite the multiple challenges
created by the ongoing public health crisis.
Furthermore, recognizing that full compliance
with the decisions of the Court is not only an obligation
of the Member States under the Charter of the United
Nations but also a prerequisite for the Court’s effective
performance of its important functions, and therefore an
essential element in the maintenance of the international
legal order, Greece welcomes the establishment by
the Court of an ad hoc committee composed of three
judges, with a mandate to assist in monitoring the
implementation of the provisional measures indicated
by the Court.
Finally, I would like to refer in that context to the
candidacy of Mr. Linos Alexander Sicilianos, Professor
and current Dean at the University of Athens and, until
recently, President of the European Court of Human
Rights, for the position of judge in the International
Court of Justice at the election to be held next week in the
General Assembly and the Security Council. Professor
Sicilianos is an academic known worldwide with
thorough knowledge of international law. He combines
his 30-year academic expertise with long judicial
experience as an international judge. Furthermore,
he has served in various bodies of the United Nations
as an independent expert. He is also fluent in French
and English, thereby fulfilling the requirements of
article 39 of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice. Given the nature of the Court and the
importance of the cases it deals with, we strongly
believe that expertise and experience really matter. For
all those reasons, Greece is convinced that Professor
Sicilianos is an excellent candidate with the ability
to contribute to the demanding work of the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. As members are
aware, there is a large void to be filled following the
21-30948

28/10/2021

sad passing of Judge Crawford, who contributed a great
deal to the functioning of the Court. To that end, it is
important to maintain the standards of international
justice at the highest level. That is why we ask for the
Assembly’s support.
Mr. Carnahan (United States of America): I
thank President Donoghue for her informative briefing
today. We are also pleased to join so many others
today in extending our thanks and commendation to
President Donoghue in her first year as President of
the Court and to her fellow judges and all of the staff
of the International Court of Justice for their tireless
dedication to international law and for carrying out the
vital role of the Court. The United States also extends its
condolences on the passing of Judge James Crawford,
a distinguished jurist and scholar of international law
whose work made a lasting impact by advancing the
peaceful settlement of international disputes.
The International Court of Justice stands at the
pinnacle of the international judicial system. We are
pleased to continue to recognize its contributions to the
realization of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. As in years past, we see States increasingly
turning to the Court and to other regional courts and
international judicial tribunals to resolve their disputes.
By providing a trusted channel for States to resolve some
disputes upfront, and helping to defuse others before
they escalate, the Court continues to fulfil its mandate
under Chapter XIV of the Charter of the United Nations,
playing a vital role in promoting and preserving the
rule of law and in advancing international peace and
security through the peaceful resolution of disputes.
It is gratifying to know that for the Member States
that accept its jurisdiction, the Court stands ready to
adjudicate their disputes.
At the same time, it is important to continue to
emphasize that consent is central to maintaining the
credibility of the Court’s work. In that regard, it is also
critical to maintain the distinction between the Court’s
contentious and advisory jurisdiction, as set out in
its Statute. The General Assembly’s ability to request
advisory opinions is an important one. It allows the
General Assembly to seek assistance from the Court in
carrying out its functions under the Charter. However,
we must be careful not to allow this important tool
to be misused for political gain or to circumvent the
Court’s jurisdiction over contentious proceedings. The
advisory function of the International Court of Justice
was not intended to settle disputes between States.

A/76/PV.23

In conclusion, this year we again commend the
efforts of the Court to ensure the continuity of its work
in the light of the challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We hope that the Court’s experiences
in adopting innovations to continue its work under
these challenging circumstances will prove beneficial
in the future.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): At the outset,
allow me to thank the President of the International
Court of Justice, Judge Donoghue, for her presentation
of this year’s report of the International Court of
Justice (A/76/4), and to welcome the Court’s increased
workload during the reporting period, which includes
the handing down of four judgments and nine orders
as well as the acceptance of one new contentious case.
We note the diversity of the subjects involved in the
cases submitted to the Court, from territorial and
maritime delimitation to human rights and reparation
for internationally wrongful acts, illustrating once
more the general character of the Court’s jurisdiction.
Furthermore, we welcome the diverse geographical
spread of the Court’s cases, confirming yet again the
universal character of the jurisdiction of the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations.
As President Donoghue indicated in April in her
reflections on the Court’s seventy-fifth anniversary, the
strength of the Court, measured in terms of the quality
of its jurisprudence and the received legitimacy of its
judgments, depends primarily on selecting judges who
are impeccably qualified to serve on the Court. In that
respect, Cyprus stresses the importance of selecting the
most prominent jurists of high merit from every region
of the world and from diverse legal traditions to serve
as judges at the International Court of Justice. The loss
of Judge Crawford, an authoritative world figure of
international law, is a heavy blow to the Court and the
broader international legal community.
We commend the Court for reviewing its procedures
and working methods during the period under review
in order to ensure the sound administration of justice,
particularly as regards the adoption of a series of
measures in response to the coronavirus disease
pandemic that enabled it to continue to perform its
judicial functions by holding hearings, public sittings
and readings of its judgments by video links and
subsequently in hybrid format. We are also pleased to
note that preparatory meetings with the host-country
authorities were held during the period under review
for the renovation and temporary relocation of the

21-309489/30

A/76/PV.23

Court from the Peace Palace due to the discovery of
asbestos in the building, and we trust that a solution
will be found soon that will honour the constitution of
the Peace Palace as well as the interests of the Court.
A few months ago, the Court commemorated the
seventy-fifth anniversary of its inaugural sitting. In
all these years of judicial practice, the Court, as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, has made
commendable contributions to the peaceful settlement
of international disputes and the development of
international law, settling more than 140 contentious
cases and providing more than 25 advisory opinions.
Furthermore, its settled jurisprudence and legal
practice continue to provide guidance for other
courts and tribunals around the globe. The Court has
also demonstrated that it is equipped to tackle cases
relating to new areas of international law that have
emerged and developed since its first sitting, such as
environmental disputes.
Cyprus is a strong supporter of the Court
and its pivotal role and has full confidence in its
impartiality and effectiveness. As a peaceful country
and a firm believer in international law and effective
multilateralism, Cyprus adheres to the principles of
the Court and attaches great importance to all peaceful
means of dispute settlement pursuant to paragraph 2 of
Article 3 and Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Furthermore, on several occasions my country
has expressed its readiness to engage in negotiations
with any relevant country with a view to reaching
a peaceful settlement in good faith of any maritime
dispute in the Eastern Mediterranean, in full respect
for international law, including the settling of any such
dispute before the International Court of Justice.
One of the fundamental requirements of the Statute
of the Court is that States consent to the Court’s
jurisdiction. As is well known, that consent is expressed
through a declaration of acceptance of the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court, a special agreement, the forum
prorogatum rule or the inclusion of a compromissory
clause in a multilateral or a bilateral treaty. As of
31 July, 193 States had become parties to the Statute
of the Court and 74 of them had deposited with the
Secretary-General a declaration of acceptance of the
Court’s compulsory jurisdiction in accordance with
article 36 of the Statute. My country recognized the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice in 1988, and we encourage all Member States to
do the same. At the same time, we view the noticeable
10/30

28/10/2021

decline in the number of new treaties that include
compromissory clauses providing for recourse to the
Court as a disappointing trend that should be reversed.
Finally, my country strongly believes that the
relationship between the Court and the Security
Council is fundamental to the maintenance of peace
and security, and it is therefore important to strengthen
the partnership between the Security Council and the
Court to uphold the rule of law at the international level.
Mrs. Falconi (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Peru would like to express its heartfelt
condolences for the loss of Judge James Crawford.
We are cognizant of his significant achievements and
grateful for his service and contributions to the Court.
As a country committed to multilateralism and
international law, Peru welcomes the report (A/76/4)
presented today to the General Assembly by the
President of the International Court of Justice, Judge
Joan E. Donoghue, which gives an account of the work
carried out by the Court between 1 August 2020 and
31 July 2021.
My delegation would like to highlight the
fundamental role that the International Court of
Justice has played as the principal judicial organ of our
Organization in the system established in the Charter
of the United Nations for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. During the past 75 years, the Court has been
a pillar of the peaceful resolution of disputes and of
rules-based governance. As such, it contributes to
the maintenance of international peace and security
and represents an essential element in strengthening
multilateralism and promoting the rule of law at the
international level.
Peru would like to recall that in accordance with
Article 96 of the Charter and in addition to its jurisdiction
in contentious cases, the Court may also issue advisory
opinions at the request of the General Assembly,
the Security Council or other authorized organs of
the United Nations and its specialized agencies. In
exercising that dual function, the International Court
of Justice issues rulings, orders and opinions, thereby
promoting and clarifying the provisions of international
law. The Court carries out its functions in an impartial
and diligent manner, enabling the settlement of disputes
among States, in the service of a community of nations
in which the principle of good faith prevails and friendly
relations between nations are fostered. We therefore
reaffirm the importance of respecting the decisions and
21-30948

28/10/2021

rulings of the Court, and we encourage States that have
not yet done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of
the Court, in accordance with paragraph 2 of article 36
of its Statute.
My delegation also wishes to acknowledge the work
of the distinguished judges who make up the Court.
Their efficiency in dealing with an influx of new cases
and the number of matters already resolved reflect both
the vigour of the institution and the high degree of
excellence and responsibility embodied in the judges’
work. We are also grateful for the valuable and intensive
work of the Registry of the Court, especially that carried
out by the Registrar and the Deputy Registrar. In that
regard, we call on the General Assembly to continue
paying close attention to the needs of the Court, taking
into account the particularly heavy caseload currently
before it.
My delegation considers it appropriate to highlight
the recent establishment of a trust fund for the Judicial
Fellowship Programme of the International Court
of Justice by the General Assembly in its resolution
75/129, of which Peru was a sponsor, requesting the
Secretary-General to establish and administer such a
trust fund. We highlight this important initiative with a
view to promoting the development of international law
and the training of legal professionals, especially from
developing countries, and we urge States and other
organizations to contribute to the trust fund.
We would like to reiterate our appreciation for
the measures adopted by the Court in response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which
made it possible to ensure the continuity of its activities
while protecting the health and well-being of its judges
and officials. We emphasize that the Court has adapted
its working methods to allow tasks to be carried out
remotely and that during the period under review, the
Court delivered four judgments by video-conference
and held hearings in a hybrid format. In that regard, we
express our appreciation for the Court’s hard work and
flexibility, as well as its responsiveness and capacity for
innovation, enabling it to continue its work even amid
the COVID-19 pandemic. We also want to reiterate
our appreciation to the host State, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, for its unwavering commitment and
support to the Court. We underscore the importance of
cooperation between the Court and the other principal
organs of the Organization, based in New York.

A/76/PV.23

In conclusion, I once again underscore our
unwavering support for the work of the International
Court of Justice in upholding a rules-based international
order. We firmly believe that the Court will continue
playing an essential role in enabling the international
community to settle international disputes peacefully
and, by extension, to deal effectively with serious
global challenges and threats to international peace
and security.
Mr. Al Reesi (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I have the
honour to deliver this statement under agenda item 76,
entitled “Report of the International Court of Justice”
(A/76/4), which my country, the Sultanate of Oman,
considers an important item related in connection
with this main judicial organ of the United Nations
system. In that regard, I would like to thank His
Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres for
his report contained in document A/76/196, as well as
Judge Joan Donoghue, President of the Court, for her
comprehensive presentation on the Court’s activities
during the period under review.
One of the conditions for membership in the
United Nations is Member States’ acceptance of the
Statute and the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. Pursuant to international law, the Court
addresses disputes among States. As such, it provides
Member States with an opportunity to settle disputes
by peaceful means based on the principles and rules of
international law.
My country, the Sultanate of Oman, supports the
International Court of Justice and calls on all Member
States to support the efforts it is undertaking within
its jurisdiction for the sake of international peace and
security, given the expertise it has accumulated and
perhaps the benefit it has derived from new technologies
for an improved performance and mechanism for action.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my country’s
supportive position and its resolute commitment to
abiding by international law and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We support the promotion
of a working relationship among the various organs
of the United Nations, in particular the International
Court of Justice, as its principal judiciary organ.
Mr. Othman (Malaysia): Malaysia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (see A/76/PV.22).

21-3094811/30

A/76/PV.23

Let me thank the President of the International Court
of Justice, Judge Joan Donoghue, for her presentation
of the Court’s report today. My delegation also wishes
to congratulate her on being the second woman to
hold this important post. Malaysia shares that historic
milestone, and we are proud of our current composition
of women judges in senior judicial leadership positions,
including the first woman Chief Justice and President
of the Court of Appeal, appointed in 2019.
Seventy-six years after its founding, the Court,
an integral component of the Charter of the United
Nations, remains as relevant as ever. We commend the
way in which the Court continues to operate despite
the challenges posed by the pandemic. We note that
during the reporting period the Court continued to
experience a particularly high level of activity. It
delivered judgments in four contentious cases, handed
down nine orders, held public hearings in four cases
and was seized of one new contentious case. The
increasing number of cases brought before the Court is
a clear expression of the continued confidence of States
in the Court. My delegation also wishes to commend
the Court on its continued efforts in exploring ways
to improve its procedures and working methods.
Among other things, we note that the Court amended
one provision of its Practice Directions with a view to
addressing the proliferation and protraction of annexes
to written pleadings.
The diversity of subjects submitted to the Court
illustrates the universal character of the Court’s
jurisdiction. In that connection, we commend the Court
on its readiness and competence in tackling cases
relating to new areas of international law that have
emerged and developed since its first sitting in 1946.
My delegation continues to advocate for the Court’s
pivotal and unique role in advancing multilateralism,
particularly through its judgments and advisory
opinions, which directly influence the development and
strengthening of the rule of law and contribute to the
building and sustaining of peaceful relations between
States. We also remain convinced that peace through
law is possible. It is our conviction that when other
diplomatic or political means have proved unsuccessful,
States should continue to seek judicial resolutions to
conflicts and disputes among them through the Court.
Malaysia demonstrated its commitment to that process
in the cases of sovereignty over Pulau Ligitan and
Pulau Sipadan, and sovereignty over Pulau Batu Puteh,
Middle Rocks and South Ledge.
12/30

28/10/2021

My delegation also strongly believes that the Court’s
advisory opinions, despite having no binding force,
carry great legal weight and moral authority. Notable
advisory opinions include the one on the Legality of
the threat or use of nuclear weapons (A/51/218, annex)
(1996). Malaysia, for its part, has annually submitted
a draft resolution entitled “Follow-up to the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons” to
the First Committee. We call on all Member States
to sponsor and support this year’s draft resolution
(A/C.1/76/L.58), which is scheduled for action in the
First Committee next week.
We also reiterate our call on the Security Council
to seriously consider Article 96 of the Charter of the
United Nations and make greater use of the Court as
a source of advisory opinions and interpretation of
relevant norms of international law, particularly on
long-pending issues affecting international peace
and security. We remain convinced that deliberations
on contentious political and security issues would
be better served if supplemented by an authoritative
legal opinion.
The Court remains an institutional pillar for
peace, justice and the international legal order. Let me
conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s steadfast support
for the Court’s guiding role in that endeavour.
Mr. Mikeladze (Georgia): At the outset, allow
me to express our appreciation for the comprehensive
presentation by the President of the International
Court of Justice, Judge Joan Donoghue, delivered to
the General Assembly today (see A/76/PV.22). We also
wish to pay tribute to an outstanding legal scholar and
great friend of Georgia’s, Judge James Crawford, who
leaves a great legacy and will be sorely missed.
Georgia is an ardent supporter of the International
Court of Justice and remains committed to the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Statute of the Court. Seventy-five
years ago, the Court, as a principal organ of the United
Nations, became pivotal in the struggle to defend the
rule of law at the international level. Georgia, as one of
74 countries that have issued a declaration recognizing
the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, would like to
take this opportunity to note the accomplishments and
challenges that have shaped the way the Court is seen to
be living up to the increased demands of international
justice. In that regard, we fully support the initiative by
21-30948

28/10/2021

Romania to promote a broadening of the recognition of
the Court’s jurisdiction.
Georgia welcomed the judicial activity of the
Court during the reporting year. As the report (A/76/4)
duly notes, the diverse geographical spread of cases is
illustrative of the universal character of the jurisdiction
of the principal judicial organ of the United Nations and
its key role in the United Nations system in maintaining
international peace and security.
The Court’s intensive workload during the
pandemic and the impressive manner in which the
Court has tackled all obstacles to maintaining the
proceedings uninterrupted are highly commendable.
The Court contributes immensely to developing and
clarifying international law through its judgments and
advisory opinions. We welcome the reinvigorated belief
in the Court by States, which serves as yet another
indication of its importance for international relations.
Unfortunately, the world continues to suffer from
blatant violations of the fundamental principles of
international law, which are occurring even as we
speak. In full disregard of international law, the Russian
Federation, as the Power exercising effective control
over the occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of
Georgia, continues its policy of factual annexation of
those regions and is seeking their full incorporation
into its military, political and economic system.
The already dire humanitarian situation on the
ground has been further aggravated by the outbreak
of the pandemic, and people must endure everyday
violations of their fundamental rights.
Georgia remains committed to the principle of
primacy of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
upholds the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, to which there is no viable alternative.
Furthermore, we believe in the primacy of
international law with regard to relations with other
States and are convinced that it is the strong international
Court of a universal character, with general jurisdiction,
along with the commitments undertaken by countries
with respect to their obligations under international
law, that form the key pillar of the international rulesbased order.
In that respect, we stress the need to reaffirm our
collective commitment to the fundamental principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

A/76/PV.23

Mr. Ndoye (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation aligns itself with the groups to which it
belongs and takes note with satisfaction of the report
of the President of the International Court of Justice
(A/76/4) relating to the judicial activities of the Court
during the past 12 months.
Senegal would like to warmly thank President Joan
Donoghue for her statement (see A/C.1/76/PV.22) and,
through her, to express our gratitude to all those who
work on a daily basis to ensure the smooth functioning
of the Court.
I also address our sincere thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his report contained in document A/76/196,
on the trust fund to assist States in the settlement of
disputes through the International Court of Justice.
The overview of the judicial activities of the Court
contained in the President’s report under consideration
reflects an increase in the number of judgments on the
merits. Four judgments and nine orders were issued in
the period under review. The importance of the cases
considered by the Court under its jurisdiction leaves no
doubt as to Member States’ preference for resorting to
the peaceful settlement of disputes, in keeping with the
Charter of the United Nations.
The diversity and broad geographical distribution
of the cases submitted to the Court reflects the
universal character of the principal judicial organ of the
Organization. We must commend the Court on the fact
that it is regularly seized of issues relating to territorial
sovereignty, territorial and maritime delimitation
and disputes relating to diplomatic relations and
human rights.
My delegation remains convinced of the crucial role
of the International Court of Justice in the promotion
of the rule of law at the international level and urges
Member States to make greater resort to its competency
in order to peacefully settle their international disputes.
On another note, our country attaches particular
importance to the Court’s Judicial Fellowship
Programme, whose aim is to help young people,
especially those from developing countries, to achieve
a better understanding of international law through
the granting of scholarships. It offers law graduates
from universities in developing countries effective
opportunities to participate in the programme by
covering the financial cost of their participation.

21-3094813/30

A/76/PV.23

My delegation welcomes the adoption on
14 December 2020 of resolution 75/129, whereby the
General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to
establish and administer a trust fund for the Judicial
Fellowship Programme of the International Court of
Justice. In that regard, we reaffirm our commitment
to continuing to support and promote that initiative
by joining, along with Argentina, the Netherlands,
Romania and Singapore, the core group of States.
My delegation calls on Member States and the
international financial institutions to contribute to the
trust fund so as to further enhance the geographic and
linguistic diversity of the participants in the Programme.
The application of international norms cannot
promote the rule of law at the international level in the
absence of the effective implementation of the relevant
decisions of the International Court of Justice. My
delegation would like to stress the need for Member
States, the General Assembly and the Security Council
to ensure respect for and the implementation of the
decisions of the Court.
As emphasized in the report, only 74 Member
States have to date made a declaration recognizing the
compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, in accordance
with paragraphs 2 and 5 of Article 36 of the Statute.
My delegation therefore invites all States that have
not yet done so to consider accepting the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court.
The prohibition of the use of armed force in
inter-State relations requires the jurisdictional
settlement of disputes and the full implementation of
the decisions taken.
Ms. Solano Ramírez (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Colombia wishes to begin by conveying its
condolences on the passing of Judge James Crawford
to his family, friends and colleagues. Judge Crawford
was counsel for Colombia in one of our cases before
the International Court of Justice. We therefore were
able to see first-hand the extent of his humanity and
intelligence. The international legal community has
lost one of its most brilliant representatives.
Colombia thanks the International Court of Justice
for the report contained in document A/76/4, which
covers the period from 1 August 2020 to 31 July 2021.
In particular, we thank President Joan Donoghue for
her comprehensive presentation this morning, which
reflected the willingness of the Court and its Registry
14/30

28/10/2021

to continue working on pending cases and adapting
its procedures and working methods to the challenges
posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In that regard, Colombia welcomes all the measures
taken by the Court to adapt its working mechanisms
during that period in order to be able to continue to
perform its judicial functions without significant delays.
In that framework, we welcome the amendments to the
Court’s Rules to make clear that hearings and readings
of its judgments may be held by video link, and the
fact that it also issued “Guidelines for the parties on the
organization of hearings by video link”.
In the case relative to Alleged Violations of
Sovereign Rights and Maritime Spaces in the
Caribbean Sea (Nicaragua v. Colombia), Colombia was
able to participate in hybrid hearings, and we take this
opportunity to reiterate our gratitude to the Court, the
Registry, the interpreters and the technical staff for the
hearings, which took place without any glitches in the
current circumstances.
Colombia hopes, however, that we can soon go
back to full in-person work, so that parties can better
exercise their right to defence.
We note also that during the period under review,
the Court adopted a new article 11 of the Resolution
concerning the Internal Judicial Practice of the Court
and amended a provision of its Practice Directions
adopted in 2001 relating to the proliferation and
protraction of annexes to written pleadings. Colombia
welcomes those adjustments, which are intended to
enhance the efficiency of the work of the Court and to
allow parties to focus more closely in their arguments
on the issues that divide them.
It is also noteworthy that the report shows that
the Court’s general list of pending contentious cases
involves eight States from my region, the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States, seven from
the Group of African States, four from the Group of
Eastern European States, three from the Group of AsiaPacific States and only one from the Group of Western
European and other States.
Colombia would like to take this opportunity
to welcome processes that facilitate the training
of students and young professionals, including the
annual Judicial Fellowship Programme, which allows
interested universities to nominate candidates from
among their recent law graduates and sponsor them
21-30948

28/10/2021

in order to enable them to continue their training in a
professional context at the Court for a period of about
10 months, from early September to June or July of
the following year. Colombia hopes that lawyers from
Latin America and the Caribbean will soon be able to
take part in those programmes.
Finally, Colombia takes this opportunity to
emphasize its long democratic tradition and its full
respect for the separation of powers and for international
law. In line with that tradition, the Colombian
Government would like to reiterate that it respects the
International Court of Justice as the main judicial organ
of the United Nations and stresses its independence.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to thank Judge Joan E. Donoghue
for her comprehensive briefing on the activities of the
International Court of Justice during the reporting
period and to congratulate her on her election as
President of the Court.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/76/PV.22),
and we would like to add the following remarks in our
national capacity.
My delegation firmly believes that the Court is one
of the fundamental parts of the international system for
the maintenance of international peace and security. We
stress the importance of the Court’s role in furthering
the promotion of a fundamental principle of the Charter
of the United Nations — the settlement of international
disputes by peaceful means. In that respect, we want to
highlight three important matters:
First, my delegation appreciates the judicial
work and other pertinent activities of the Court,
as highlighted in the report (A/76/4). We note its
contributions to the corpus of international law during
the most recent reporting period. Furthermore, we are
of the view that since its inception 75 years ago, the
Court has played a central role in international law. As
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, it
resolves disputes that cannot otherwise be settled by
or through the political organs of the United Nations.
Many conflicts and fatalities, as well as much human
suffering, have been avoided due to the Court’s success
in settling international disputes peacefully.
Secondly, the sustained level of the Court’s
activity, including as it is reflected in the number of

A/76/PV.23

cases referred to the Court, is an encouraging fact
and reaffirms Member States’ confidence in it. It also
shows their growing respect and support for the Court’s
legal wisdom and its role in the peaceful settlement
of international disputes. In order to encourage other
States to follow suit, my delegation sincerely hopes that
the Court will remain committed to delivering credible
judgments and advisory opinions.
Thirdly, we appreciate the innovative approach
and methods of the Court amid the challenge of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, including through the
amendment of its rules of procedure and its issuance
of relevant guidelines to adapt to these unprecedented
circumstances. We also support the Court’s continued
development of its activities in disseminating
information on its role and activities and in reaching out
to wider audiences through electronic and digital media.
In addition, my delegation welcomes the establishment
of the trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme
in this milestone year. We hope that the Trust Fund
will encourage the further involvement of developing
States, with their geographic and linguistic diversity,
and contribute to a diverse culture and legal tradition
in the Court.
Before concluding, I wish to express our deep
condolences for the loss of Judge James Crawford of
Australia, who passed away in May.
Finally, I pledge Indonesia’s unwavering support
for the Court and its role in strengthening the rule of
law at the international level.
Ms. Bhat (India): Allow me at the outset to thank
Judge Joan E. Donoghue, President of the International
Court of Justice, for her detailed and comprehensive
presentation of the Court’s report (A/76/4) for the
period between August 2020 and 31 July 2021. We
also offer our condolences for the sad demise of Judge
Crawford, whose valuable contributions to the work of
international law will always be remembered by the
legal community worldwide.
The International Court of Justice, the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, is an important
forum for the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. In April, the Court commemorated the
seventy-fifth anniversary of its inaugural sitting, and
we congratulate the Court on its distinctive contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security
through all the years of its existence. The provisions in
the Charter of the United Nations, especially Article 92,

21-3094815/30

A/76/PV.23

28/10/2021

show the important role assigned to the Court, which
is granted a unique status. It is the only judicial organ
whose legitimacy derives directly from the Charter.
The Court enjoys general jurisdiction on all aspects of
international law and is available to all States of the
international community.

Finally, India reaffirms its strong support for
the work of the International Court of Justice and
acknowledges its important contribution to maintaining
peaceful relations between parties to disputes and
reaffirming the faith of the global community in the
rule of law.

Over the past 20 years, the Court’s workload
has grown considerably. The flow of new and settled
cases reflects the institution’s great vitality. The wide
geographical distribution of the pending contentious
cases illustrates the universal character of the jurisdiction
of the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
Cases submitted to the Court involve a wide variety of
complex factual and legal subjects, such as territorial
and maritime delimitation, diplomatic missions, human
rights, reparation for internationally wrongful acts,
the interpretation and application of international
treaties and conventions and environmental protection.
This diversity of subject matter illustrates the general
character of the Court’s jurisdiction.

Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia thanks the President of the International Court of
Justice, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, for her detailed report
(A/76/4) on the Court’s activities from 1 August 2020 to
31 July 2021. We take this opportunity to congratulate
her on her election and express our support for her
important work for this organ. Likewise, I would like
to express our solidarity with the people of Australia
and our deepest condolences for the irreparable loss
on 31 May of renowned jurist and academic James
Crawford, whom we recognize for his outstanding
contribution to international law.

The report reveals that during the 2020-2021
judicial year, the International Court of Justice once
again experienced a particularly high level of activity,
including the handing down of four judgments and nine
orders. In four cases, the Court held public hearings
by video link or in hybrid format. Moreover, the Court
was seized of one new contentious case. On 31 July, the
number of cases on the Court’s general list stood at 14.
We welcomed the adoption of a new article 11 of
the Resolution concerning the Internal Judicial Practice
of the Court. This article provides for the establishment
of an ad hoc committee, composed of three judges, who
will assist the Court in monitoring the implementation
of the provisional measures that the Court indicates.
The committee will examine the information supplied
by the parties in that regard, report periodically to the
Court and make recommendations. We also welcome
the amendment of one of the Court’s 2001 Practice
Directions for use by States appearing before it, with a
view to addressing the proliferation and protraction of
annexes to written pleadings. The amended version of
Practice Direction III specifies that the number of pages
of annexes attached by a party to its written pleadings
should not exceed 750, unless the Court decides, upon
the request of a party, that a number in excess of that
limit is warranted by the particular circumstances of the
case. We believe that this will save a lot of the Court’s
precious time and ensure that only centrally relevant
pieces are provided for the Court to examine.
16/30

Bolivia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/76/
PV.22).
Bolivia would like to highlight the Court’s efforts
to fulfil its delicate and important functions in the
most recent reporting period despite the limitations
and difficulties the world is facing as a result of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, through such means
as conducting public hearings in a hybrid format and
adapting both to the reality of each State and the reality
we are going through as an international community.
Our delegation also recognizes the Court’s
contribution to the development of international law
as a principal organ of the United Nations and as a
fundamental institution for the settlement of disputes
or international situations liable to disrupt the peaceful
coexistence of States, while always maintaining as its
legal basis international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular Article 1, in accordance
with the principles of justice and international law. The
dispute over the status and use of the waters of the Silala
River between Chile and Bolivia is still pending before
the International Court of Justice. Our country attaches
the utmost importance to that pending contentious case
and hopes that the Court will be able to resolve it, as it
is an issue of interest to our region and the world.
We welcome the establishment of the trust fund
for the creation of scholarship programmes for
21-30948

28/10/2021

graduate students in international law that will allow
universities in developing countries to send their most
accomplished students to undertake internships in
this important organ. We urge that multilingualism
be recognized as another tool in this field and call for
greater geographical diversity in that regard.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia, being a
pacifist State and a promoter of the culture of peace,
participates in and is guided by all the initiatives and
jurisdictional activities carried out by the International
Court of Justice, which we believe acts with total
impartiality and independence. Evidence of that is
the efforts it makes to resolve the cases before it with
total effectiveness and efficiency and to provide States
a judicial space to resolve their disputes in a peaceful
manner. Bolivia respects the international law and
international decisions emanating from this important
organ and hopes that its judicial resolutions will be
accepted and carried out by all.
In conclusion, Bolivia considers that the most
appropriate way for the peaceful resolution of disputes
between States will always be through dialogue and
negotiation between brotherly peoples, but we are also
sure that recourse to the International Court of Justice
is a right of every State with a grievance. Today more
than ever, our common objectives are the peace and
development of all States, and we are confident that the
International Court of Justice will rise to that challenge.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico thanks President Joan Donoghue for
her briefing on the latest report (A/76/4) on the activities
of the International Court of Justice, and would like
to express its appreciation for the progress the Court
has achieved in the past year despite the coronavirus
disease pandemic. The Court’s rapid adaptation to
this reality by adopting new working methods shows
that the principal judicial organ of our Organization
is capable of modernization and that it can rise to the
current challenges in fulfilling its mandate for the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
We take this opportunity to congratulate the Court
on its seventy-fifth anniversary and recognize the
value of its more than 140 judgments. Behind each of
them is a dispute that has been settled by the rule of
law and in favour of peace. The Court’s contribution
to strengthening the rule of law is also reflected in its
more than 20 advisory opinions. We greatly value the
Court’s advisory jurisdiction, as it serves to identify

A/76/PV.23

technical and legal solutions that enable States, the
General Assembly or the Security Council to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes. That is why we
continue to advocate for the Secretary-General to
be allowed to request advisory opinions from the
Court without having to go through the Assembly or
the Council. The ability to do so would strengthen
the Secretary-General’s capacities for good offices
and mediation.
Although the Court has demonstrated its integrity,
effectiveness and legitimacy on many occasions, only
74 Member States — less than half of the Organization’s
membership — have accepted the Court’s compulsory
jurisdiction. That action is the most basic, and merited,
expression of support for the Organization’s principal
judicial organ. Mexico therefore proudly belongs to the
core group of the initiative promoted by Romania to
adopt a declaration in favour of the Court’s jurisdiction,
including through the inclusion of jurisdictional clauses
in international treaties. The fact is that the Court’s
effectiveness necessarily depends on the compliance of
the parties to the cases with its rulings, and that is also
crucial to the maintenance of peace and good relations
among States. The same is true for rulings on interim
measures in order to avoid unnecessary political
tensions. In that context, we endorse the content of
resolution 73/257, adopted by the Assembly in 2018.
As the only universal and general jurisdictional
organ, the Court’s work has increased over the past
two decades. It is currently considering disputes
concerning maritime and territorial issues, diplomatic
missions, reparations and treaty interpretation, to
name but a few. The geographical diversity of the cases
also reflects the scope of its legal work. Considering
the increase in the number of cases, it is important to
provide the Court with sufficient funds to effectively
fulfil its mandate.
We note that the largest number of pending cases is
from Latin America and the Caribbean, reflecting anew
the trust that our region places in the Court. Mexico is a
good example. As a responsible actor and in conformity
with our pacifist vocation, we have turned to the Court
in the recent past. The peaceful settlement of disputes
is a foreign-policy principle enshrined in the Mexican
Constitution, and our vision as a country is founded on
the promotion of justice and the rule of law, indelible
hallmarks of our diplomatic tradition.

21-3094817/30

A/76/PV.23

In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to the
Court as a principal mechanism for conflict resolution
and a guarantor of sustainable peace through law
and legality.
Mrs. Gunasekera (Sri Lanka): I would like
to congratulate Judge Donahue, President of the
International Court of Justice, for the concise but
comprehensive report (A/76/4) she presented to us this
morning with regard to the work of the Court during
the period from August 2020 to July 2021. This year
is especially important, as the Court celebrated its
seventy-fifth anniversary in April.
Sri Lanka was sad to hear of the passing of Judge
James Crawford, an academic giant in the field of
international law. He was a great friend of Sri Lanka
and contributed in large measure to the work of the
Court. His loss is irreparable. Sri Lanka has also been
represented on the Court by one of its proud sons, the
late Judge Christopher Gregory Weeramantry, a Sri
Lankan lawyer who was a judge of the International
Court of Justice from 1991 to 2000 and served as its
Vice-President from 1997 to 2000.
The International Court of Justice has steadfastly
promoted international law, peace, security and justice
over the years. We commend it for standing up for
international law in these turbulent times. We are
pleased to hear of the judgments delivered and orders
handed down during the period under consideration. It
is noteworthy that the Court held public hearings using
a virtual platform or in a hybrid format in four cases,
and that it took cognizance of contentious matters,
including land and delimitation, sovereignty, diplomatic
missions, human rights, reparation for internationally
wrongful acts, the interpretation and application
of international treaties and matters concerning
environmental protection. This only goes to show the
wide canvas of matters under the Court’s consideration.
We are pleased to see that the Court has also
engaged in reviewing its own procedures concerning
its internal practices through the establishment of an
ad hoc committee of three judges in order to assist the
Court in monitoring and investigating any provisional
measures it might take with regard to pruning lengthy
pleadings, annexes and written submissions, and
restricting the number of pages, among other measures,
in its promotion of an efficient system of administration
of justice. There is no doubt that there is still room for
greater efficiencies.
18/30

28/10/2021

The International Court of Justice is the only court of
a universal character with general jurisdiction to decide
cases regarding international law in States’ exercise of
their sovereignty, as well as its advisory jurisdiction
and opinions provided to the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council
and other interim United Nations committees.
The Judicial Fellowship Programme and the
promotion of international law among young people
is commendable and deserves all of our support, as
has been manifest in the trust fund established by the
General Assembly.
The International Court of Justice has endeavoured
to maintain its impartiality and has conferred
legitimacy on the international legal system. We
cannot, however, rest on our laurels but must rather
work tirelessly to address areas of contention if we are
to gain the complete confidence of the international
community. Finally, Sri Lanka reiterates its position
of commending the International Court of Justice as
the pre-eminent principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, but we encourage its judges to renew that
influence with efficacy and continued reforms in an
ever-changing world dealing with issues concerning
environmental protection, terrorism, drug trafficking
and rapid globalization.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the observer of the Observer State
of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): We align ourselves with
the statement made by the representative of Azerbaijan
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(see A/76/PV.22).
At the outset, I would like to thank Judge Donahue,
President of the International Court of Justice, for her
report (A/76/4) on the work of the Court over the past
year, and to commend the Court for its important role
and for having continued to fulfil its mandate despite
the pandemic.
There is no greater testament to the desire of the
founders of the United Nations to build a new world
order that upholds international law in reaction to the
Second World War and the horrors that accompanied it
than the decision to establish the International Court
of Justice. The Court embodied the determination to
see the rule of law supplant the rule of force. Given
the importance of the Court as the cornerstone of the
21-30948

28/10/2021

international law-based order, its jurisdiction should
have been compulsory for all States. Imagine if a
national court had no enforcement mechanisms and
could apply its jurisdiction only to the citizens willing
to accept it.
Despite that original sin, the Court has been able
to deliver on its important mandate for two reasons.
The first is its authority and credibility. The second
is because of the willingness of many States to freely
subject themselves to its jurisdiction. We therefore
commend the Court for its long-standing service
to the cause of international law and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and we equally commend all
States that recognize the compulsory jurisdiction of
the Court and those that have decided to submit their
disputes to the Court’s jurisdiction. Whenever we have
had the opportunity, the State of Palestine has done
just that. In that context, I would like to welcome the
proposed declaration on promoting the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice and to commend
its initiators. I want to state from this rostrum that I
am confident that the State of Palestine will be able to
endorse it.
We cannot speak of the Court without speaking
of its remarkable judges, who are entrusted with
delivering on its mandate. On this occasion, I want to
honour the memory of Judge James Crawford, whose
name is forever associated with important milestones in
the development and advancement of international law,
including the elaboration of the landmark International
Law Commission articles on the responsibility of States
for internationally wrongful acts and in planting the
seeds that led to the establishment of the first permanent
International Criminal Court. Logically, this towering
figure of international law found himself serving
within the highest international court. The people of
Palestine are eternally grateful to Judge Crawford for
having served as a counsel to Palestine on the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the wall
built by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory. It
was an integral part of his lifetime service to advancing
the international rule of law, striving to end injustice
and helping peoples find avenues for recourse and
means for redress. In this regard, Palestine’s decision
to resort to peaceful mechanisms or mechanisms
created to advance the peaceful settlement of disputes
should be commended and supported, not objected to
or obstructed.

A/76/PV.23

Respect for, and compliance with, the Court’s
decisions and opinions is indispensable to preserving
the rule of law. Seventeen years have passed since
the advisory opinion of the Court on the wall made
clear determinations with regard to the illegality of
Israeli policies. Already then — 17 years ago — the
Court underlined the fact that these policies could and
would amount to de facto annexation if they were to
be permanent, in breach of the cardinal principle of
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land by force.
Rather than reversing them, Israel has continued its
plans to annex the maximum Palestinian land with a
minimum of Palestinians and to confine our people in
enclaves where they are deprived of their rights, land
and resources. The choice ahead of us is clear, and the
international community must spare no effort to ensure
that the future of our region is, in the words of another
great man, President Carter, peace, not apartheid.
The diversity of States resorting to the Court is
matched with the variety of subject matters it addresses.
Through its functions addressing both contentious and
advisory cases, the Court is capable of determining the
law with authority and credibility, as it pertains to any
situation and thereby to contribute in no small measure
to the peaceful settlement of disputes. We call on the
United Nations, including the Security Council, the
General Assembly and, when possible, the SecretaryGeneral, to help make use of these functions, as both
prevention and conflict resolution command giving the
greatest possible role to the Court. It is also the marker
that we are being true to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
The Court holds the greatest promise towards
making this world more just and peaceful. We all
have wondered in recent years if we were doomed to
see all the progress that generations had accomplished
unravel. We can collectively prevent such a prospect,
informed by the tragedies of the past that led to the
establishment of international justice and keeping
in mind the alternative to an international law-based
order. There might be short-term interests that argue
for undermining this order, but the long-term interests
of our nations and of humankind as a whole plead for
furthering the rule of international law rather than
undermining it.
The State of Palestine reiterates its unwavering
commitment to the rule of law, the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and the principle
of humanity as well as to human rights and dignity.

21-3094819/30

A/76/PV.23

This commitment guides our unequivocal support
for the Court as the cornerstone of the international
law-based order. The State of Palestine will continue
to work tirelessly to ensure the triumph of universal
values as enshrined in international norms, not only for
the benefit of our own people, but of all nations.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of the report of the International
Court of Justice, contained in document A/76/4?
It was so decided (decision 76/510)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Several
delegations have asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. I would like to remind members that statements
in exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first statement and five minutes for the second,
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Skachkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are forced to respond the statement made
by the representative of Ukraine. Ukraine decided
once again to take the floor to repeat false accusations
against Russia and to try to offer its own interpretation
of a process that has not been completed. We would like
once again to remind Ukraine that debates on judicial
proceedings being considered at the Peace Palace in The
Hague are not supposed to be debated under the agenda
item on the report of the International Court of Justice.
We therefore consider it incorrect and inappropriate to
comment on them.
Mrs. Weiss (Israel): Israel is disappointed that
certain actors in this Hall have decided once again to
sidetrack an otherwise professional and constructive
debate in this august forum in order to advance a narrow
political agenda, draining limited time and resources.
The International Court of Justice should serve as a
beacon of hope and clear voice of international law and
justice, weighing in on the current major legal issues
facing States and the world community. It should not be
used or allow itself to be used as a political battleground
or as a threat designed to improve a certain party’s
negotiation posture. It is unfortunate that the Palestinian
delegation today, as its leadership did during the
general debate (see A/76/PV.12), chose to use and abuse
the International Court of Justice as a threat and as a
way to entrench and perpetuate the conflict, rather than
20/30

28/10/2021

to present a vision of a better future for all the people in
our region, be they Palestinian or Israeli.
The President took the Chair.
It is also unfortunate that the representative of
Palestine chose to throw around words with very heavy
and specific legal meanings and false accusations.
Peace and true justice will take hold in our region only
when certain actors cease to make threats or to take
unconstructive unilateral actions, be they judicial or
otherwise, and become willing to negotiate peacefully
and compromise.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): Let me start by saying
that resorting to the International Court of Justice is
never a threat. These are international law mechanisms,
civilized mechanisms, peaceful mechanisms. We have
heard delegation after delegation calling on States
whenever they were confronted with situations to resort
to these peaceful means rather than to other means.
Therefore, when we speak of the International Court of
Justice, it is not a bargaining chip or a threat; it is the
way to try to advance international law. I think all of us
can agree that that is the best way to peacefully settle
any dispute.
The second element I want to raise is that there
is an unacceptable reality on the ground. We just had
the announcement of major Israeli settlements that
everybody in this Hall has condemned and considered
illegal, and about which the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice have also been very clear.
It is not just a word that we mention when we speak
of apartheid. It is a reality that is lived by our people,
and that reality has been observed and condemned not
just by those who had an experience of apartheid before
us, but also by Human Rights Watch and B’Tselem and
numerous experts and figures around the world.
We are saying that we aspire to a reality of peace
for everyone. But for everyone to be able to enjoy
peace — the nations in this Hall know it better than
anyone — we need to be free. Asking for our freedom,
asking for our rights, and appealing to international
justice and to the international conscience, is something
that should be commended — not objected to. And in
no way is that a threat, and in no way is that negative
for peace efforts. It is the best way to say how peace
can advance: in mutual respect, in mutual dignity, in
mutual trust, in freedom and peace for all. That is what
we aspire to, and I believe that is what the international
community wishes to see.
21-30948

28/10/2021

A/76/PV.23

If there are other mechanisms that people want
to propose, they can always tell us, but objecting to
the Palestinians using a tool that is available to every
nation before us to achieve their own freedom is not
acceptable. People in this Hall have freed themselves
and they know how they have done it, including
some of those objecting today to what we are doing.
That is why we believe that the peaceful way we are
preaching — and the freedom and peace for all that
we are preaching — is the best future possible for our
region and all of its peoples.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 76?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting on 17 September 2021, the General
Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a) of agenda item
25 to the Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to
take action expeditiously on the document, may I take
it that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (a) of
agenda item 25 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 76/506).
Agenda item 25
Operational activities for development
(a) Operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/76/L.4)
The President: The Assembly will take action
on draft resolution A/76/L.4 entitled “Review of the
functioning of the reinvigorated resident coordinator
system, including its funding arrangement”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/76/L.4?
Draft resolution
(resolution 76/4).

A/76/L.4

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind

delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mimouni (Algeria): Allow me to sincerely
thank all States Members of the United Nations and
Permanent Observer Missions, from the Permanent
Representatives to the committed members of
delegations, that so constructively engaged in our
informal consultations and stood in support of our
approach as co-facilitators. I am heartened by the
support for Ambassador Hermann and myself in this
process, which has brought us to this Assembly Hall
today to adopt resolution 76/4 on the review of the
reinvigorated resident coordinator (RC) system. I
would also like to express my deep appreciation to
the President of the General Assembly, the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Secretary-General for their
support and constructive commitment during this
important process.
A little less than three and a half years ago, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 72/279 by consensus (see
A/72/PV.91). It was a landmark resolution that ushered
in a new era for the United Nations development system
by switching on the lights of a new resident coordinator
system and increasing the emphasis on the importance
of development coordination. It had a simple and clear
purpose: to better position the United Nation to deliver
on the Sustainable Development Goals.
Over the course of the last five months, Member
States have clearly demonstrated their commitment
to the review process of the reinvigorated resident
coordinator system. While Member States may have
had different priorities that we would have liked to see
reflected in the outcome of the review, I was grateful
to note a continuous shared sense of importance to use
the review to solidify and consolidate the reforms even
more forcefully based on the challenges encountered.
In this regard, it sent an important signal from
Member States that we collectively agreed to respect
the mandates as established in resolutions 72/279 and
75/233 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review.
It underscores our collective commitment to seeing the
mandates and guidance established in these resolutions
taken forward and implemented by the United Nations
development system. I believe that resolution 76/4 builds
upon these resolutions by, inter alia, clearly recognizing
the critical enabling role played by the RC system in
facilitating rapid, coherent and effective responses by

21-3094821/30

A/76/PV.23

the United Nations development system. This will be
ever more important in the years ahead, as we will
need to accelerate our collective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in pursuit of
building back better in the decade of action.
With the permission of the President of the General
Assembly, I would like to have Ambassador Hermann
of Denmark, with whom I co-facilitated the informal
consultations on the resolution, take the floor after
me, and I would seize this opportunity to express my
warmest gratitude to him and his team for the excellent
and constructive cooperation during the past month.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I wish to thank
Ambassador Mimouni and say that I fully share his
view of our cooperation. I want to extend my most
sincere thanks to him and his team for their excellent
and productive collaboration under sometimes
challenging circumstances. Indeed, I want to take this
opportunity to extend a special thanks to Ambassador
Sofiane Mimouni, not only for our cooperation on
consultations leading to the adoption of resolution 76/4,
but also for our friendship over the past years. As many
in the Hall today will know, Mr. Mimouni is moving
on to new challenges, and I wanted to put on record my
deep appreciation for his friendship and his guidance
and his service to the United Nations over the past year.
I therefore ask the Assembly to join me in a round of
applause for Ambassador Sofiane Mimouni.
Please allow me to reiterate my profound gratitude
to all the members of the General Assembly for their
active engagement and constructive spirit during our
recent consultations, as well as to the President of
the Assembly, the Secretary-General and the Deputy
Secretary-General, along with their respective teams.
This has been a unique opportunity to take stock of
how far we have come with the reinvigorated resident
coordinator (RC) system at the centre of a repositioned
United Nations development system. I believe that all
delegations rose to the occasion.
My fellow co-facilitator just highlighted one
important message from resolution 76/4: that Member
States continue to stand behind the repositioned United
Nations development system and the reinvigorated RC
system. In addition, the resolution gives clear guidance
to the system as a whole, where further efforts will be
needed in the years ahead for consolidation of a more
coherent system.
22/30

28/10/2021

At the same time, we also need to look inward and
collectively recognize that Member States could not
arrive at a common understanding to fundamentally
change the funding model in place for the RC system,
which would, by default, introduce greater predictability
and sustainability in the parameters for the funding of
the RC system. While the RC system re-emphasizes that
we, the States Members of the United Nations, believe
that the system should be supported by adequate,
predictable and sustainable funding, it will continue
to fundamentally require the political will of Member
States for these aspirations to become a reality.
As we now move from adoption to implementation
of resolution 76/4, let us therefore support each other in
keeping this commitment. Let us demonstrate that we
are ready to walk the talk in the years ahead, that we
will indeed act in this decade of action. Let us show to
our colleagues in the United Nations who are working
tirelessly in the field to advance the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
that we are committed to making the funding model
work and to delivering the funding required for the
benefit of those we all aim to serve — the people in the
field — and to advance the 2030 Agenda and achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals. Let us join forces
in turning ambitions into realities.
Mr. Diallo (Guinea): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
At the outset, let me commend the co-facilitators,
Ambassador Mimouni of Algeria and Ambassador
Hermann of Denmark, and their teams, for their
hard work and for diligently guiding us through the
consultations process to a successful conclusion, as
the path to consensus was extremely difficult, but not
impossible, despite the number of divergent views.
The Group of 77 and China strongly recommits to
the repositioned United Nations development system
and its reinvigorated resident coordination (RC) system,
as established with the guidance of the SecretaryGeneral. As programme countries, the members of
the Group count, in various degrees, on the support
of the United Nations development system and its
entities as we strive to follow our national development
priorities and needs and to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals and other development
frameworks and goals.
21-30948

28/10/2021

Although disappointed that the General Assembly
was not able to move the funding of the RC system to
a more stable and predictable foundation, the Group
of 77 and China is pleased that the funding proposal
set out in resolution 76/4 at least does not weaken the
current funding of the system. We are convinced that
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding of the
resident coordinator system is essential to delivering
a coherent, effective, efficient and accountable
response, as our overarching goal, in accordance with
national needs and priorities and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We note with appreciation
the efforts made by the co-facilitators to improve the
collection of the levy, and we call on all entities of
the United Nations development system to continue
contributing to the funding of the system through the
cost-sharing arrangement.
The Group of 77 and China remains gravely
concern about the state of the funding of the RC
system, particularly with regard to the financial
shortfalls observed in the budget since the start of
its functioning. That is one of the reasons why we
were open to discussing the possibility of partially
funding the system through a hybrid model with a
share coming from assessed contributions. We thank
the co-facilitators and the membership as a whole for
understanding our call for resolution 76/4 to include a
clear revision mechanism that would allow for the issue
of the funding of the RC system to be reassessed should
such shortfalls persist.
The resident coordinators and their teams are
central pieces of the United Nations development
system’s repositioning and key to a stronger, focused
delivery on the ground in the decade of action and for
a sustainable inclusive recovery from the coronavirus
disease pandemic. In that regard, we call on traditional
donors to step up and provide the needed voluntary
contributions in line with the Secretary-General’s
proposal and what is outlined in the resolution we
adopted today.
Once again, the Group of 77 and China would like
to reaffirm the strong political support that we attach to
the new resident coordinator system, and we recall the
importance of the resident coordinators remaining in
constant dialogue with and consulting frequently with
the host Governments as they deliver on their mandate,
in line with the concepts of national leadership and
ownership. It is high time we move ahead and give the
necessary tools to the resident coordinators and to the

A/76/PV.23

United Nations country teams so they can implement
the mandates of the 2020 quadrennial comprehensive
policy review and help countries move towards
achieving their development goals.
The Group of 77 and China congratulates the
co-facilitators and the Member States for the successful
conclusion of the informal consultation process, and
we, as always, will remain engaged with them and our
development partners. And through the President of the
General Assembly, we wish to convey our continued
thanks and appreciation to the Secretary-General
and the Deputy Secretary-General for their work in
ensuring that the United Nations development system
is fit for purpose, and we wish to assure them of the
Group’s continued support in this regard.
We offer a final word to convey our very best wishes
to Ambassador Mimouni in all his future endeavours,
as he successfully concludes his tenure as Permanent
Representative of Algeria to the United Nations.
Ms. Micael (Eritrea): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of African
States in explanation of position after the adoption of
resolution 76/4 on the resident coordinator (RC) system
review. I align these remarks with the statement made
by the representative of Guinea on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
At the outset, the African Group would like
to reiterate its thanks and appreciation to the
co-facilitators of the informal consultation process, the
representatives of Algeria and Denmark, for their efforts
in undertaking this intergovernmental consultation
process. The African Group would also like to reiterate
its appreciation to the Secretary-General and the
Deputy Secretary-General for their briefings and for
participating in the plenary informal consultations in a
transparent and interactive manner.
The African Group is pleased to join consensus
in the adoption of resolution 76/4 on the review of
the resident coordinator system and appreciates
the efforts undertaken by the co-facilitators and all
delegations towards achieving that result. However, the
Group would like to place on the record the following
important points.
The African Group reiterates its strong support
for the United Nations development system’s
repositioning and expresses satisfaction with the
support provided by the resident coordinators across

21-3094823/30

A/76/PV.23

Africa to national Governments in implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals in the context of the
decade of action, but also in the coronavirus disease
response and recovery. In this regard, we appreciate the
acknowledgment in the resolution of the role and the
value addition of the RC system, as supported by the
United Nations Development Coordination Office and
resident coordinator offices in programme countries.
As we have stated on many occasions, it is crucial
for us to ensure a sustainable and predictable funding
model for the RC system. Africa is the greatest
beneficiary of the RC system. Africa is also the most
in need of it, given the challenges it faces and the
size of the United Nations programme activities on
the continent. We therefore express our firm support
and strong attachment to preserving and maintaining
these additional United Nations capacities and ensuring
predictable funding in the years ahead in order to support
country programmes and respond to African countries’
national needs and priorities. While we welcome the
consensus-based adoption of resolution 76/4 and the
efforts made towards inclusion, the African Group
would have appreciated more ambitious language on the
funding model of the resident coordinator system. We
also thank the co-facilitators for including paragraph 8,
which secures the continuity of discussions on the RC
funding model, should the current model not meet the
needed resources for the full functioning of the system.
The African Group continues to firmly believe
that the funding model for the RC system, as suggested
by the Secretary-General, through the fully assessed
option or the hybrid 2.0, is the best and most appropriate
model for ensuring much-needed sustainability and
predictability. We trust that the strong and renewed
commitment by all donors to providing adequate
voluntary contributions, equivalent to or above their
relative share, as stated in paragraph 7 of the resolution,
will help to ensure the system’s adequate funding and
clear provisions to protect the current capacities set up
across developing countries in the RC system.
Lastly, the African Group strongly believes that
the discussion on the funding model should continue
in the future. We look forward to working together and
supporting the United Nations development system in
delivering on the ground and avoiding any funding
shortages that could constrain the proper functioning
of resident coordinator offices in Africa and other
developing countries.
24/30

28/10/2021

Mr. Fepuleai (New Zealand): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Australia, Canada
and my own country, New Zealand (CANZ).
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
co-facilitators, Ambassadors Mimouni and Hermann,
the Permanent Representatives of Algeria and
Denmark, and their teams on the successful conclusion
of this process.
The CANZ countries would like to reaffirm our
full support for the reinvigorated resident coordinator
system. We were pleased to see that support echoed in
resolution 76/4. The resolution outlines Member States’
expectation that United Nations development system
entities will continue to engage with and support the
resident coordinators in exercising their functions. As
we look towards recovery from the coronavirus disease
pandemic, it is more important than ever that the
United Nations present a cohesive and united front. It
must engage effectively with programme countries and
partners, including international financial institutions,
as well as internally.
As CANZ has stated since the beginning of the
discussions on the reinvigorated resident coordinator
system, access to predictable funding is crucial. We
recognize that the current system has not delivered
on its funding targets. Throughout those negotiations
CANZ has expressed its willingness to consider
alternative methods to deliver adequate, predictable
and sustainable funding. While we acknowledge that
the model before us now was the best path to consensus,
we reiterate the call to all Member States to provide
voluntary contributions to ensure the smooth and
effective functioning of the system. Adequate funding
is essential to recovery and to achieving the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. De La Maisonneuve (European Union): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. We would like
to thank the co-facilitators, Ambassadors Mimouni and
Hermann, as well as their teams, for their commitment
to this process and their tireless work and efforts to
accommodate our different views and positions, while
guiding us through a long consultative process with
resilience, perseverance and determination. We would
also like to recognize and thank all delegations for their
21-30948

28/10/2021

commitment to the process and for their engagement
and continued support to reform of the United Nations
development system. Reform is the only way forward to
an effective and efficient United Nations system to get
back on track to reaching the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), and to address the huge challenges faced
by the international community as a whole.
The resident coordinator system passed its first
stress test in the coronavirus disease pandemic and really
proved its added value. We see that same determination
of the United Nations system in other crises, such as
climate change, or in the joint support for the people of
Afghanistan. More joint action, not less, of the United
Nations development system, under the impartial and
neutral leadership of resident coordinators, is crucial
to reaching those goals and therefore for the United
Nations system to keep its relevance.
Collectively, we came to the conclusion that the
only way forward was to stick to the existing funding
model of the resident coordinator system for the time
being. Some among the membership, including in the
European Union, hoped to find consensus on a more
creative solution with an adjusted funding model.
However, we hope that the United Nations membership
can keep its political promise to the United Nations
development system reform agenda and ensure that the
resident coordinator system receives predictable and
sustainable funding, even with a formula that continues
to rely heavily on voluntary contributions. That is
crucial in order to guide the United Nations country
teams towards a system that delivers more effective
and efficient support to Member States in reaching
the SDGs.
We would also like to urge all the States Members of
the United Nations to share the burden of financing the
system. It serves all of us by delivering a more effective
and efficient United Nations on the ground. It is the
task of all of us to provide predictable and sustainable
resources to the resident coordinator system, even if on
a voluntary basis. All Member States should live up to
their own expectations and provide funding based on a
fair or relative share. We stand ready to engage again in
the future on such matters.
Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): The
United States joins the consensus on resolution 76/4.
We would like to express our sincere thanks to the
co-facilitators, Ambassadors Mimouni and Hermann,
for their tireless work in helping Member States find

A/76/PV.23

agreement on this important but also contentious
resolution. The United States remains committed to
supporting the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Member States to make the resident coordinator (RC)
system fit for purpose and help United Nations country
team agencies deliver greater and more coherent
development results to assist countries in fulfilling the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Since the launch of the new RC system in 2019, the
United States has contributed $23 million per year to
the Special Purpose Trust Fund for the system, totalling
$69 million to date. We are the top financial contributor.
As with many donors that have contributed to the RC
system and the United Nations development system as a
whole, we expect accountability from the system on the
use of public funding. In that regard, we welcome the
resolution’s call for the Deputy Secretary-General, as
Chair of the United Nations Development Coordination
Office, to report to Member States on resident
coordinator performance, using a results framework
with multi-year indicators. We also welcome the call
for the Secretary-General to provide additional and
necessary information to Member States to ensure the
independence of the system-wide evaluation office. We
urge the Secretary-General and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral to respond to those calls as top priorities in
their implementation of this resolution.
While the United States supports sustainable and
predictable funding for the RC system, we regret the
fact that during the negotiation process, some sought
to focus on the system’s funding model in a way that
excluded meaningful discussion on the critical issues of
accountability and results of the resident coordinators
and the RC system. We felt that it was premature
to discuss changing the current funding model,
especially in an environment lacking in transparent
and independent information and analysis of the
RC system’s budgeting and expenditure processes,
including efficiency gains and cost savings, as well as
RC performance, results and accountability.
We firmly believe that RC system funding should
be linked to performance and results. A productive
funding arrangement is one that empowers resident
coordinators to carry out their work effectively and
impartially, and incentivizes them to achieve the
development results that Member States envision
for the RC system, including upholding the values
and principles of the United Nations. Such a funding
arrangement should also generate an account for the

21-3094825/30

A/76/PV.23

reform-related efficiency gains the Secretary-General
envisioned at the outset, such as through common
back-office functions and shared premises. To better
understand the needs of the system, the system should
report on how the resources made available through
efficiency gains are being utilized. As the RC system
made the generation of those savings possible, their use
to fund resident coordinator systems operations is a
logical conclusion.
Moving forward, the United States will continue
to engage with Member States and the Secretariat to
implement resolution 76/4 to ensure that the RC system
is fit for purpose, with the appropriate accountability
mechanisms for performance and results, and that its
budget and funding provide the right transparency,
accountability and incentives for the continued reform
of the system.
Ms. Moe (Norway): We would like to express our
appreciation to the co-facilitators and their teams for
bringing the resident coordinator (RC) review to a
conclusion. We are pleased to join the consensus today
and we are grateful for the co-facilitators’ hard work.
Norway’s overarching aim with regard to the
review has been to ensure sufficient predictable and
sustainable funding for the resident coordinator system.
We are disappointed that we were not able to agree
on a new funding model with assessed contributions
as one of the funding streams. We believe that along
with the continuation of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Group cost-sharing arrangement,
this would have been the best way to improve the
predictability and sustainability of the funding. As we
move forward with the current funding model, we hope
that Member States do their utmost to mobilize more
funds for the RC system. The success of the reforms
depends on it.
With regard to voluntary contributions, Norway
will continue to do its part and we hope that Member
States generally will also shoulder their responsibility.
Multi-year commitments for voluntary contributions
are an important way to enhance predictability, but
unfortunately, resolution 76/4 does not contain a
request to provide multi-year commitments. The 1 per
cent levy on strictly earmarked contributions remains
an important funding stream for the RC system. We see
a need for the Secretariat, in consultation with Member
States, to update the operational guidance. With that,
26/30

28/10/2021

we would like to end by expressing Norway’s continued
strong support for the resident coordinator system.
Ms. Shmat (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of Belarus joined the consensus in adopting
resolution 76/4, entitled “Review of the functioning of
the reinvigorated resident coordinator system, including
its funding arrangement”. I would like to thank the
coordinators of the negotiation process for their work
in seeking the consensus that resulted in the adoption of
this important resolution. We support ongoing efforts
to further develop and adapt the resident coordinator
system in its response to the needs of programme
countries. We focus particularly on the importance of
ensuring that the resident coordinator system is fully
aligned with such fundamental values as independence
and impartiality.
With respect to the funding mechanism, we support
the position affirmed in paragraph 7 of the resolution
on the entirely voluntary nature of funding for
Member States. However, it is vital to be aware of the
impermissibility of increasing the financial burden on
developing countries. We also note that to date the legal
aspects related to the presence of resident coordinators
in their countries of accreditation with regard to their
privileges and status have not been fully resolved. We
urge the Secretariat to get started on the work of creating
frameworks for the presence of resident coordinators
in host countries. We believe that for improved
functioning in the future, active cooperation with
host Governments, greater accountability for resident
coordinators and reduced bureaucracy would improve
the current United Nations system on the ground.
Mr. Varli (Turkey): Allow me to express our
deep appreciation to the Permanent Representatives
of Algeria and Denmark and their teams for their
professionalism and constructive approach throughout
the consultations on the resident coordinator (RC)
system review, including its funding arrangements.
We are glad that we have reached a consensus
on resolution 76/4 and look forward to its timely and
effective implementation. Turkey has supported reform
of the United Nations development system, including
the reinvigorated resident coordinator system. As a
donor and a programme country, we are ready to support
the work of the Secretary-General to ensure that all
resident coordinators are well prepared and equipped
to operate effectively on the ground in accordance with
their mandates.
21-30948

28/10/2021

Efficiency, transparency and accountability should
remain the underlying principles of the reform of
the United Nations development system. In line with
the strong call of resolution 75/233, we encourage
the United Nations development system to work on
innovative funding models to contribute to the adequate,
sustainable and predictable funding of the United
Nations development system and improve partnerships
with the private sector and other stakeholders, including
development banks.
We will continue to work with the United Nations
development system for a more efficient, transparent
and accountable RC system on the ground, in line with
resolutions 71/243, 72/279 and 75/233.
Mr. Kimura (Japan): Japan welcomes the consensus
on the adoption of resolution 76/4. First of all, I would
like to express my deep gratitude to the co-facilitators,
Ambassadors Mimouni and Hermann, for guiding the
Member States through this process, and to all Member
States for their positive engagement and constructive
spirit throughout.
Japan is a strong supporter of reform of the United
Nations development system aimed at enhancing the
efficiency, effectiveness, coherence and accountability
of the United Nations development system, so that
it can better support the efforts of the developing
countries to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. With that in mind, my delegation
stressed three points throughout the negotiations on the
draft resolution.
First, a fundamental characteristic of United Nations
operational activities for development has always been
their voluntary nature and the ability to respond to the
needs of developing countries in a flexible manner. The
respective capacities and configuration of the resident
coordinator (RC) offices and, this year, regional offices,
must be carefully designed, based on the real needs on
the ground, in a country- or region-specific manner.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution, such as allocating
the same set of staff in each country.
Secondly, the discussion on the reform of the
RC system must be transparent and evidence-based
in order to ensure full accountability of the system’s
full accountability. The system budget of $281 million
must be scrutinized through a needs-based approach.
The development resources required for coordination
should be commensurate with the size of the overall
operational activities conducted by the United Nations

A/76/PV.23

country team in each individual country. The effective
use of existing resources within each country team
could be further explored, including by making the
assets or experts of one agency available to an entire
United Nations country team, which would also nurture
the One United Nations mindset among its members.
Thirdly, we stress the importance of thoroughly
reviewing whether all possible measures under
resolution 72/279 have been sought out and tested to
close the funding gap, if any, before considering any
changes to the current funding model. In that regard, we
welcome paragraph 10 of resolution 76/4, which requires
the system to improve the reporting of efficiency gains.
We look forward to seeing a more thorough assessment
of efficiency gains across the system so that they can be
redeployed to increase the output of the entire system,
including strengthening coordination.
The proper functioning of the reinvigorated
resident coordinator system should be measured by the
results delivered in each country and, ultimately, to
the people in need. In that context, we request that the
Chair of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Group consult with Member States in the process of
developing the results framework with multi-annual
performance-indicated targets for the resident
coordinator system, including its funding model,
as mentioned in paragraph 9 of the resolution before
its finalization.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize that coordination
is not an objective in itself. At the end of the day, a
country can achieve development results only with
national ownership. Let us not forget that United
Nations country teams, including resident coordinator
offices, are there to support each country. As one of the
major contributors to and supporters of United Nations
development and humanitarian agencies, Japan will
continue to actively engage in future discussions on
reform of the United Nations development system.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Guinea on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
We thank the Permanent Representatives of Algeria
and Denmark for their unstinting efforts in preparing
the text on the review of the resident coordinator (RC)
system, which enjoys broad agreement. We support the
General Assembly’s adoption of today’s resolution by
consensus (resolution 76/4).

21-3094827/30

A/76/PV.23

The ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic has
created unprecedented challenges in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The international community has high hopes that the
United Nations development system, especially the
resident coordinator system, can play an effective role
in helping countries cope with crises and overcome
difficulties. China has always supported SecretaryGeneral Guterres’s efforts to promote reform of the
development system. We hope that the United Nations
will take advantage of the review process to encourage
resident coordinators and United Nations country teams
to attend fully to the aspirations of the Governments
and people of the host countries, help countries build
capacity, achieve inclusive, sustainable and resilient
recovery and fully implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
First, development should remain at the core of the
agenda, and the eradication of poverty continues to be
our primary task. We should effectively mobilize and
increase development resources and help developing
countries implement the Sustainable Development
Goals, including those related to poverty reduction,
infrastructure development, education, health and
climate action so as to effectively improve people’s
well-being.
Secondly, we must uphold a Member State-driven
approach. Resident coordinators should enhance
their communication and cooperation with their host
Governments to ensure that their work aligns with the
specific national conditions and development strategies
of each country, and should also report on their work
and seek guidance in a timely manner. Host countries’
assessments of their resident coordinators and their
accountability should be further strengthened, and hostcountry satisfaction should be an important criterion for
measuring the performance of resident coordinators.
Thirdly, we should increase the representation of
developing countries in the RC system and improve
geographical balance in order to enable the United
Nations development system to be better informed of
the needs of developing countries and provide more
targeted assistance.
Fourthly, funding for the RC system should
follow the principle of common yet differentiated
responsibilities. Developed countries should fulfil
their official development assistance commitments and
increase their financial support, especially voluntary
28/30

28/10/2021

contributions. At the same time, the Secretariat should
communicate with Member States in a timely manner
on the RC system’s budget performance, efficiency
gains and personnel arrangements, among other things,
in order to improve the efficiency of the system.
China will continue to work with all Member States
to consolidate the gains of United Nations development
system reform, assess progress against the General
Assembly’s mandate, identify gaps and possible areas
for improvement and turn the resident coordinator
system into a strong platform that supports developing
countries in achieving development, post-pandemic
recovery and the 2030 Agenda.
Ms. Elsaeed (Egypt): My delegation aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the representatives of
Guinea, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and
Eritrea, on behalf of the Group of African States. We
would like to add the following remarks.
We wish to express our appreciation to the
co-facilitators and their teams for their hard work
and valued efforts to reach consensus throughout the
intergovernmental consultations process. We reiterate
our recognition of the essential role played by resident
coordinators (RCs) in developing countries, including
Egypt, and reaffirm our commitment to continuing
to support and reinforce the reform efforts of the RC
system and the United Nations development system
in general.
We are pleased to join the consensus on the adoption
of resolution 76/4, on the review of the functioning of
the reinvigorated resident coordinator system, and we
welcome the efforts made by all the parties involved to
bring the process to an agreed conclusion. We welcome
the inclusion of a revision mechanism to enable the
current funding model to be reassessed should it prove
inadequate to the proper functioning of the resident
coordinator system. We consider it particularly vital
to guarantee uninterrupted RC activities in developing
countries by ensuring adequate, predictable and
sustainable funding.
Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for their valued efforts throughout the process of
repositioning the United Nations development system.
Ms. Barahona Figueroa (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation associates itself with the
21-30948

28/10/2021

statement delivered by the representative of Guinea on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
We thank the co-facilitators, Mr. Mimouni and
Mr. Hermann, the Permanent Representatives of
Algeria and Denmark, for introducing resolution 76/4.
El Salvador reiterates the importance of
strengthening and revitalizing the resident coordinator
system in line with resolution 72/279 in order to ensure
the continuity of plans and programmes with a major
impact at all levels, especially locally. We therefore
reaffirm the valuable work of United Nations country
teams under the leadership of resident coordinators.
They provide important support in the coordination of
humanitarian assistance, especially in the face of the
global health emergency caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its socioeconomic
consequences, thereby demonstrating the achievements
of the repositioned United Nations development system
and its operational activities.
In that connection, we recognize that the resident
coordinator system is essential to driving our recovery
from the COVID-19 pandemic and to continuing
work with countries to advance the eradication of
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, minimize
the consequences of climate change and mitigate the
risk of natural disasters. We must promote strategic
lines of action that contribute to accelerating the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the pillars of sustainable development
without undermining the gains made, and continue our
joint efforts throughout the Decade of Action.
In that regard, I am pleased to highlight the recent
commitment made between El Salvador and the United
Nations, through the signing of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,
to a road map outlining the work we need to do in
coordination with the United Nations system. That
guiding document was developed in line with the
2030 Agenda and constitutes the first step towards
consolidating a renewed resident coordinator system at
the national level.
El Salvador therefore reaffirms that adequate,
predictable and sustainable funding is essential to
ensuring that the resident coordinator system fulfils its
responsibilities in an effective, efficient and coherent
manner. We call on donor countries to increase their
contributions, and their core contributions in particular,
in order to increase the diversity of actions on

A/76/PV.23

the ground. That support is essential in order to promote
the implementation of the priorities identified by
individual countries, especially in the uncertain context
of the pandemic and other disasters or unpredictable
situations. In that connection, we highlight the call
of the Secretary-General for an increase in core
contributions to United Nations development system
entities to at least 30 per cent of total contributions.
We also note the importance of ensuring the additional
1 per cent coordination-services charge applicable to
non-core contributions made to third parties for tightly
earmarked contributions. And we emphasize our
concern about the state of financing for the resident
coordinator system and the growing shortfall in its
budget, which is why it is imperative to partially fund
the system through a hybrid contribution model.
On the other hand, we appreciate the openness
to promoting tools to ensure transparency and
accountability — especially in cases where the
revitalized resident coordinator system is unable to
function properly through adequate, predictable and
sustainable funding — in the proposals made in the
report of the Secretary-General entitled “Review of the
functioning of the resident coordinator system: rising
to the challenge and keeping the promise of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development” (A/75/905),
which contribute to further improving that aspect.
El Salvador affirms the relevance of the resident
coordinator system in accelerating better recovery
from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as its
important contributions to the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals at the local, national
and global levels.
Mr. Ustinov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the co-facilitators for
leading the negotiations on resolution 76/4. We believe
that retaining the existing funding model was the only
option that could possibly be agreed on. We are happy to
note that delegations reached a consensus in that regard.
At the same time, I would like to reiterate Russia’s
position regarding the fact that overall expenses on the
resident coordination system — $280 million — have
not yet been justified. The accountability of the system
should be improved significantly, and Member States
should be provided with suggestions regarding ways of
reducing the requested amounts. So far, we have not
received any.

21-3094829/30

A/76/PV.23

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
Mr. Sofiane Mimouni, Permanent Representative of
Algeria, and Mr. Martin Bille Hermann, Permanent
Representative of Denmark, who very ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations in

30/30

28/10/2021

the informal consultations on resolution 76/4. I am sure
that all of us here join me in extending to them our
sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 25.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

21-30948
