S/PV.7481

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7481st meeting

Wednesday, 8 July 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Bohemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-21061 (E)
*1521061*

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Al Hussein,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson.
The Deputy Secretary-General: One of the
greatest missions of the United Nations is the
prevention of genocide. The horrors of the past and the
dangers of the present remind us of the importance of
that mission. The genocide at Srebrenica was one of the
darkest chapters in recent history. In three days, family
and community members, faith leaders, dignitaries and
representatives from around the world will gather in
Srebrenica to honour the victims. I will travel there to
represent the United Nations on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral.
Today, we meet here in New York to pay our respects
to all victims and to share in the grief of the affected
families and communities. We gather in humility and
regret to recognize the failure of the United Nations and
the international community to prevent such tragedies.
But we also meet to proclaim our determination that
the lessons learned from those unspeakable days in July
1995 must help us detect the dangers earlier. We must
build an Organization that is better equipped to keep
such crimes and atrocities from reoccurring.
The United Nations has acknowledged its
responsibility for failing to protect the people
who sought shelter and relief in Srebrenica. The
15 November 1999 Secretary-General’s report to the
General Assembly on the fall of Srebrenica (A/54/549)
identified the mistakes committed by the Organization
and by the wider international community. That same
year, the independent inquiry into the actions of the
2/23

08/07/2015

United Nations during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda
found similar deficiencies. We have since then worked
in many ways to implement the recommendations of
the reports. Prevention has become an imperative. A
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide has been
appointed. International criminal tribunals have brought
perpetrators of heinous crimes to justice. The 2005
General Assembly endorsement of the responsibility to
protect made the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity a core
State and international responsibility.
Peacekeepers are now regularly provided with
robust mandates to protect civilians. They are often
authorized to use all necessary means in defence of
populations. But peacekeepers continue to face many
of the same challenges that plagued the United Nations
in Srebrenica, not least paralysing divisions among
Member States and a lack of political and material
support. The Human Rights Up Front initiative is
generating structural changes inside the Organization,
which aim to improve our efforts to take early preventive
action. The Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect have developed a framework of analysis
for atrocity crimes, a useful tool to assess risks and
develop prevention strategies. The United Nations and
its Member States and regional organizations have
an obligation to strengthen our collective prevention
efforts and to find peaceful solutions in the spirit of
Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The Security Council has a central role to play. We
see today how situations can deteriorate and get out
of control when the Council is divided. The carnage
in Syria has undoubtedly taken a toll on the reputation
and standing of the Council and the United Nations.
Atrocious crimes are today also taking place in Iraq,
South Sudan and elsewhere. Extremist groups like
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab are seemingly competing in brutality
with the aim of spreading fear and division among
populations. As the Charter and as morality direct us,
we must unite our strength against such atrocious acts
and threats. When we are running out of words in our
outrage, we have to take action and live up to basic
values and principles.
All of us share the same objective — to work
towards a world that has finally learned the horrific
lessons of the past and where people can live in peace

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7481

and dignity, as is their right and aspiration. The world
looks to us at the United Nations and to the Security
Council and expects us to uphold that right and to meet
those aspirations. That is our shared responsibility
today. And it is how we can best pay homage to the
victims of Srebrenica.

authority to take the necessary measures, including
use of force, such as NATO air power, in reply to
bombardments against the six safe areas. That stick was
used successfully in February 1994 when the United
Nations used the threat of NATO air power to oblige the
Serbs to cease their pounding of Sarajevo.

The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.

Yet that stick was then dropped by UNPROFOR
during the Goražde crisis in April 1994, when the
Secretary-General, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the UNPROFOR Commander in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, General Sir Hugh Michael Rose, were not
eager to use the threat of force and settled only for close
air support, a limited action solely in defence of the
United Nations. They were concerned by the apparent
contradiction of having Blue Helmet troops take sides
in a conflict, yet by not taking sides when the conflict
was so obviously one-sided, with an aggressor and a
clear victim, the United Nations appeared to many to be
doing just that — siding with the aggressor.

I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.
Mr. Al Hussein: The sounds of mass murder and
war are not the howling of machine guns or popping
of side arms. The real sounds of an act of genocide, the
sounds of Srebrenica that I heard years ago were the
dull, low moaning of 10,000 and more living victims
of genocide — all the mothers, sisters and daughters of
the murdered 8,000 boys and men. How could we, all
of us, in the United Nations at the time have been so
foolish as not to anticipate their murder? How could we
have made so many mistakes? Still today we have not
properly understood them, nor have we even taken the
right corrective measures to avoid their repetition.
One week ago, The Hague Institute for Global
Justice and the United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum organized a discussion that brought together,
for the first time, many of the key officials connected
to the events 20 years ago in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially Srebrenica. Our task was to piece together in
detail what happened from the formation of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 1992 to the fall of Srebrenica and the
mass murder that ensued, with the help of recently
declassified documents, as well as materials from the
relevant trials at the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Allow me to briefly narrate some
of the key events.
Early in 1993, the Bosnian Deputy Prime Minister
Hakija Turajlić was shot and killed by Bosnian Serb
soldiers at a checkpoint outside Sarajevo, while riding
in a United Nations armoured personnel carrier. The
United Nations watched the killing haplessly. In one
sudden bloody stroke, it lost the respect of both sides to
the conflict. When General Morillon placed Srebrenica
under the protection of the United Nations two months
later, it restored some credibility to the Force, but it
also showed UNPROFOR to be operating in its own
orbit, unguided by New York. Resolution 836 (1993)
subsequently gave UNPROFOR that guidance, and
some leverage too, by providing a stick — that is, the

The hesitation of the United Nations to use NATO
air power meant the Bosnian Serb leadership could push
on an open door. Whenever, in 1994, UNPROFOR came
under attack in one of the six designated safe areas and
requested closer support from NATO, leading to what
was described as “pinprick attacks”, the Bosnian Serb
leadership took United Nations personnel hostage. This
caused even more vacillation in the United Nations,
prompting the Bosnian Serb leadership to exert even
greater levels of pressure. The United Nations simply
became reactive, especially after the collapse of the
Vance-Owen plan in 1993.
Only on 24 and 25 May 1995 did this change.
Following the withdrawal of heavy weapons from
the United Nations weapons collection sites around
Sarajevo, a new UNPROFOR Commander, more
disposed to the use of air power, warned both sides to
return their weapons. The Bosnian Serbs were slow to
comply and air strikes, as opposed to close air support,
were ordered. The next day, the Bosnian Serbs bombed
Tuzla, leading to a second set of NATO air strikes on
Bosnian Serb targets. This prompted, in turn, the taking
of some 400 United Nations peacekeepers hostage.
Soon after, the United States, together with the United
Kingdom and France, decided to suspend the use of air
strikes. The stage was set for Srebrenica.
Earlier, on 8 March, Radovan Karadžić had
approved his Directive 7, ordering the Bosnian Serb
Army to squeeze the eastern enclaves, including

15-210613/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Srebrenica, to “create an unbearable situation... with no
hope of survival or life for the inhabitants of Srebrenica
and Zepa”. Together with this pause in the use of air
strikes coming into being in the first days of June, a
door clicked open and the hand of Ratko Mladić swung
towards it.
On 3 June, the Bosnian Serbs attacked Observation
Post Echo on the edge of the Srebrenica safe area, found
little resistance and took over the post. It was the litmus
test for what was to come. The following day, 4 June,
Ratko Mladić met with the overall United Nations
Commander, Lieutenant General Bernard Janvier, and
came away with the impression that the United Nations
would not use NATO air power so long as the Bosnian
Serbs refrained from threatening United Nations
personnel.
One month later, as the Bosnian Serb army
advanced on Srebrenica from the south-east, there were
two requests for close air support from DutchBat, on
6 and 8 July, respectively. Both of them were denied,
even though resolution 836 (1993) had been clearly
violated. When Mladić saw that there was minimal
resistance, he decided on 9 July to take the town. On
10 July, the Dutch set up a blocking position that, if
overrun, the United Nations warned, would trigger a
NATO response. But when Lieutenant General Janvier
spoke to General Tolimir on the evening of 10 July to
demand that the Bosnian Serb soldiers immediately halt
their firing, Janvier telegraphed, in his choice of words,
his reluctance to use air power.
On 11 July, NATO aircraft were flying over
Srebrenica from 6 a.m., ready to pounce, but there was
no request from Lieutenant General Janvier. Only after
the Bosnian Serbs began to actually overrun the United
Nations blocking position at 11 a.m. did Janvier present
his request to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Akashi, who approved it. But there was a
condition attached to the order — air power could be
used only against the actual weapons system firing on
the United Nations blocking position, so not only was it
all too late, but also too little. The safe area was seized.
On the night of 11 July, Ratko Mladić began the
process of transforming that military victory into a
crime on a scale not seen in Europe since 1945. It was,
apparently, on that night that he took the decision to
execute the 1,000 boys and men gathered in Potocari.
The mass executions began on 13 July. Realizing that
they had been undetected by the United Nations, the

4/23

08/07/2015

killers continued their work until over 8,000 hors de
combat boys and men were dead.
In the years since then, while many of us have been
haunted by these events, there has never been a proper
discussion about them at the United Nations, beyond one
perfunctory debate in the General Assembly in 1999.
The fact that UNPROFOR had a clumsy mandate in the
beginning was abundantly clear, and it was obvious that
two cultures, the United Nations and NATO, operated
together with some confusion. Still, those boys and
men may well have lived had the UNPROFOR Chief of
Staff in Sarajevo actually approved the request for close
air support, or had the United Nations used air strikes
in line with resolution 836 (1993) on 3 June, when the
attack on Observation Post Echo took place; or on
6 July, when the advance against Srebrenica began; or
on 8 July; or if Lieutenant General Janvier had approved
them on 10 July, or early on the morning of 11 July.
And the deeper lessons for the United Nations
are as relevant today as they were 20 years ago. Our
inability to anticipate events, so prevalent then, is still
with us today, as is our recurrent failure to understand
with whom and with what we are dealing. Even after the
events earlier in the war in Ključ, Kotor Varoš, Prijedor
and Sanski Most, none of us believed that Mladić could
be so brazen as to commit genocide when the United
Nations was there in Bosnia and Herzegovina in great
numbers.
We got it wrong — so wrong — although the
people of Srebrenica knew full well who they were
confronted with and what was in store for them. We
simply had not stopped to think about these issues
in sufficient depth. Perhaps we could say the same
thing about the international community’s approach
to the political crisis in July 2013 in Juba, given what
unfolded subsequently in South Sudan. All too often in
UNPROFOR, we lurched almost mindlessly from crisis
to crisis, and still today the United Nations seems to
skate over the surface of many of the conflicts on its
agenda.
Moreover, UNPROFOR feared the Bosnian Serbs.
We in UNPROFOR did not even allow for the possibility
they could also have feared or learned to fear us. We
were often timid, and readily communicated this
impression. The most foundational lesson of Srebrenica
was this — to succeed, the United Nations must be
respected. For the United Nations to be effective in
robust peacekeeping, all parties to a conflict, and in

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7481

particular the aggressor, must take the measure of the
Council, its decisions and the United Nations presence
on the ground. They must believe there will be serious
consequences, and no impunity.

learn, with great remorse. For many of us who served
with the United Nations in the former Yugoslavia,
Srebrenica will remain for many years the heart that
breaks daily.

We also too often crossed the line from needing
to understand the grievances of the oppressors to then
almost showing sympathy with them. And this, to me
was and is exceedingly dangerous. More alarmingly,
we perceived the complexity of the political scene
but then made the mistake of believing that what
was complicated politically must also be complicated
morally. It was not. The fact that all sides committed
crimes was true, but this did not mean that all sides
were equally guilty — not when scale and proportion
were factored in. In the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the moral picture was actually very straightforward for
anyone who wanted to see it.

The President: I thank Mr. Al Hussein for his
briefing.

General Rupert Smith, the single most influential
United Nations Commander, who brought the fighting
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to an end in 1995, today
argues persuasively that Commanders of United
Nations operations must command, and that others must
do the negotiating. If not, when they are faced with an
assault on their mandate or personnel, or on civilians,
the Commanders or the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General will have nothing to offer in
negotiations except the mission itself.
Again, so long as there is no respect for the United
Nations, it is likely that further massacres will be
perpetrated. At the very least, if the United Nations is to
make good on its commitment to protecting civilians, it
must be resolute, undivided and clear about its intention.
Had that been the case with Sri Lanka in 2009 — or
now in the Sudan, Syria, the Central African Republic
or even Burundi and Myanmar — the consequences for
the lives of millions of people would be immense.
I also believe that it is clear from the 1999
Srebrenica report that the safe area concept can work,
but only if implemented properly. I believe it should
be examined very thoroughly for possible application
in some of today’s crises, where the acute suffering of
innocent people reminds us of the thousands of families
weeping, hauntingly, for the men and boys of Srebrenica
whom they would never see again.
Srebrenica was a catastrophe for its inhabitants and
the refugees huddled there on 11 July 1995, and also
for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the
United Nations. It is a trauma from which we could still

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/508, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Jordan, Lithuania, Malaysia,
New Zealand, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are gathered here today to pay tribute to
the memory of all the victims of the monstrous crimes
committed in and around Srebrenica two decades ago.
Before proceeding, Mr. President, I would like to
ask you to call for a minute of silence to honour their
memory.
The President: I note the request of the
representative of the Russian Federation, who asked
that we observe a minute of silence to honour the dead
of Srebrenica.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the course of the Balkan crisis, the
region witnessed a variety of atrocities, including war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
the investigation of all crimes committed during the
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina with respect to all
ethnic groups, including Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats. Do
we need to ask ourselves the question of who suffered
the most? If one looks at overall result of a decade of
conflict the territory the former Yugoslavia — when
hundreds of thousands of Serbs were driven from
their traditional places of residence — it is impossible
to avoid the conclusion that they suffered as much as
others, if not more.
In the region and the world, we have before us a
fundamentally important task, namely, to achieve full
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is why we
support the initiative to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement through

15-210615/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

steps aimed at rallying all peoples of the region in order
to ensure that the Balkans can move together towards
greater stability, security and inter-ethnic peace.
When a delegation from Bosnia and Herzegovina
first approached us about the need to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the tragedy at Srebrenica, we
agreed that it should be done in a solemn manner, given
the special sensitivity of the issue for people living in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region as a whole. We
said that what we needed to do was to emphasize the
positive ground that has been covered and to look to
the future. That is exactly what the delegation of the
United Kingdom was saying at the beginning when it
stated that it was ready to prepare a Security Council
draft resolution. However, the implementation of this
initiative has taken a different direction.
The draft resolution (S/2015/508) submitted by
the United Kingdom turned out to be unhelpful,
confrontational and politically motivated. It contains
distortions as a result of which the blame for the past is
basically placed on one people. The approach whereby
one responsible party is singled out for a war crime is
not legitimate and could result in even greater division
within Bosnian society. From the very beginning, we
tried to ensure that the document was balanced. We
proposed an alternative option based on a forwardlooking approach; however, our statements were
ignored.
In addition, the authors of the draft resolution used
the anniversary of the tragic events at Srebrenica to
introduce certain concepts that have not been agreed at
the international level, including intrusive approaches
to human rights that could lead to interference in the
internal affairs of States.
The British draft resolution immediately aroused an
extremely painful reaction in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and beyond. The diametrically opposed proposals
coming from the various entities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina serve to illustrate that the draft resolution
before us will not promote peace in the Balkans, but
will instead doom the region to tension and make the
prospects for sustainable peace ever more remote. That
reaction is in evidence in the letters addressed to the
members of the Security Council and to the SecretaryGeneral by the Serbian member of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the President of the Republika
Srpska and the President and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia. We also received similar letters.

6/23

08/07/2015

This issue has been the subject of considerable
controversy in Bosnia and Herzegovnia — so much
so that we can even talk about the real threat that it
could undermine the country’s stability, so hard-won
through the implementation of the Dayton Agreement.
In addition, more broadly, we cannot overlook the
attempts to exert political pressure on Banja Luka and
Belgrade.
We are convinced that the role of the Security
Council should be to strengthen the foundations
of international peace and security, rather than
undermining them. Everyone must do his own job.
Let historians analyse the vicissitudes of the conflict
in the former Yugoslavia and its genesis, including the
role of the various countries and alliances that took
hasty decisions. Let experts help the Secretariat and
the international community to understand where our
weaknesses lay. But let us not immerse the Security
Council in historical events, for we already face too
many unresolved issues in the contemporary world.
Let them do their work. Let them give us the necessary
assessments. Let the national and international
tribunals render their verdicts. Justice must prevail.
All perpetrators, regardless of their ethnic or religious
affiliation, must be punished.
Given that there is no consensus on this issue in
Bosnia and Herzegovina itself — as the Council is
aware, neither in the country’s Parliament or among the
members of the Presidency — the Council’s adoption
of this draft resolution in its present form would be
completely counterproductive and lead to greater
tension in the region.
A major commemoration will be held in Srebrenica
on 11 July. It is important to note that the Serbian
leadership will participate in the event, and it would be
wrong for us in the Security Council to prejudge it by
adopting a destructive document or by demonstrating
that the Council’s members are split. We therefore
appeal to the authors of the draft resolution and to you,
Mr. President, not to put the draft resolution to the vote.
Otherwise, we will be forced to vote against it for the
reasons I have set out here.
If it turns out to be inevitable, our negative vote will
not mean that we are indifferent to the suffering of the
relatives of the victims of the tragedy at Srebrenica and
elsewhere in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We ourselves
have been through a lot.

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

In future, we will continue to make the utmost effort
to consistently implement the Dayton Peace Agreement
and effectively contribute to further normalization
of the situation in the Balkan region, including by
promoting reconciliation, ensuring that there is a
genuine collective security system and promoting an
atmosphere of trust and cooperation. We believe that is
something all of us need to aim for.
I would like to reiterate my proposal not to put to
the vote the draft resolution we have before us.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Currently, Security Council members still have grave
concerns about the draft resolution to commemorate
the Srebrenica event (S/2015/508). To force a vote on a
draft resolution on which major differences still remain
is not in conformity with national reconciliation within
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region at large. It
will also affect the unity of the members of the Council.
China believes that the Council members can continue
their exchange of views on the draft resolution, but
should refrain from hasty actions.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The draft resolution
(S/2015/508) before us is a balanced text. We have
worked very hard to make sure that it is so and that it
remembers the past respectfully and sensitively. Let me
be clear: there were victims on all sides. That is clearly
set out in the text. Crimes were committed against all
sides and by all sides. Again, that is clear in the text.
This draft resolution does not accuse the Serb
people; instead, it supports reconciliation. Recognition
of the past is a prerequisite for that. It also calls on the
United Nations and all of us to learn the lessons and act
on the painful lessons from the genocide at Srebrenica.
All Council members know how hard we have
worked to find a consensus on the text. We have been
working on this for over a month. We delayed the vote
from yesterday until today to make that possibility have
best chance of success. We thank all members for their
support and patience while we did that.
Members of the Council will also know that an
unbridgeable gap lies at the heart or our respective
differences. The horrific events at Srebrenica amounted
to a genocide. That is not a verdict that the Security
Council is seeking to establish, but a verdict that is
clearly set out in judgments from the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Court of Justice. To call it anything else
now will hinder, and not help, reconciliation. That is

S/PV.7481

why many voices from the region are calling for us to
proceed and to vote, and thereby honouring the victims
as we do so. For that reason, I think it is vital now that
we proceed to a vote.
The President: The principle sponsor of the draft
resolution has asked that we proceed to a vote. I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chad, Chile, France, Jordan, Lithuania, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain, United Kingdom, United
States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstentions:
Angola, China, Nigeria, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
The President: There were 10 votes in favour, 1
vote against and 4 abstentions. The draft resolution
has not been adopted, owing to the negative vote of a
permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and High
Commissioner for Human Rights Al Hussein for their
powerful briefings.
I was a 24-year-old reporter in July 1995 living
in Sarajevo when the Bosnian Serbs made their move
on Srebrenica. I was there when, a few days after the
Srebrenica safe area fell, a colleague first told me about
reports of mass executions. “No!” was all I could say.
“No!” Even having lived in a war zone and under siege,
and even having seen innumerable atrocities, I could not
bring myself to believe that Bosnian Serb forces would
execute every Muslim man and boy in their custody. For
all of the brutality of a horrific war, that was a singular
horror. It was genocide, a fact now proven again and
again by international tribunals.
When I learned that Russia was planning to veto
the Security Council draft resolution (S/2015/508)
commemorating the genocide in Srebrenica, I confess I
had a similar reaction: “No!” I said. “No!” Why would
Russia vote to deny recognition of the Srebrenica
genocide? Today’s vote mattered. It mattered hugely to

15-210617/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the families of the victims of the Srebrenica genocide.
Russia’s veto is heartbreaking for those families, and it
is a further stain on the Council’s record.
I spent the tenth and the fifteenth anniversaries
of the genocide in Srebrenica — there, in Srebrenica.
In 2005 I met up with my former colleague journalist
David Rohde, who is here with us today. In August 1995,
days after the massacres, it was David who discovered
a leg protruding from a mass grave site in the woods
and fields of Nova Kasaba. Subsequently, he discovered
a pile of canes and another pile, of eyeglasses — the
canes of the old men who had been executed for one
reason: because they were Bosnian Muslim. Canes!
In 2005 David and I joined the Bosnian families of
those who had been massacred as they walked along
the route that many of Srebrenica’s Muslim men and
boys had taken while fleeing the fallen safe area. The
families were tracing their loved ones’ journeys in
reverse. Although it was 10 years since the genocide,
all along the route we came across the human remains
of the victims: scraps of clothing, shoes, discarded
identification cards and even scattered bone fragments
protruding from the earth.
In 2010, when I led a United States presidential
delegation to Srebrenica on behalf of President Obama,
I retraced the final leg of that journey again. Many
children of those killed in Srebrenica were interspersed
among those on the march. Most were teenage girls
and young women who had grown up without fathers
and brothers. Far fewer young men than women took
part in the walk — a chilling result of the fact that so
many young boys had been executed. Remains were
still being dug up and mourned. One mother I met in
Srebrenica was burying the fourth of her five sons at
a mass grave site in the centre of town. She was still
searching for the remains of her fifth. It is that mother’s
truth and pain that was vetoed by Russia today.
Why should we continue to retrace victim’s
harrowing journey, or why, for that matter, do we
continue to gather, whether it is here at the United
Nations, or in Srebrenica, to mark this day and to retell
these gut-wrenching accounts of the victims? We revisit
so we can try to learn from our collective failure — and
by ours, I mean the world’s, the Security Council’s and
particularly that of Governments, including mine, that
had the power to prevent what happened but did not.
Bosnians believed that they would be protected
by a United Nations flag and by the principles it stood

8/23

08/07/2015

for. They took refuge in a place literally called a safe
area, yet when Bosnian Serb forces probed the United
Nations willingness to protect civilians under its
watch, the peacekeepers melted away and the Bosnian
Serbs pressed ahead. First, they cut off fuel and other
essential supplies; they then attacked the peacekeepers’
outposts; and after that, they disarmed and humiliated
the peacekeepers themselves. Promised NATO air
strikes never materialized.
We also commemorate Srebrenica to show our
ongoing commitment to holding accountable the
perpetrators of those atrocities. The perpetrators of
the genocide in Srebrenica killed more than 8,000
Muslim men and boys and raped countless women
and girls, in part because they felt confident that they
would never be punished. That is why it is so important
that all of the indicted masterminds and commanders
of the genocide in Srebrenica — most notably Ratko
Mladić and Radovan Karadžić — are now facing trial
for their crimes in The Hague. That shows that the arm
of justice is long and that abusive regimes — from the
Al-Assad regime that gases its own people to the North
Korean Government that works its people to death in
gulags — will one day have to answer to their atrocities.
As we saw today, some political leaders and groups
denied that genocide took place in Srebrenica or fail
to wish to recognize it. Bosnian Serb leader Milorad
Dodik last month called the genocide “the biggest
sham of the twentieth century”. We have heard such
statements from Holocaust deniers and even, more
recently, from Rwandan genocide deniers. Individuals
who use such phrases humiliate themselves, and they
embarrass and mislead those whom they claim to
represent. Genocide happened in Srebenica. That is the
conclusion reached by both the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Court of Justice, based on mounds of evidence. The
refusal to acknowledge that genocide occurred is not
only deeply hurtful to the victims and their families,
who have already endured so much, but it is the very
obstacle to reconciliation.
Imagine being the mother of those five sons, killed
in the Srebrenica genocide, and being told that a denial
of the genocide would advance reconciliation. It is
madness — a madness motivated by a similar negation
of the Bosnian Muslim experience that helped fuel the
slaughter at Srebenica in the first place. As long as
the truth is denied — whether in the Council or in the
region — there can be no meaningful reconciliation.

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Imagine if this were us — if those were our families.
Would we reconcile when our experience was being
denied? There is no stability in genocide denial. The
Council did everything in its power to get Russia on
board with this simple draft resolution, which does not
even name the perpetrators, but Russia had a red line.
The draft resolution could not reference the genocide in
Srebrenica; it could not reference a fact.
Twenty years ago, the international community
failed to protect the people taking refuge in Srebrenica,
and the result was genocide. Today, because of Russia’s
refusal to call what happened in Srebrenica by its
rightful name — genocide — the Council is again
failing to live up to its responsibility. This is a veto of
a well-established fact, documented by hundreds of
thousands of pages of witness testimony, photographic
evidence and physical forensic evidence of the kind I
encountered on my walks. The Rwandan genocide,
like the Srebrenica genocide, is an established fact.
Would anybody here dream of arguing that we should
not mark the Rwandan genocide or, indeed, that we
should deny it because a group of genocide deniers said
it might undermine reconciliation or stability? Does
Holocaust denial advance reconciliation, or do we all
agree that recognition and remembrance are the key,
critical ingredients to moving forward? Everyone here
knows the answer to those questions, yet a number
of countries today have chosen to remain neutral on
genocide recognition by abstaining from supporting the
draft resolution.
If the mothers of the boys executed in
Srebrenica — boys executed just because they were
Bosnian Muslims — were present today, they would
ask how anybody could abstain on their reality; but,
far worse, they would ask how any country could use
the privilege of permanent membership on the Council
to negate entirely what has happened to them. The
crime of genocide is the crime that the United Nations
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide was written and ratified to prevent
and punish. The crime of genocide in Srebrenica is what
the genocide Convention, which all of us have ratified,
exists to prevent and punish.
Reconciliation cannot be built by burying the dark
parts of one’s history, however unsettling they may be.
At the hearings at the ICTY, perpetrators and victims
alike testified to how heavy machinery had been brought
in to dig up the earth in order to bury victims before the
executions even occurred. As the victims — many of

S/PV.7481

them blindfolded with their hands bound — were led to
their death, they heard not only gunshots and cries, but
also the roar of bulldozers digging the mass graves in
which they would eventually be buried.
In closing, I would just like to tell one story. Ramiz
Nukić nearly ended up in one of those mass graves. As
Bosnian Serb forces approached Potocari in July 1995,
he said goodbye to his wife and children and fled into
the forest with his father, brother and thousands of other
Bosnian men and boys. He shared his story recently
with a reporter. When the men and boys paused briefly
at the top of a hill, tanks and guns opened fire. His
father and brother were killed immediately, along with
others. Nukić himself managed to escape, eventually
finding his way to a refugee camp.
In 1999, Nukić returned to Potocari and found his
way back to that hill. He found bloodied clothes and
shoes and three skeletons there, but none belonged to
his family. Since then, he has spent every single day
searching the woods around Srebenica for victims’
remains. What began as a search for his father and
brother has become a search for the remains of all
victims. He has said that a day rarely goes by that
he does not find some remains, which he reports to
Bosnia’s Missing Persons Institute, which then tests
the bones’ DNA against a network of survivors’ DNA.
The identification is important for victims’ families,
particularly those who never have been able to confirm
what happened to their loved ones and who expect to
find out that they were killed but have nothing tangible
to prove it. The remains help give them a long overdue
sense of closure. Thanks to Nukić, many bones got their
names, as a staffer at the Institute has said.
This year, partial remains of Nukić’s father were
finally found — though not by Nukić himself — in a
mass grave. Nukić will bury his father on Saturday in
Srebenica — one of 136 newly identified victims to be
buried alongside the 6,241 victims already interred in
a joint cemetery there. He will be joined by thousands
of mourners who assemble each year to mark the
genocide. On recovering part of his own father, Nukić
said, “Although he is not complete, I will bury him, and
I will know where his grave is”. He said he intends to
keep searching for the remains of other victims for as
long as he lives.
We too must continue to search relentlessly for
the full truth about Srebenica. The remains of more
than 1,000 victims are still out there. They continue
to haunt us, and we cannot rest until they are all

15-210619/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

found. Only by unearthing those truths and only by
recognizing this genocide, the gravity of this genocide
and how we outside failed to prevent it will we be able
to help the region move beyond such a dark part of its
history — help it walk towards greater reconciliation,
which we all seek — and live up to the promise of
preventing genocide in our time.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
deeply regrets Russia’s opposition to the adoption of a
draft resolution whose goal was to honour the memory
not only of the victims of the genocide in Srebenica,
but also that of the innocent victims on all sides during
the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in order to
recall the Security Council’s special responsibility
to prevent such massacres. A subject such as this
deserved unanimous support from the Council. But by
opposing this draft resolution, Russia has prevented the
Security Council from expressing any support for the
commemoration and remembrance of the victims of the
genocide and the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Under the pretext of ensuring respect for a particular
remembrance, Russia has opposed the Security
Council’s enjoining the parties to move beyond the
suffering of the past and to advance with determination
on the path to reconciliation. Reconciliation will require
recognition of the genocide committed in Srebrenica 20
years ago, which was defined as such by international
courts including the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Court of Justice.
Justice — and we cannot make this point strongly
enough — is the cornerstone of reconciliation and peace.
The text, which we backed from the very beginning,
had the aim of remembrance, but it was also forwardlooking. It was also aimed at assisting in the process of
reconciliation among the peoples of the Balkans and
helping them forge a future of security and peace. We
deeply regret the failure to adopt the draft resolution
today, but we will not give up. We must continue to
work together for reconciliation and peace. That is the
responsibility of us all.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
reiterate first and foremost that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela condemns unequivocally and robustly the
genocide carried out in Srebrenica 20 years ago, as it
does any crime against humanity, wherever perpetrated
and irrespective of its motivation.

10/23

08/07/2015

Seventy years after the collapse of Nazism and
fascism and that totalitarian ideology, after the
Holocaust carried out against the Jewish people and
the killing of Soviet Jews and other peoples that were
victims of fascism, the world continues to witness acts
of genocide and war crimes, as happened in Rwanda,
Srebrenica, Iraq and Palestine and at Sabra and Shatila.
All of this calls into question both the effectiveness of
international mechanisms established to prevent such
atrocities as well as our own human condition.
My country abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution in the belief that it was not a balanced
text, because it attributes full responsibility for what
happened to just one party to the conflict, omitting
the complexities of the situation. Venezuela believes
that one cannot single out an entire people for actions
carried out by extremist elements, motivated by hatred
and intolerance, that hide their actions behind the flag
of fervent nationalism.
In a similar vein, the aforementioned draft contains
elements that had not previously been agreed on and
are controversial in the United Nations, such as the
concept of the responsibility to protect, which detracts
from the primary responsibility of the State itself
for the promotion and respect of human rights and
undermines the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, including respect for sovereignty.
We believe that justice needs to be built on a foundation
of truth, and that is why we welcome the work done by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
which is responsible for trying those responsible for
atrocities in the context of the conflict that took place
in the territories that made up the former Yugoslavia.
We also need to bear in mind that the proposed
draft resolution did not enjoy consensus support from
the authorities and the peoples of the region in question,
who are those who are responsible for advancing, with
the support of the international community, the process
of peacebuilding and ensuring political stability in the
region.
Given that, we believe that the draft, rather
than contributing to reconciliation, would serve to
exacerbate divisions between the Bosniak, Serb and
Croat communities, which live together in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and must work to build a common future
based on peace, solidarity, dialogue and respect for
human rights. The work of the United Nations should
be aimed at fostering understanding among the peoples

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of the Balkans. It is for that reason that we are focusing
on reconciliation among the parties. In order to achieve
that, it is imperative to continue the work that was begun
in Dayton through the implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which was the result
a political consensus among the parties involved.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): Angola abstained in
the voting today on the draft resolution submitted by
the United Kingdom on Srebrenica for the following
reasons.
First, Angola does not take a position of denial
on the issue. Whether we call it mass murder, mass
atrocities or genocide, the fact is that we acknowledge
that on 11 July 1995, extremely grave events took
place in Srebrenica that are tantamount to the crime
of genocide, as was recognized by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Our fundamental disagreement stems from the fact
that the text of the draft resolution should take into
account, in the same manner, the many thousands of
victims of massacres from all over the region during
the war on the territory that was later to become the
independent State of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It had been our expectation that the text would take
stock of the level of reconciliation and cooperation
among the States and communities in the region and
look forward to a future of peace, to healing and
reconciliation and the building of a better future for
all of the peoples made neighbours by geography and
history to share the past, the present and the future.
Twenty years after the events in the former
Yugoslavia, such a draft resolution would not make any
tangible contribution to the ongoing and still-fragile
process of reconciliation and could have a negative
impact on the efforts of the responsible leaders of the
Balkan States to create a better common future, which
have already produced significant results. It had been
our expectation that the final text of the draft resolution
would translate a required level of compromise among
the members of the Security Council, permitting a
consensual text in which all members would recognize
themselves.
We would further wish to see a draft resolution
focusing on positive aspects, addressing genuine
reconciliation, dealing with the past as a lesson to be
learned and seeking a future-oriented approach by
helping the region to face the needs of the present and
the future by encouraging, facilitating and accelerating

S/PV.7481

the process of reconciliation and cooperation in the
Balkans.
The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and your team
on New Zealand’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council, and I wish you every success in this function.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson and Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for their statements.
Chad welcomes the organization of this meeting
to commemorate the Srebrenica massacre and to pay
tribute to the victims. We express our solidarity with
the survivors and encourage the efforts at reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In July 1995, more than 8,000 Muslim men and
adolescents were massacred in three days in Srebrenica
during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, even though
the town had been declared a safe area by the United
Nations and a contingent of Blue Helmets was present
there. We should recall that the atrocity in Srebrenica
is the worst massacre committed in Europe since the
Second World War, and has been described as genocide
by international courts. The victims at Srebrenica
were targeted because of their identity, and the men
were brutally separated from the women and children
before being transported to previously chosen sites to
be coldly and methodically massacred in full view of
the whole world.
Those massacres weigh on our collective conscience
and will always do so. The international community
bears a crushing responsibility because of its silence
and refusal to act in the face of the atrocities. Even
today, the circumstances under which the population
of Srebrenica in the safe area was abandoned remain
unclear. It is important that we make an effort at
remembrance so that the truth can be established. We
therefore welcome the efforts of the Netherlands, which
has investigated the behaviour of its battalions during
the Srebrenica massacre and published several reports.
The genocide in Srebrenica, carried out less than a
year after that of Rwandan Tutsis in 1994, seriously calls
into question the tools at the international community’s
disposal and its capacity to react to the precursors
of mass crimes. While the genocide in Rwanda in
1994 failed to draw the attention of the international

15-2106111/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

community, we must also note with regret that the world
also remained passive in the face of the preparations
for the Srebrenica genocide. This is an opportunity for
the whole international community to reflect on the
lessons to be learned from one of the darkest moments
in history, and to reaffirm its determination to prevent
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
international community should therefore continuously
assess the effectiveness of the tools at its disposal
and should put prevention at the heart of its efforts to
identify situations that could result in mass crimes.
The situation in Bosnia remains delicate, and
tensions between the communities are high. Lasting
peace and reconciliation in the country depend on
impartial justice for victims and their relatives.
Justice must be done to heal wounds and reconcile a
shattered society. We therefore welcome the work of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and encourage it to pursue and complete
its mandate. It is of course the responsibility of the
State concerned to continue and intensify its efforts
to promote and consolidate the momentum of national
peace and reconciliation.
We understand the dilemmas of cultural diversity
from our own experience, and we therefore encourage
the spirit of tolerance, the acceptance of differences
and respect for diversity. Of necessity, reconciliation
depends on recognizing the pain and suffering of
the victims of genocide. We therefore encourage the
implementation of measures designed to build mutual
trust with a view to genuine national reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence in the region.
The continuous commemoration of genocide and
the establishment of such memorials as the one at
Potočari are also important to the process. The only way
in which the horrors of the past will not be forgotten is
to commemorate them regularly so that they are never
repeated. Chad therefore voted in favour of the draft
resolution (S/2015/508) that was just put to the vote, but
which failed due to the veto of a permanent member. We
profoundly regret the use of the veto in circumstances
as sensitive as those having to do with combating mass
crimes, even though the draft resolution did no more
than set the genocide in its historical context, without
accusing by name any party whatsoever.
In conclusion, we believe that the responsibility to
protect must be reflected in substantive measures to
prevent the most serious crimes by learning the lessons
of the genocides in Rwanda and Srebrenica, to which the
12/23

08/07/2015

international community responded with indifference.
Learning those lessons will require a greater sense
of responsibility, commitment and reactivity in the
prevention of mass crimes. Only strong determination
and a common willingness to fight together against
crimes of genocide and grave violations of human
rights will allow us to break with the past.
Humanitarian organizations also have an important
role to play in prevention, through awareness-raising. In
that regard, we would like to pay a well-earned tribute
to the humanitarian organizations present in Srebrenica
in 1995 for the assistance they gave to the population,
their condemnation of the forced displacement and their
calls of alarm regarding the possibility of massacres,
which were unfortunately not heeded. We hope that
those events will never be repeated.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their comprehensive briefings.
Jordan regrets the fact that the draft resolution
(S/2015/508) was not adopted today. As we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the greatest
massacre Europe has known since the Second World
War, we cannot, as the United Nations, forget this
bloody tragedy and the crimes that followed against
the survivors. The tragedy and the calls for help from
defenceless towns will remain etched in our memories.
It could have been avoided if the United Nations had
acted effectively to confront the dangers surrounding
Srebrenica. We all know that on the eve of the massacre
there were neither combatants nor weapons in the town.
The inhabitants were only children, women, elderly
people and unarmed men, who were killed in cold
blood with the full knowledge of the United Nations
peacekeeping forces. Twenty years after the massacre,
we must ask ourselves what lessons the United Nations
can learn to prevent such a tragedy from being repeated
and what it can do for the families of the victims.
One of the most important lessons that the
Organization can learn and must develop from the
massacre is that a genocide early-warning system must
be established so that such events can be monitored and
preventive diplomatic efforts intensified. We therefore
welcomed the establishment of the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, whose work must continue as part of an
overarching early warning system. But the efforts of
the Office of the Special Adviser will be useless unless
15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the Security Council works together to implement in a
timely manner the necessary resolutions when national
Governments are unable to protect their citizens under
imminent threat. Furthermore, States Members of the
United Nations must make available the resources to
support the early-warning system, its various offices
and the United Nations peacekeeping missions so that
those operations can properly and nobly discharge their
mandate.
We would like to encourage all States that have
not yet signed or ratified the relevant international
instruments, particularly the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1997
Additional Protocols, to do so. We should all have
signed all of those instruments.
Moreover, we must ensure the adoption of national
laws and legislation to ensure the robustness of the rule
of law and the full participation and involvement of
civil society in governance, so as to prevent incitement
to violence through hatred and calls to target given
groups in society. Incitement to hatred can pave the way
to violence, thus leading to reprehensible acts such as
the massacre that the Council is commemorating today.
A massacre is not frozen in time. Its aftermath
remains present in the survivors, as we have seen in
the faces of the survivors of Srebrenica 20 years later.
Delivering justice requires us to ensure the upholding of
justice and the absence of impunity, so that the families
of the victims can receive the justice they deserve,
thereby becoming part of the reconciliation process in
the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Jordan appeals to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to continue
its work. We call upon all partners to continue to
support the ICTY to ensure the necessary political will
to support the efforts of the international community to
successfully deliver justice.
We recognize the improvement in the Organization’s
working methods since the Srebrenica massacre in order
to prevent similar massacres or genocides in conflict
areas. Nevertheless, we must continue to shoulder our
responsibilities boldly and judiciously to rectify the
errors of the past and not to repeat them and to properly
meet today’s challenges in order to ensure that tragedies
and massacres of this nature never happen again in any
region of the world.

S/PV.7481

Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings. The twentieth
anniversary of the massacre of more than 8,000 Muslim
men and boys in Srebrenica — an atrocious act of
genocide — should be an occasion for reflection. We
need to reflect on the lapses on so many levels that
allowed the massacre to take place and assure ourselves
that such an atrocity will never occur again. We also
need to reflect on the progress that has been made on
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina since that
unfortunate event. We encourage the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to put the past behind them and forge
ahead within a united and peaceful country.
States have the primary responsibility to protect
their populations against mass atrocities. In that regard,
it is the obligation of every State to implement their
commitments made under the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document. The international community in
general, and the Security Council in particular, must
live up to their responsibilities to ensure that never
again will the world witness the horrors of genocide.
Nigeria supports the formation of a global network
of focal points on the responsibility to protect, as
that responsibility is only as consistent, powerful and
effective as practitioners make it. Therefore, all States
Members of the United Nations have the responsibility
to protect citizens from mass atrocities.
Developing the institutions needed to predict and
prevent genocide is crucial. Early-warning mechanisms,
programmes for conflict prevention, standing forces for
rapid intervention and international courts for effective
punishment should be prioritized. Political will on the
part of Governments and international organizations is
essential in narrowing the gap between the desperation
of people in dire situations and addressing earlywarning signals.
Nigeria believes that formulating an international
contingency plan that can be promptly carried out
in a case of a serious humanitarian crisis may be
one more way to address those challenges. Regional
cooperation and partnerships with non-governmental
organizations in the field of genocide prevention should
be strengthened. A robust campaign against acts of
genocide and other atrocities must be sustained.
Nigeria remains firmly committed to the fight
against impunity. We believe that impunity must be
addressed resolutely wherever it occurs in the world.

15-2106113/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The fight against impunity and the prevention of mass
atrocity crimes are national priorities for us. Our belief
in the need for global action against mass atrocity
crimes and security threats to humankind underpins
our ratification of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the Arms Trade Treaty and other
relevant international legal instruments.
The implementation of the Rights Up Front
initiative, launched by the Secretary-General in
December 2013, with a human rights mandate, will
contribute to strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations and the Security Council in responding to
conflicts in a timely manner. This laudable initiative
should be sustained.
We reaffirm our support to the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
to the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
Their briefings to the Security Council are an earlywarning mechanism. We call for more regular briefings
by those officials, especially when civilians are faced
with an imminent threat of mass atrocity crimes. We
would urge the Council to give consideration to holding
an annual open debate on the prevention of genocide,
in the same manner the Council regularly holds debates
on the protection of civilians, on women and peace and
security and on other thematic issues on its agenda.
The protection of civilians is an important aspect
of the mandates of peacekeeping missions today. We
therefore call for the integration of the United Nations
framework of analysis for atrocity crimes into the
planning for peacekeeping operations. That would give
peacekeepers a better understanding of the risk factors
that could trigger mass atrocity crimes and enhance the
protection of civilians.
Finally, the world must not forget the victims of the
massacre at Srebrenica. Out of respect for their loved
ones, Nigeria supports the designation of 11 July as an
international day of remembrance.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I also thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights
for his briefing.
Spain deeply regrets the Russian veto of the draft
resolution (S/2015/508), submitted by the United
Kingdom to commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide. As the Deputy SecretaryGeneral mentioned at the outset, one of the major
responsibilities of the United Nations and of the Security

14/23

08/07/2015

Council is to prevent atrocity crimes such as the one
that occurred in Srebrenica two decades ago. Vetoing
such an initiative represents two steps backwards in the
Organization’s efforts to support progress in terms of
the responsibility to protect our citizens and in limiting
the use of the veto for atrocity crimes.
The Security Council meets very frequently and
addresses a great many issues very seriously. However,
the issue before us today has special significance.
Today we are meeting to honour the memory of the
victims of one of the most tragic episodes in Europe in
recent history and to express our solidarity and respect
to the survivors and the relatives of those who died.
But we are also pointedly meeting to look towards the
future and to reiterate unequivocally once again that
the events of 20 years ago will never happen again.
The conflict that devastated Bosnia and Herzegovina
of 20 years ago, with all of its unspeakable crimes, is
one of the worst tragedies in the history of Europe in
the second half of the twentieth century. The genocide
carried out in Srebrenica in July 1995 was undoubtedly
an atrocity that we must all deplore. As always occurs
in war, nobody wins, everybody loses, and all parties
suffer. All parties are victims who weep. The victims
of Srebrenica are our victims.
Over the past 20 years, the United Nations has
done admirable work on the basis of lessons learned.
We have worked very hard on an early warning system
and on the prevention of atrocities, such as that we
commemorate today. Vital contributions have been
made to our work, including the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
on the responsibility to protect. We now have such posts
as the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect, who report to
the Secretary-General and who play a huge role in
prevention and protection. The same is true of the role
of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for Children and
Armed Conflicts. Finally, we also have the SecretaryGeneral’s Rights Up Front initiative.
Spain is contributing to all those efforts. A
meeting of the Global Network for Focal Points on
the Responsibility to Protect was held just recently, in
Madrid on 23 and 24 June, which considered, among
other topics, the new challenges and threats confronting
the most vulnerable populations and the contemporary
factors linked to crimes against humanity.

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

But the most important lessons that we have learned
over the 20 years since Srebrenica have been in Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself. Twenty years after the signing
of the Dayton Peace Accords, which laid the foundations
of peace and launched Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
path towards a new era, the country is advancing down
the path of reconciliation, socioeconomic progress, and
full integration into Europe, to which it belongs in its
own right.
A few months ago in the biannual debate on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/PV.7440),
we welcomed the entrance into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement between that country and
the European Union. We welcome the future-oriented
perspective shown by leaders of all political stripes in
undertaking that written commitment and expressing
the voice and the desire of all citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue down the path of reform and
stability. That is the path to follow. That is today’s Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and that is why we commemorate all
the victims who have suffered.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Elliasson and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Al Hussein,
for their briefings.
The General Assembly’s commemoration on
1 July, organized by the Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
presence of the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly, represented an extremely
powerful and moving and moment of gathering and
remembering. Today, it is the Council’s turn to recall the
victims of the massacre and to show its solidarity with
the families who lost a loved one, friend or neighbour in
Srebrenica. It is important for us, too, to commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica
and to pay tribute to all the innocent victims on all sides
of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also
essential to collectively learn from the past to improve
our future actions. When such a massacre takes place,
it always represents a terrible collective failure. The
United Nations shares responsibility because it failed
to fulfil its founding mission in Srebrenica for the
maintenance of international peace and security and for
the protection of the civilian population.
We know that prevention must be at the heart of
our actions when human lives are in danger. Since
the genocide in Srebrenica, the United Nations has
developed its own mechanisms to prevent such tragedies

S/PV.7481

from recurring. Preventing means above all warning.
A first step was the establishment of the joint Office
for the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect, now headed by Mr. Adama Dieng, which
I welcome. The Office acts as an early warning
mechanism for the Security Council by bringing to
its attention any situation that could degenerate into
genocide.
Prevention also means acting. The second step
was the adoption in 2005 by the Heads of State and
Government of the key concept of responsibility
to protect. Narrowing the scope of the concept or
questioning it would be irresponsible and an affront to
the victims of multiple massacres and genocides. Ten
years after the adoption of the Millennium Declaration
(General Assembly resolution 55/2) and the recognition
of the concept of the responsibility to protect, it is our
duty to continue to implement that principle.
Prevention also means judging. In 1948, the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide anticipated the establishment of an
international criminal court. Fifty years later, we finally
adopt the Rome Statute establishing the International
Criminal Court. Meanwhile, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia has helped to bring to justice
the main perpetrators of violations of international law
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia committed
since 1991. At the heart of the reconciliation process,
the Court remains an essential vehicle for memory and
reparation.
Despite such progress, it is clear that there are still
many tragic situations in which the United Nations
remains powerless. In Syria, crimes against humanity
and war crimes are committed every day before our
eyes, and the Security Council remains paralysed. In
such critical situations, the Council must be able to
respond and assume its responsibilities. In is to that end
that France is pushing for the five permanent members
to voluntarily commit to renouncing the use of the veto
in cases of mass crimes. The use of the veto is not a
privilege; it is a responsibility. It is therefore up to the
permanent members first of all to show that they are
responsible within the framework of the Council.
Twenty years ago, on 11 July 1995, more than 8,000
adults and children were massacred in Srebrenica.
Those events have been described as genocide by both
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Court of Justice, and mark one

15-2106115/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

08/07/2015

of the most tragic and dramatic events in the Bosnian
war. To this day, as has been recalled, it is the worst
massacre in Europe since the Second World War.

over 1,000 victims of the massacre have yet to be found.
As one of the mothers put it: “Every year, I think this is
the year I will bury my son”.

Unfortunately, the Security Council today could
not adopt a draft resolution to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide and
to pay tribute to all the innocent victims on all sides
of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As I said
in my explanation of vote, France deeply regrets the
fact that Russia opposed a text, whose basic value of
which is commemorative, because of the fracture
lines which the local populations themselves want to
put behind them. The draft resolution would not only
commemorate the event, which is critical, but also
underline the importance of rapprochement among
the States of the region centred on a shared European
future. It was in that spirit that we helped to write and
supported the draft text, which recalls that the future of
the Balkan populations, like that of the entire European
continent, is not to perpetuate the problems of a tragic
and painful past but rather to build a common destiny
based on reconciliation.

Today’s meeting is indeed timely, not only
in conjunction with the twentieth anniversary of
Srebrenica, but also in view of the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations. On this solemn occasion, on
behalf of the people and Government of Malaysia, I
wish to convey our deepest and heartfelt sympathies
and condolences to the families and loved ones of those
who perished at Srebrenica. As the oft-quoted saying
goes: “Those who fail to learn from history are doomed
to repeat it”.

As a French and European citizen, I welcome the
progress made in recent years in the region to ensure a
better future for the generations born after Srebrenica. I
also welcome the fact that all Balkan States are moving
towards the European Union and joining in a common
project based on peace and tolerance. These strong
values guided the founders of the European project,
whose aim was reconciliation from the outset. Sixty
years later, we have covered a very impressive distance
that is undoubtedly unprecedented in history. France,
with the European Union, hopes that all the Balkan
countries will become full parties to the European
project.

In light of the region’s troubled history and signs of
rising ethno-nationalism, we believe that it is crucial for
the Council and for the international community to send
a strong signal condemning genocide and its denial. We
are convinced that the substance and the uncovering
of the truth, particularly on the fate of those killed
at Srebrenica, will go a long way towards promoting
and deepening national healing and reconciliation. In
that spirit, Malaysia worked alongside other Council
members to achieve an outcome that would support
such aspirations. We believe that the draft resolution
initiated by the United Kingdom would have made a
serious and substantive contribution to that end, and as
such we co-sponsored and voted in favour of it.

Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): We commend New
Zealand for convening this historic meeting of the
Council to pay tribute to the victims of the Srebrenica
genocide 20 years ago. We are grateful to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein for their respective briefings.

In recalling the statements and views expressed
during the Srebrenica commemoration event last
week, one particular statement stands out — that of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s assessment that the
Secretariat, the Security Council and Member States
share the blame for failing to prevent the genocide
at Srebrenica, despite the mounting warning signs. I
would like to believe that, 20 years after Srebrenica, we
have come a long way, particularly in learning from the
mistakes of the past. We are encouraged by the tangible
improvements in the workings of the United Nations,
including improved peacekeeping capabilities, the
establishment of the Office of the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide and the ongoing conversations
on the doctrine of the responsibility to protect.

Having previously served in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I attended the annual commemoration
of the Srebrenica massacre. It was very painful for
me, particularly witnessing first-hand the sorrow and
agony of the mothers of Srebrenica as they buried their
loved ones after a painstaking process of collecting and
identifying the remains found in mass graves. To date,

After the Holocaust, the Rwandan genocide
and Srebrenica, we must pause to reflect and ask
ourselves: How many times will the world have to
bear the unfulfilled promises of “never again”? The
international community, particularly the Council,
owes it to the victims and the loved ones to live up to
that promise, including by exercising our collective

16/23

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

responsibility to protect civilians from the most serious
international crimes and to learn from the mistakes of
the past.
We remain concerned that the lack of political will
and divisions in the Council could lead to devastasting
tragedies at the risk of the loss of multitudes of
innocent lives. In our view, tragedies such as that of
Srebrenica could have been prevented had the Council
been united and been able to muster the necessary
political will. Malaysia believes that ending impunity
is crucial to preventing future atrocities. While we
failed to prevent Srebrenica, we must at least strive
to ensure that justice is served for its victims. In that
regard, Malaysia continues to support the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in ensuring accountability for the crimes committed
during the war in the region. We urge all States to fully
cooperate with the Tribunal si that it can implement its
mandate to completion.
We fully agree that there is a need, evoked by earlier
speakers, to look forward and promote reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region. In the
immediate aftermath of the war, Malaysia supported
Bosnia and Herzegovina in its reconstruction efforts.
We will continue to do so. Through our investments
projects, we have sought to bring the various ethnic
groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina together on the path
towards economic and social integration. We firmly
believe that the first steps towards reconciliation are
to acknowledge and accept the past in order to build a
common future. We owe it to the victims of Srebrenica
to demonstrate that we have indeed learned from the
past, that we are now a better people because of it, and
that we will give our all to prevent such atrocities from
reoccurring.
Against that backdrop, we are disappointed and
deeply regret that the Council has been unable to
overcome its division to unite and find agreement in
sending a message of solidarity with all the victims of
the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly
those of Srebrenica. We fear that such continued
politicized division distorts historical facts and denies
justice to the victims of genocide.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and
High Commissioner for Human Rights Al Hussein for
their briefings.

S/PV.7481

In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
Government and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the situation there has remained stable overall. The
economy is growing and political process and the rule
of law are making headway. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is an important country of the Balkans. The interests
of the region and the international community at large
are served by the maintenance of peace, stability and
development and the achievement of harmonious
coexistence among all ethnic groups there.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Accord. The international community
should seize this opportunity to promote continued
progress in the efforts of the country’s ethnic groups in
nation-building, the full implementation of the Dayton
Accord, and the achievement of greater progress in all
fields.
The conflict that occurred in the former Yugoslavia
two decades ago is a dark page in history. China
expresses its condolences for the deaths of innocent
civilians in Srebrenica and elsewhere. The international
community should reflect deeply on history so as
to prevent the reoccurrence of such a tragedy. In
addressing issues related to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the international community, including the Council,
should bear in mind the need to maintain peace and
stability in the country and the region, and promote
dialogue and reconciliation among all the ethnic groups
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and among the countries of
the region so as to achieve harmonious coexistence.
That should be the consensus of the Council.
China notes that the draft resolution introduced
by some countries on the commemoration of the
Srebrenica event has given rise to controversy within
Bosnia and the countries of the region, and that some
Council members have strong reservations on the draft.
In such circumstances, forcing a vote on a contentious
draft resolution goes against the spirit of promoting
reconciliation within Bosnia and Herzegovina and
among regional countries, and undermines unity
among the Council members. China regrets that, and
was therefore compelled to abstain in the voting on the
draft resolution.
China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We believe that the country has the
right to choose its own path of development and its own
foreign policy. The international community should

15-2106117/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

respect and support the choices of the Government
and people of the country concerning their nationl
development; adopt a balanced and cautious approach
to the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina; fully
respect the leadership, ownership and initiatives of the
people of the country; facilitate unity and harmonious
development among all ethnic groups of the country;
and promote the sustainable economic and social
development and long-term security and stability
of the country. China stands ready to work with the
international community to make a due contribution to
the lasting peace, stability and development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to begin by thanking New Zealand for
having organized this meeting as part of the activities to
commemorate the shame and the pain of the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica. We also
grateful for the briefings made by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
Chile condemns all crimes against humanity, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. As it is an
ethical imperative that such issues be brought to the
collective conscience and to acknowledge those cases
where the United Nations system has failed, we will be
unfailing in our participation in any act commemorating
mass violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law
Every society has the right to truth and memory.
Consequently, the international community must
reiterate and reaffirm its solidarity with all victims
and their families, while at the same time denouncing
crimes that can be classified as genocide — regardless
of the context and circumstances. The Council is
in no position to judge any State, but rather serve to
acknowledge grave facts, the consequences of which
still affect us in the present. We are also here to identify
concrete ways of contributing to the prevention and
eradication of crimes of this nature — through the
mechanisms afforded us by international law. The
Dayton Peace Accords mapped out a future in which all
the participants in this painful conflict could promote
tolerance, justice and reconciliation in order to continue
forging the necessary conditions for stability and peace,
conditions to which the Council is committed.

18/23

08/07/2015

Ten years after recognizing the responsibility
to protect, we reiterate that States bear the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute crimes of
that nature. The international community must work
with and support Member States that — either on their
own volition or because of their inability — fail to meet
that obligation.
Firmly committed to the preventive nature of
the responsibility to protect, Chile endorsed and
participated in the fifth Annual Meeting of the Global
Network of Focal Points on the Responsibility to
protect, held in Madrid last June.
Whenever faced with the need to prevent such
crimes, it is essential that we remember the SecretaryGeneral’s Rights Up Front initiative. We should also
look to the work of the Special Advisers on Prevention
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect, as well
as make use of the framework of analysis for atrocity
crimes. Another core tool available to us are the
mechanisms and/or international tribunals, which
ensure accountability and the avoidance of impunity
and act as a deterrent tool or as a prevention of future
crimes. In that regard, we would like to point out the
key roles of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Court.
The Council must support the referral of situations
to the International Criminal Court by taking the
actions that would facilitate the successful carrying out
of investigations, without interfering in matters that are
the sole preserve of international justice. The Security
Council is in a position to make a contribution to
prevention through education, the strengthening of the
internal capacity of countries and the exchange of good
practices, which enhance early warning. In this vein,
we would like to reiterate our call upon those countries
that have the right of the veto to refrain from using it
in situations of crimes against humanity, war crimes,
genocide or ethnic cleansing. Otherwise, the Council is
left powerless to defend the values and
​​
principles that
are the most fundamental for humankind. We urge the
Security Council, in particular its permanent members,
to assume that responsibility.
Memory, truth and justice are core aspects of
non-repetition that must be in place to make a reality
of our — as yet unfulfilled — hope of “Never again”
and to make progress in processes of comprehensive
reconciliation and the fight against impunity.

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We welcome and thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Eliasson, and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Al Hussein,
for their comprehensive briefings.
It is our great hope that drawing painful lessons
from the past will enable us to improve our actions
in the present and create appropriate mechanisms to
prevent their recurrence in future. Fundamental to the
prevention of conflicts is addressing the root causes,
promoting inclusive political dialogue and creating an
environment conducive to unity in society-based ethnic
diversity. In that context, in memory of all the victims
of the conflict in the Balkans that came about with the
disintegration of the former Yugoslavia, to whom we
pay tribute, we would like to express our strong support
to the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance with Dayton
Peace Agreement.
We acknowledge the important role that the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, which we
also commemorate today on its twentieth anniversary,
has played in the post-conflict reconciliation process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the broader region.
We recall that States bear the primary responsibility
to protect their own populations from war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. For its part,
the international community has a crucial role to play,
if and when a national Government fails to protect its
own population. In that sense, while celebrating the
tenth anniversary of the concept of the responsibility to
protect, adopted in the World Summit Outcome in 2005,
we encourage Member States to strengthen prevention
efforts in order to end the impunity for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. Empowering
United Nations peacekeeping missions with vlear
mandates to protect civilians is an outstanding task.
Effective peacekeeping requires a clear understanding
of the risk factors and a trigger for mass atrocity crimes.
We encourage the integration of the United
Nations framework of analysis of attrocity crimes into
strategies guiding United Nations peace operations. The
establishment of the Human Rights Council, reinforcing
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
the institution of international criminal tribunals,
strengthening accountability and international criminal
law, have been importants gains in upholding human
rights and the rule of law.
Lastly, the international community should provide
support to the countries in region in order to strengthen

S/PV.7481

the cooperation among them and support the efforts at
reconciliation among Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein for their briefings.
Today we pay respect and convey our deepest
sympathy to all innocent victims and the survivors
of the worst crime in Europe since the end of the
Second World War — in Srebrenica and surrounding
areas in July 1995. The Srebrenica genocide left deep
scars: thousands of men executed and buried in mass
graves, hundreds of men buried alive, men and women
mutilated and slaughtered. We remember all these
atrocities so that they never happen again and so that
the principles of humankind are never again abandoned.
This remembrance is also crucial for prevention and the
resolution of other conflicts around the world. It is a
matter of deep regret that, due to the Russian veto today,
the Council failed to show unity in paying tribute to the
civilian victims of the genocide in Srebrenica.
We condemn the genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed during the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their perpetrators must be
brought to justice.
Srebrenica’s crimes cannot be denied. Acceptance
of the past and ensuring justice for the victims on
all sides is essential in pursuing reconciliation. It
is therefore vital that political elites on all sides
recognize and accept past events, including the fact of
the genocide. The politicians in the region must show
courage, overcome their differences and unite for the
stable future that all of us wish to see.
Hundreds of families live with the pain of not
knowing what happened to their loved ones, not
knowing the truth. “It is not living because you want to,
but living because you have no choice”, said a mother
who lost two of her sons in describing what those who
lost their families are going through.
Much more needs to be done. Some 20,000 survivors
of cruel and premeditated sexual violence are living
in the shadows, afraid to speak, afraid to seek justice.
They need care, protection and support. The enormous
scope of the crime, 20 years on, contrasts sharply with
the few dozen convicted perpetrators.
Only truth and justice can nurture peace and
stability. The International Court of Justice and the

15-2106119/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
recognized the genocide at Srebrenica. Those who were
behind this tragedy are now standing trial.
The international community and the United
Nations, established 70 years ago, meant to save
humanity from horrors such as those that the people of
the Balkans lived through. The experience in Bosnia
was a painful one in the history of the United Nations.
This lesson must be learned.
The United Nations today is better equipped to
detect the early warning signs of possible atrocities. The
responsibility to protect must not remain a concept on
paper only. The Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect, as well
as the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for Children and
Armed Conflict, are vital elements in this strategy.
Their tireless efforts in bringing human rights abuses
to the Council’s attention are commendable.
But perhaps the most important lesson drawn from
these terrible events is that the systemic terrorization
of people must be met decisively with all necessary
means and with political will, as the Secretary-General
outlined in his report. Yet far too often lack of political
will and divisions have stood in the way of decisive
action, including on the part of the Council. Let me be
clear: restraint in the use of the veto in mass atrocity
situations should not remain a theoretical option. We
call on all permanent members of the Council to declare
it forthwith.
Let us use this solemn occasion to encourage the
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina to unite in building
a better future for their children. Twenty years have not
passed without positive changes. The country is taking
steps towards its European integration, with strong
continuous support for these efforts by the European
Union.
The recent agreement by the Parliament and
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina on a broad
range of reforms and their commitment to be proactive
in the reconciliation process will, hopefully, help them
to overcome differences, unite for the future and ensure
stability and peace in the region. The international
community, including the members of the Council,
should and will continue to support these efforts.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is outraged that Russia has vetoed this draft
resolution today. Russia’s action tarnishes the memory
20/23

08/07/2015

of all those who died in the Srebrenica genocide. Russia
will have to justify its decision to the families of the
more than 8,000 people murdered in the worst atrocity
in Europe since the Second World War.
The draft resolution did not point fingers of
blame, score political points or seek to reopen painful
divisions. It did not link the crimes of Srebrenica to the
Serb people. It recognized that there were victims on
all sides, and it aimed to send a clear message that the
Council supports reconciliation in Bosnia.
But reconciliation must be based on a shared
acceptance of the fact that genocide occurred at
Srebrenica. This is a legal fact, not a political judgement.
On this there is no compromise. So it is profoundly
regrettable that Russia has chosen to side with those
who, by their actions, are preventing reconciliation
from moving forward — those who are unwilling to
accept the facts today.
Some said that in submitting this draft resolution,
we risked ethnic division in the Balkans. The emotional
responses in the region in the past weeks show that until
past actions are acknowledged and accepted, we cannot
move forward. As Adisada Dudic said so poignantly at
the commemorative event last week, “Denial does not
make the facts go away. It does not change the past.
And it certainly does not erase memory”.
It is denial, and not this draft resolution, that will
cause division. Denial is the final insult to the victims.
It undermines the prospects for a secure, peaceful
future for Bosnia and Herzegovina — a future that all
of its citizens deserve. Because, even two decades on,
the horrors some choose to deny are still ongoing for
families in Bosnia. The remains of hundreds of the
victims of the genocide — fathers, sons, mothers and
daughters — have yet to be found. The suffering of
their loved ones, and their search for truth, continues
to this day. Russia’s actions will only exacerbate their
grief.
Despite this veto, we must all continue our support
for a peaceful, stable and prosperous future for Bosnia,
a future based on an acceptance of the past.
Today was an opportunity for the Council to reflect
on its responsibility to prevent genocide, both in 1995
and today and in future. This responsibility is made
clear in our promise to save future generations from
the scourge of war. And yet, 50 years after the end of
the Second World War, 50 years after the signing of
the United Nations Charter, we broke our promise and
15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

allowed genocide to return to Europe, to a small town
in eastern Bosnia, to a United Nations-designated safe
haven.
Kofi Annan said that the tragedy of Srebrenica
would forever haunt the history of the United Nations.
Russia’s veto shows that it is hard to lay those ghosts
to rest. We must nevertheless continue to reflect on the
lessons we have learned as individuals, as countries
and as an Organization.
Twenty years on from Srebrenica, we now have an
even greater set of tools to predict and prevent conflict
and genocide. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect play vital
roles. The Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up
Front initiative and the new framework of analysis
for atrocity crimes are welcome developments. And
beyond the United Nations, we now have even greater
access to information of impending conflict. We can
see the signs of any slide toward genocide, through
non-governmental organizations, human rights
monitors and social media.

S/PV.7481

express our deep condolences to the victims’ friends
and families.
The devastating effects of the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are still felt today, not least in the
memories of those who lost loved ones in the conflict.
We offer our sympathy for all victims of that conflict,
many of whom perished in mass killings that still shock
our collective conscience today.
Thankfully, 20 years on the situation on the
ground is, of course, very different. However, after two
decades reconciliation remains a live issue that requires
continued nurturing. We have seen important steps
taken by all sides towards reconciliation. Pledges have
been made to move further down this path to peace and
friendship. New Zealand encourages all involved to
walk this path together.
In his 1999 report on the Fall of Srebrenica, then
Secretary-General Kofi Annan asked
“how will the United Nations ensure that no future
peacekeeping operation witnesses such calamity on
its watch? (A/54/549, para. 469)”

But early warning is not early action. We knew of
the risks at Srebrenica. We saw the reports of ethnic
cleansing, the signs of mass graves. We heard the
reports from journalists in the field, and yet we did not
act. The consequences of our inaction reverberate to
this day.

More than 15 years later, that is a question which is still
looking for a comprehensive answer. It is a question to
which the memories of all victims of genocide and mass
atrocities deserve an answer. We as a Council have a
duty to remember the past in order to do everything
possible to avoid history repeating itself.

Today, the risks of genocide and mass atrocities
still lie beneath the surface, in South Sudan, in Syria,
in the spread of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We cannot afford to repeat the mistakes of 20 years ago.
We must act where we have early warning. We must
find greater unity in the Council and use all of the
tools at our disposal to do so. Russia’s veto of this draft
resolution shows just how difficult it can be to find this
unity. But we must persevere, for it is the only way to
make “never again” a reality.

New Zealand deeply regrets that the efforts that we
and others made over a considerable period to try to
ensure that this commemorative event would be marked
by a united Council did not prove possible. While
acknowledging the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations, since 1945 New Zealand has
consistently opposed the veto. New Zealand regrets that
despite achieving the support of a majority of Council
members, the draft resolution was not adopted because
of the exercise of a veto by one of the permanent
members. At a commemorative event, it strikes us
particularly inappropriate that a veto was used. While
it was only one negative vote, the outcome reflects on
all of us. It once more demonstrates how we must all
find better ways of working to ensire that the Council
can reach agreement and act when it should.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of New Zealand.
We have heard today from the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights about the events in Srebrenica, which
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Court of Justice determined
involved acts of genocide. New Zealand joined with
others in remembering the victims of that genocide. We

The United Nations and the Council failed many
victims of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
not least those in Srebrenica. Those failures came at
a horrific cost to innocent people on all sides, and

15-2106121/23

S/PV.7481

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

are still felt strongly all these years later. Today, the
Council has failed those innocent victims. Looking to
the future, in order to avoid another event like that at
Srebrenica, or indeed another Rwanda, we must do more
than just strive to design better mandates and work to
improve the capabilities of peacekeeping missions that
the Council authorizes, although of course that is an
important place to start. But beyond that, it is clear that
the Council should be more active in trying to prevent
violent conflict before it begins.
But let us also be honest enough to admit to each
other and to ourselves that the only guarantee of
preventing the horrors witnessed at Srebrenica from
happening again is if we as Member States live up to
the Charter commitments we took on as a condition
of joining thd Organisation. We all — all Members of
the United Nations — have to own this responsibility,
irrespective of race, colour, creed or history, or state of
development. This is fundamental to our common and
shared humanity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I would
urge him and any others who ask to take the floor to
remember the solemn spirit of the commemorative we
are celebrating today.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to make two comments, one
procedural in nature and the other substantive.
The procedural comment is as follows. Today,
several representatives have taken the floor twice, once
in explanation of vote and once on the substantive issue.
We note that, in his first statement, the representative
of France did not say a single word in explanation of his
vote. We believe that such a statement is inappropriate.
On the substance, some delegations — those
of the United States and the United Kingdom in
particular — criticized Russia’s position. They distorted
our position, which, I stress, in no way justifies their
comments. I would simply suggest that they should
have listened to our statement more carefully. I do,
however, also have a number of questions in that regard
that I should like to put to the representatives of the
United States and the United Kingdom.
We recently marked the fortieth anniversary of the
end of the war in Viet Nam. Why did we not hold a

22/23

08/07/2015

Security Council meeting to commemorate that? Why
was no draft resolution presented to condemn the carpetbombing of Hanoi, the use of napalm, or the massacre
in My Lai led by Lieutenant Calley, who was pardoned
by the President of the United States? We also recently
marked the tenth anniversary of the illegal invasion
of Iraq by the United States and the United Kingdom,
as a result of which over a million people may have
perished and the entire region remains in crisis to this
very day. Why have the United States and the United
Kingdom not suggested that the Security Council adopt
a resolution on that topic, in which events could be
called by their rightful names?
The problem is that the humanism of these
delegations can be switched on and off depending on
political circumstances, which undermines our trust in
their statements and in their actions.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked to make a further statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): In the spirit
of this sober commemoration, I shall be very brief.
First, I would say that every country and every
people should grapple with their history, and grappling
with that history is a prerequisite to reconciliation. We
in this country are going through something like that
right now after the events in Charleston with respect
to the racial divisions that persist in our society.
Every society should look back, but the Russian
representative’s intervention just now shows not only
that Russia is prepared to deny the genocide, but also
that, accompanying that denial, it simply wants to
distract from that core fact.
There is no distracting from the core fact that
8,000 Muslim men and boys were killed systematically
because they were Bosnian Muslims by Bosnian Serbs
under the leadership of Radovan Karadžić and Ratko
Mladić — not by the Serbian people — and that those
families are grieving today doubly, first and foremost
because they lost their loved ones, and secondly because
our collective effort to recognize and commemorate the
genocide in Srebrenica was vetoed by Russia.
The President: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I shall speak very
briefly just to say that this is a 20-year anniversary of
an event in which the United Nations as an institution
and the Council were deeply associated. It is therefore

15-21061

08/07/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

absolutely vital and absolutely right that we have
focused on this. We were proud to hold the pen on the
draft resolution, and seeking to commemorate that
event in the way that we have tried to do today has
absolutely got to be the right thing to do.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a further statement.

S/PV.7481

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will heed your call, Sir, to take into
account the very special nature of this meeting. I shall
therefore refrain from responding to the tirades of the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom just now.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

15-2106123/23
