A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/157
8 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.1 and Corr.1)]
54/157. International Covenants on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/116 of 12 December 1997 and Commission on Human Rights resolution
1998/9 of 3 April 1998,1
Mindful that the International Covenants on Human Rights2 constitute the first all-embracing and legally
binding international treaties in the field of human rights and, together with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,3 form the core of the International Bill of Human Rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General4 on the status of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,5
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and reaffirming that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

2
3

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Resolution 217 A (III).

4

A/54/277 and Corr.1.

5

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, and resolution 44/128, annex.

00 26508

/...

A/RES/54/157
Page 2

universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the promotion and protection of one category
of rights should never exempt or excuse States from the promotion and protection of the other rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in examining the progress made by States parties in fulfilling the obligations undertaken
in the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and in providing recommendations to States parties on their implementation,
1. Reaffirms the importance of the International Covenants on Human Rights as major parts of
international efforts to promote universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
2. Appeals strongly to all States that have not yet done so to become parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, as well as to accede to the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and to make the declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
3. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to intensify systematic efforts
to encourage States to become parties to the International Covenants on Human Rights and, through the
programme of advisory services in the field of human rights, to assist such States, at their request, in ratifying
or acceding to the Covenants and to the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
4. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and, where applicable, the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
5. Stresses the importance of avoiding the erosion of human rights by derogation, and underlines the
necessity of strict observance of the agreed conditions and procedures for derogation under article 4 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, bearing in mind the need for States parties to provide
the fullest possible information during states of emergency so that the justification for the appropriateness
of measures taken in those circumstances can be assessed;
6. Encourages States parties to consider limiting the extent of any reservations they lodge to the
International Covenants on Human Rights, to formulate any reservations as precisely and narrowly as
possible and to ensure that no reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the relevant treaty
or otherwise incompatible with international treaty law;
7. Also encourages States parties to review regularly any reservations made in respect of the
provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to withdrawing them;

/...

A/RES/54/157
Page 3

8. Takes note with appreciation of the annual report of the Human Rights Committee submitted to
the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session,6 and takes note of General Comments Nos. 257 and 268
adopted by the Committee;
9. Also takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights on its sixteenth and seventeenth sessions9 and eighteenth and nineteenth sessions,10 and takes note of
General Comments Nos. 8,11 9,12 10,13 1114 and 1215 adopted by the Committee;
10. Urges States parties to fulfil in good time such reporting obligations under the International
Covenants on Human Rights as may be requested and in their reports to make use of gender-disaggregated
data;
11. Stresses the importance of taking fully into account a gender perspective in the implementation of
the International Covenants on Human Rights at the national level, including in the national reports of States
parties and in the work of the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights;
12. Urges States parties to take duly into account, in implementing the provisions of the International
Covenants on Human Rights, the observations made at the conclusion of the consideration of their reports
by the Human Rights Committee and by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well
as the views adopted by the Human Rights Committee under the first Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
13. Invites States parties to give particular attention to the dissemination at the national level of the
reports they have submitted to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the summary records relating to the examination of those reports by the Committees and the
observations made by the Committees at the conclusion of the consideration of the reports;
14. Once again encourages all Governments to publish the texts of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in as many local languages
as possible and to distribute them and make them known as widely as possible in their territories;

6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/54/40).
Ibid., Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/51/40), vol. I, annex V.
8
Ibid., Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/53/40), vol. I, annex VII.
9
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 2 (E/1998/22).
7

10

Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 2 (E/1999/22).

11

Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 2 (E/1998/22), annex V.

12

Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 2 (E/1999/22), annex IV.
Ibid., annex V.

13
14

E/C.12/1999/4.

15

E/C.12/1999/5.
/...

A/RES/54/157
Page 4

15. Invites the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
when considering the reports of States parties, to continue to identify specific needs that might be addressed
by United Nations departments, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, including through the
advisory services and technical assistance programme of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights;
16. Stresses the need for improved coordination between relevant United Nations mechanisms and
bodies in supporting States parties, upon their request, in implementing the International Covenants on
Human Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and
encourages continued efforts in this direction;
17. Invites States to continue to contribute, with practical proposals and ideas, to the dialogue on ways
of improving the functioning of the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights;
18. Welcomes the continuing efforts of the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights to strive for uniform standards in the implementation of the provisions of the
International Covenants on Human Rights, and appeals to other bodies dealing with similar human rights
questions to respect those uniform standards, as expressed in the general comments of the Committees;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to assist States parties to the International Covenants
on Human Rights in the preparation of their reports, including by convening seminars or workshops at the
national level for the purpose of training government officials engaged in the preparation of such reports, and
by exploring other possibilities available under the regular programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights effectively assists the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in the implementation of their respective mandates, including by the provision of
adequate Secretariat staff resources;
21. Welcomes the initiative by the Secretary-General, taking into account the suggestions of the Human
Rights Committee, to take determined steps, in particular through the Department of Public Information of
the Secretariat, to give more publicity to the work of that Committee and, similarly, to the work of the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, under
the item entitled “Human rights questions”, a report on the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, including all reservations and
declarations.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
