S/2012/166

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 March 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 19 March 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to submit, pursuant to paragraph 9 of Security Council
resolution 2003 (2011), a framework for African Union and United Nations
facilitation of the Darfur peace process. The framework has been developed in close
consultation with the African Union, and through consultations with the Sudanese
stakeholders and the Implementation Follow-up Commission. With a view to
facilitating a comprehensive and inclusive settlement to the Darfur conflict, it
provides a plan for African Union and United Nations support to the Darfur peace
process.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-26460 (E) 200312

*1226460*

S/2012/166

Framework for African Union and United Nations facilitation of
the Darfur peace process
Introduction
1.
The most recent phase of the Darfur negotiations culminated in the signing in
Doha on 14 July 2011 of the Agreement between the Government of the Sudan and
the Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM) for the Adoption of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. While the signing of the agreement represented an important
step forward in the peace process, and the Doha Document provides a basis for
reaching a comprehensive political settlement to the Darfur conflict, an inclusive
and therefore lasting solution has not yet been reached.
2.
The Security Council welcomed in paragraph 9 of resolution 2003 (2011) the
intention of the Secretary-General to develop a road map for the Darfur peace
process, working in close consultation with the African Union, and consulting, as
appropriate, all Sudanese stakeholders and the Implementation Follow-up
Commission. This note provides a “framework” rather than a “road map” for
African Union and United Nations support to the Darfur peace process in that it
reflects mediation and facilitation steps rather than a strategic plan. Its title
distinguishes it from the road map of the African Union High-level Panel on Darfur
outlined in its 2009 report and reports of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel that replaced it, which reflects on issues of peace, justice,
reconciliation and Darfur’s position in the Sudan necessary for sustainable peace.
3.
In its report of 30 November 2011 to the 301st meeting of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
summarized its approach to peace in Darfur, stating that the Darfur conflict could be
defined as “the Sudanese conflict in Darfur”, and noting that it originated in “longstanding problems of governance in the Sudan, and especially the challenge of
governing a diverse country in an equitable manner”. The Panel welcomed the
signing of the Doha Document as an instrument to end hostilities and the basis for
the foundations for peace, noting that its proposal to initiate a Darfur political
process “primarily as a domestic exercise to involve all Darfurians in negotiating
the future of Darfur within the Sudan” remained valid in this context. The Panel
stressed that the immediate task was to popularize the Doha Document to ensure its
acceptance by the population of Darfur and to persuade the remaining armed groups
to sign the Document. The Panel stated that in “the new context that has emerged
following the secession of South Sudan, the Darfur peace process will, of necessity,
be linked to the national constitutional reform process that involves all citizens of
the Republic of the Sudan in forging a new national political settlement. Indeed, a
durable resolution of the Sudanese conflict in Darfur requires that a holistic
agreement among Darfurians be an integral part of a national process.”
4.
I fully support the views of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel as outlined above. In this context, the present note recognizes that the African
Union, in particular the Panel, is mandated in accordance with the communiqués of
the African Union Peace and Security Council, including its communiqué of
30 November 2011, to support the Government of the Sudan and relevant parties in
regard to including the outcome of the Darfur peace process in the national
constitutional review process.

2

12-26460

S/2012/166

5.
The framework is built on the premise that the people of Darfur and the parties
to the conflict must lead the peace process and its implementation, with the United
Nations, the African Union and international partners in a facilitation role. The
international community can do a lot to support the process, but in the final analysis
sustainable peace can be created only by the people of Darfur and the parties to the
conflict.
6.
The framework is built on three pillars to be pursued simultaneously:
(a) support to the signatory parties with the implementation of the Doha Document;
(b) engagement with the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory armed
movements to promote negotiations; and (c) support for Darfur-based internal
dialogue and consultations.
7.
The framework was developed through a series of consultations within and
between the African Union and United Nations, and with Sudanese stakeholders and
the Implementation Follow-up Commission. The consultations were held, inter alia,
at a joint African Union-United Nations workshop on the future steps in the Darfur
peace process, held in Addis Ababa on 17 and 18 July 2011, a retreat for Special
Envoys for the Sudan in El Geneina on 19 and 20 October 2011 and numerous
bilateral meetings. Consultations with partners will continue as the framework is
implemented in order to further review, refine and coordinate action in support of
the peace process. In this regard, flexibility will be required during implementation
to ensure that the framework is adjusted as required in response to new
developments and changes in the context.
Guiding principles
8.
The framework for the Darfur peace process is guided by the following
principles:
(a) The peace process should include all stakeholders, including the
Government of the Sudan (such as, inter alia, elected members of Darfur
constituencies in the national and local governments); LJM and other armed
movements; political parties; and Darfuri civil society, including Arab communities.
(b) The Joint Chief Mediator should continue to engage the parties to
promote the resumption of peace talks. However, the international community
should avoid establishing a new mediation process that permits endless rounds of
negotiations and delaying tactics.
(c) The framework should reflect broad consensus among international
actors on the way forward in the Darfur peace process. It should provide the plan for
a coordinated and coherent approach within the international community to
supporting the peace process and ensure that the initiatives of international actors
are mutually reinforcing.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
9.
In Darfur, the adoption of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur appears to
have generated hope in a large cross-section of the population. Informal
consultations conducted by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) with a selection of interlocutors in camps of internally displaced
persons, civil society organizations and political parties show a generally positive
response, but also mixed sentiments, some scepticism and even rejection. On the

12-26460

3

S/2012/166

basis of informal consultations on the ground, UNAMID has concluded that many
Darfuris are in favour of the agreement and have commended it as a means through
which to address the root causes of the conflict. They have welcomed the pledge of
the Government of Qatar to support development efforts in Darfur and stressed the
need for sustained support by the United Nations, the African Union and other
members of the international community. Worried about the absence hitherto of key
armed movements from the negotiations, they have urged continued engagement
with the Government and non-signatory movements to increase the inclusiveness of
the peace process. They have underlined the need for the Doha Document signatory
parties to demonstrate strong political will and the commitment required to ensure
that the document is implemented. At the same time, reactions have been generally
negative among supporters of the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Abdul Wahid and
SLA-Minni Minawi in the Kalma and Zam Zam internally displaced person camps,
respectively, and among the Darfuri representatives of some opposition political
parties, who have cited as concerns the lack of inclusiveness of the Doha Document
and the lack of political will on the part of the signatory parties to implement it
faithfully.
10. Meanwhile, the Government of the Sudan and LJM have begun to implement
the Doha Document. This has included, to date, the establishment of the Darfur
Regional Authority and, with the assistance of UNAMID, of the Ceasefire
Commission; the holding of the inaugural meeting of the Joint Commission; the
appointment of a Darfuri to the post of Second Vice-President of the Republic of the
Sudan, the leader of LJM as Chairperson of the Darfur Regional Authority, the
Secretary-General of LJM as Federal Minister of Health and a member of LJM as
Wali of Western Darfur; appointment of members of the Executive Authority of the
Darfur Regional Authority, including seven LJM representatives in accordance with
the Protocol on the Political Participation of LJM; the appointment of a Public
Prosecutor to the Special Court for Darfur; and the inauguration of the Darfur
Regional Authority.
Engagement with the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory movements
11. Representatives of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) participated
intermittently in the Doha negotiations, but did not sign the Agreement for the
Adoption of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, stating that, in the absence of
comprehensive talks with the Government on all aspects of the peace process and of
a unified front among all armed movements, the Doha Document was a partial and
therefore inadequate solution to the conflict. Since that time, Mohamed Bahr Ali
Hamdeen, former Deputy Chairman of JEM and Chief Negotiator, has established a
break-away faction from JEM and has stated a desire to negotiate a settlement with
the Government on the basis of the Doha Document.
12. In the meantime, on 11 November 2011, JEM joined the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front (SRF), composed of the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth, SLA-Abdul Wahid and SLA-Minni Minawi, which, inter alia, has pledged to
overthrow the Government of the National Congress Party. JEM has nevertheless
stated that it would be willing to enter into negotiations with the Government
provided all aspects of the Doha Document were open for discussion. The
Movement has produced a “counter-draft” of the document that contains significant
amendments to all seven chapters.

4

12-26460

S/2012/166

13. Late in December 2011, the leader of JEM, Khalil Ibrahim, was killed in an
engagement with Sudanese Armed Forces, and his brother, Gibril Ibrahim, was
appointed as his successor. The implications for the Darfur peace process of Khalil
Ibrahim’s death will become clear only over time. Increasing the inclusiveness of
the peace process with regard to the belligerent parties, however, remains an
important element of a lasting settlement to the conflict.
14. Despite the best efforts of the joint mediation and the international community,
SLA-Abdul Wahid did not participate in the negotiation process leading to the Doha
Document. As SLA-Minni Minawi had signed the Darfur Peace Agreement, that
movement was considered to be a part of the Government at the beginning of the
negotiation process. SLA-Minni Minawi split from the Government in the latter part
of 2010. Since the signing of the Doha Document, the Chairman of SLA-Minni
Minawi has stated that his movement would enter into negotiations with the
Government only if they were held on the basis of national political and economic
reforms. It has been assessed that SLA-Abdul Wahid holds a similar position.
15. For its part, the Government has indicated that it will negotiate with the
movements only when they have renounced their call to overthrow the National
Congress Party-led Government and only on the sections of the Doha Document
relating to political appointments and final security arrangements.
16. Without the inclusion of the non-signatory movements in the peace process,
the prospects for continuing hostilities in Darfur remain real. The framework
therefore recognizes the importance of involving the non-signatory movements in
the peace process with a view to expeditiously concluding a fully inclusive,
negotiated settlement to the conflict. In terms of proceeding on the basis of the Doha
Document, the Government of the Sudan and LJM, as signatory parties, will need to
show flexibility and be open to the possibility of renegotiating aspects of the
document if so desired by the negotiating parties.
Internal dialogue and consultations
17. Lasting peace in Darfur can be achieved only through a peace process that
includes all major Darfuri stakeholders, including non-belligerents. The views of the
civilian population, including women, need to be reflected in any political
settlement to ensure local ownership of and broad-based support for the settlement.
The framework therefore includes the holding of Darfur-based internal dialogue and
consultations to complement and enhance the Doha Document. UNAMID and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel will work together in this regard to
develop a plan for Darfur-based internal dialogue and consultations that builds on
the outcome of the Doha negotiations. While stakeholders themselves will
ultimately determine the nature of the consultations, it is envisaged that they will
involve locality- and state-level conferences throughout Darfur that culminate in a
major, Darfur-wide conference.
18. To be credible, the process will need to be inclusive of a broad range of
Darfuri stakeholders from all key constituencies (including diverse and equitable
representation based on, inter alia, geography and tribe), safe and free from undue
manipulation by parties or stakeholders. This will require certain conditions to be in
place, in particular as they concern the safety and security of participants and their
political and civil rights. In the context of supporting the implementation of the
Doha Document and assisting with its dissemination throughout Darfur, UNAMID

12-26460

5

S/2012/166

commenced preliminary consultations in October with stakeholders on the
conditions necessary for Darfur-based internal dialogue and consultations. The
findings of these preliminary consultations will inform the development by
UNAMID and the African Union High-level Implementation Panel of a plan to
support credible internal dialogue, taking into account the relevant resolutions and
communiqués of the United Nations Security Council and African Union Peace and
Security Council.
19. The rationale of Darfur-based internal dialogue is predicated on the need to
fully include the people of Darfur in the peace process. As the envisaged approach is
stakeholder-driven, the outcome of the process should not be prejudged; instead it
should be determined in the course of the consultations by the participants
themselves. For the international community, as well as the Doha Document
signatory parties, this may create the challenge of how to relate the outcome of the
internal dialogue to the implementation of the Doha Document, as well as to the
outcomes of future negotiations between the Government and non-signatory parties.
This issue relates to the comprehensiveness of the document and should be solved
through dialogue between all parties involved, facilitated by UNAMID, the Joint
Chief Mediator and the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, in
consultation with international partners.
Peace dividends and early recovery
20. Long-term peace in Darfur is inextricably linked to returns, durable solutions
for the displaced, early recovery, reconstruction and development. While
responsibility for reconstruction and development rests primarily with the
Government of the Sudan, and the onus of implementing the early recovery and
development aspects of the Doha Document rests with the signatory parties,
international support for such activities can help to strengthen the peace process,
provided it is well coordinated and contributes to sustainable, durable solutions.
Assistance from the African Union, the United Nations and the broader international
community in early recovery and reconstruction — and eventually for
development — including through the implementation of relevant provisions of the
Doha Document, will form an important part of most aspects of the framework and
will eventually require, as peace becomes sustainable, a special focus of the
international community. Further consultations on these issues between UNAMID,
the United Nations country team, the Darfur Regional Authority and other partners
will be required.
Plan of action
21. In the light of the above, a three-pronged strategy for reaching a
comprehensive and inclusive political settlement to the conflict is proposed that
involves (a) supporting the implementation of the Doha Document; (b) engagement
with the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory armed movements to promote
negotiations; and (c) support for Darfur-based internal dialogue and consultations.
These are mutually supportive processes that should be pursued in parallel.

6

12-26460

S/2012/166

Objective 1
Effective and timely implementation of the Doha Document by the
signatory parties
22.

Actions. The following actions are proposed:

(a) The signatory parties, assisted by UNAMID and international partners,
ensure the effective functioning of the Darfur Regional Authority and associated
institutions;
(b) The signatory parties, with the support of UNAMID, implement the
ceasefire and final security arrangements of the Doha Document in accordance with
the timelines and plans provided for in the document;
(c) In consultation with the people of Darfur, the Darfur Regional Authority
develops an outline of priorities for the implementation of the provisions of the
Doha Document and commences their implementation;
(d) The signatory parties strengthen their capacity and ability to implement
the Doha Document, including through the provision of advice, as appropriate, from
UNAMID and international partners;
(e) UNAMID, the African Union High-level Implementation Panel and other
partners exercise their good offices in a coordinated way to encourage the signatory
parties to implement the Doha Document faithfully and demonstrate flexibility when
faced with disagreements;
(f) The signatory parties, with the support of UNAMID and international
partners, determine resource mobilization needs in connection with the
implementation of the Doha Document.
23. Timelines. These actions would be pursued through the entire period of
implementation of the Doha Document, with specific action plans to be developed
to address key priority areas of the document.
24. Potential risks to the implementation of the Doha Document include weak
leadership and weak commitment on the part of the signatory parties to taking
concrete steps and making the compromises necessary for its implementation.
Another risk would be resistance to the support offered by the African Union and
United Nations in the implementation of the agreement. A third risk would be the
lack of trust in the Government by local communities, based on experiences from
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement. The Government can take steps to
overcome this risk by implementing quickly those aspects of the Doha Document of
greatest importance to the people of Darfur and delivering to them quick peace
dividends that address communities’ needs in an equitable and sustainable fashion.
A fourth risk involves objections to the provisions of the agreement by other major
Sudanese stakeholders. This risk can be averted by the timely commencement of
internal consultations and negotiations with non-signatory parties. An additional risk
is the ability of signatory parties to meet their financial obligations in carrying out
the Doha Document and the possible reluctance of donors to fund its
implementation. These risks can be averted by the parties first investing their
resources in implementation of the document to the extent possible and working
with international partners in identifying priority resource mobilization
requirements. The possible reluctance of donors can be mitigated by the parties if
they show concrete progress in implementation of the agreement and willingness to

12-26460

7

S/2012/166

invest their own funds. A related risk is the limited capacity of the Darfur Regional
Authority to absorb, disperse and manage funds, which can also be overcome by
close donor collaboration with the Authority to build its capacity.
Objective 2
Inclusivity, local ownership of and consensus among the people of Darfur on the
peace process
25.

Actions. The following actions are proposed:

(a) The signatory parties and civil society, assisted by UNAMID,
disseminate the Doha Document to the grass roots;
(b) Through consultation with UNAMID and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, Darfuri stakeholders propose the conditions needed to ensure
safe and credible internal dialogue, and make their views known on issues of
representation, venues, dates and the elements of a comprehensive solution to the
conflict;
(c) UNAMID, on the basis of these consultations, further develops effective
mechanisms to monitor the enabling conditions;
(d) The United Nations Secretariat and African Union Commission
respectively keep the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council apprised
of issues relating to the enabling environment for the consultation process;
(e) At the appropriate time, UNAMID puts in place logistical preparations
for the holding of the internal dialogue;
(f) UNAMID and the African Union High-level Implementation Panel verify
the voluntary, inclusive and representative nature of selection for the internal
dialogue process and agree on a monitoring and reporting mechanism;
(g) UNAMID and the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
launch the consultation process, monitor the environment within which
consultations are held and report on security incidents, threats, violations of
participants’ freedoms and instances of undue interference.
26. Timelines. Dissemination of the Doha Document by the signatory parties and
civil society, as well as preliminary consultations with stakeholders on the planning
and conduct of the internal dialogue, commenced in October 2011. During the first
quarter of 2012, there will be further engagement with all stakeholders. On this
basis, during the second quarter of 2012, UNAMID will further develop its
mechanisms to ensure the effective monitoring of the conditions for the internal
dialogue. Selection by stakeholder groups of participants and the commencement of
locality- and state-level consultations should occur at the same time, provided the
requisite conditions are in place. Thereafter, internal dialogue and consultation
meetings and conferences would be held throughout Darfur, and inputs from the
consultations would be submitted to a Darfur-wide conference, and subsequently to
the Doha Document signatories, for consideration and adoption.
27. Potential risks to the internal dialogue include the physical security of
participants, particularly in regard to disturbances which can be created by fighting
between the Government and armed groups. This risk must be kept under careful
review. Further risks are related to the protection of the political and civil rights of

8

12-26460

S/2012/166

participants. These risks can be mitigated by action taken by the Government to
ensure the protection of the rights of participants, by the establishment of
appropriate monitoring mechanisms by UNAMID, and action by the Government to
ensure the freedom of movement of UNAMID and participants. Conversely, there is
a risk that the threshold in terms of the conducive environment will not correlate
with that deemed necessary by the would-be participants. Preliminary consultations
on stakeholders’ views on the necessary conditions for a credible internal dialogue
and effective monitoring by UNAMID can help to reduce this risk. A further risk
relates to attempts by parties to the conflict or other stakeholders to unduly
influence the outcome of the internal dialogue; this can be mitigated through an
effective monitoring process. Finally, the risk of unrealistic demands or expectations
among stakeholders, and doubts among stakeholders about commitments to
implement the outcome of the process, can be addressed through an effective public
information campaign and concrete steps by the signatory parties to meet
expectations of the population.
Objective 3
Non-signatory parties and the Government of the Sudan participate fully in a
negotiated peace process
28.

Actions. The following actions are proposed:

(a) The Joint Chief Mediator, with the support of the international
community, maintains contact with all parties, urging them to enter into
negotiations;
(b) The Joint Chief Mediator, with the support of the international
community, encourages the parties to take measures to build confidence among
them, including, inter alia, ceasing hostilities;
(c) The Joint Chief Mediator facilitates negotiations once the parties are
ready to engage in them;
(d) The Joint Chief Mediator keeps international partners regularly informed
about progress and coordinates action with them.
29. Timeline. The use of good offices to bring the parties into the peace process
would continue until such time as there is a sustainable peace process for Darfur.
30. Potential risks to bringing the non-signatories to the negotiating table include
the insistence by the parties on unrealistic preconditions for negotiations. A further
risk is the intransigence of the parties vis-à-vis negotiations and during the
negotiations. These risks can be mitigated by establishing unified positions among
the international community in respect of the peace process and maintaining close
dialogue with the parties. A further risk is the establishment of parallel peace
process initiatives by regional and/or international partners that undermine this
element of the framework.
International engagement in the Darfur peace process
31. The coordinated and complementary involvement of international actors in
support of the Darfur peace process is key to the success of efforts to advance the
peace process. Competing agendas among international actors, the creation of
parallel initiatives and the provision of support from regional countries to

12-26460

9

S/2012/166

non-signatory movements that undermines attempts to persuade the movements to
join the peace process can hinder progress. These risks can be mitigated through
regular consultation and information-sharing among international actors.
32. UNAMID and the Joint Chief Mediator will keep international partners
informed about the status of the peace process, including negotiations and Doha
Document implementation and challenges, and coordinate international support to
the parties in overcoming challenges and difficulties. The Implementation Followup Commission, Special Envoys’ meetings and direct discussions would form the
means of such consultation and coordination. In addition, the African Union and the
United Nations will convene at their headquarters regular meetings of the Sudan
Consultative Forum to ensure wider awareness of the progress achieved in
implementing the framework and to ensure a coordinated international approach to
Darfur. Further, the African Union Commission and the United Nations Secretariat
will brief the African Union Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council every 90 days on progress against implementing the framework.
These information-sharing and coordination efforts will continue throughout the
search for a just and lasting solution to the Darfur conflict.

10

12-26460
