United Nations

A/RES/67/166

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 69 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/457/Add.2 and Corr.1)]

67/166. Human rights in the administration of justice
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in articles 3, 5, 8, 9 and 10 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols
thereto, 2 in particular articles 6, 7, 9 and 10 of the Covenant, the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, 3 in particular articles 37, 39 and 40, and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 4 as well as all other relevant
international treaties,
Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of the
administration of justice,
Recalling all the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council
that are relevant to the subject of human rights in the administration of justice,
including General Assembly resolutions 62/158 of 18 December 2007 and 65/213 of
21 December 2010 and Human Rights Council resolutions 10/2 of 25 March 2009 5
and 18/12 of 29 September 2011, 6
Recalling also General Assembly resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
entitled “Declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule
of law at the national and international levels”,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex; and United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1642, No. 14688.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
4
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/64/53),
chap. II, sect. A.
6
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
2

12-48856

*1248856*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/166

Human rights in the administration of justice

Welcoming the entry into force of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 7 and encouraging all States
that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention,
Welcoming also the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women
Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules), 8
Welcoming further the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to
Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems, 9
Taking note of general comments No. 21 on the humane treatment of persons
deprived of their liberty 10 and No. 32 on the right to equality before courts and
tribunals and to a fair trial, 11 adopted by the Human Rights Committee, and general
comments No. 10 on children’s rights in juvenile justice 12 and No. 13 on the right of
the child to freedom from all forms of violence, 13 adopted by the Committee on the
Rights of the Child,
Noting with appreciation the important work in the field of the administration
of justice of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) as well as the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Noting with satisfaction the work of the Interagency Panel on Juvenile Justice
and of its members, in particular their coordination in providing technical advice
and assistance in juvenile justice, and the active participation of civil society in their
respective work,
Convinced that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and the
integrity of the judicial system as well as an independent legal profession are
essential prerequisites for the protection of human rights, the rule of law, good
governance and democracy and for ensuring that there is no discrimination in the
administration of justice and should therefore be respected in all circumstances,
Recalling that every State should provide an effective framework of remedies
to redress human rights grievances or violations,
Emphasizing that the right to access to justice for all forms an important basis
for strengthening the rule of law through the administration of justice,
Mindful of the importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and human
rights in the administration of justice as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity,

_______________
7

Resolution 61/177, annex.
Resolution 65/229, annex.
9
Resolution 67/187, annex.
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/47/40),
annex VI.B.
11
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/62/40), vol. I, annex VI.
12
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/63/41), annex IV.
13
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/67/41), annex V.
8

2/7

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/67/166

Recognizing the importance of the principle that, except for those lawful
limitations that are demonstrably necessitated by the fact of incarceration, persons
deprived of their liberty shall retain their non-derogable human rights and all other
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling that the social rehabilitation of persons deprived of their liberty shall
be among the essential aims of the criminal justice system, ensuring, as far as
possible, that offenders are able to lead a law-abiding and self-supporting life upon
their return to society,
Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the specific situation of
children, juveniles and women in the administration of justice, in particular while
they are deprived of their liberty, and their vulnerability to various forms of
violence, abuse, injustice and humiliation,
Recognizing the specific situation and needs of children formerly associated
with armed forces or armed groups when accused of crimes under international law
allegedly committed while they were associated with armed forces or armed groups,
Reaffirming that the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration
in all decisions concerning the child in the administration of justice, including in
relation to pretrial measures, as well as being an important consideration in all
matters concerning the child related to sentencing of his or her parents, or, where
applicable, legal guardians or primary caregivers,
Takes note with appreciation of the most recent report of the
1.
Secretary-General; 14
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the most recent report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the protection of human rights of
juveniles deprived of their liberty 15 and the joint report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children on prevention of and responses to violence against children within
the juvenile justice system, 16 both submitted to the Human Rights Council;
3.
Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all
United Nations standards on human rights in the administration of justice;
4.
Reiterates its call to all Member States to spare no effort in providing for
effective legislative and other mechanisms and procedures, as well as adequate
resources, to ensure the full implementation of those standards;
Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the relevant
5.
United Nations entities and programmes in order to strengthen national capacities
and infrastructures in the field of the administration of justice;
Appeals to Governments to include in their national development plans
6.
the administration of justice as an integral part of the development process and to
allocate adequate resources for the provision of legal aid services with a view to
promoting and protecting human rights, and invites the international community to

_______________
14

A/67/260 and Add.1.
A/HRC/21/26.
16
A/HRC/21/25.
15

3/7

A/RES/67/166

Human rights in the administration of justice

respond favourably to requests for financial and technical assistance for the
enhancement and strengthening of the administration of justice;
7.
Stresses the special need for national capacity-building in the field of the
administration of justice, in particular through reform of the judiciary, the police
and the penal system, as well as juvenile justice reform, in order to establish and
maintain stable societies and the rule of law in post-conflict situations, and in this
context welcomes the role of the Office of the High Commissioner in supporting the
establishment and functioning of transitional justice mechanisms in post-conflict
situations;
Affirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
8.
terrorism, including in the administration of justice, complies with their obligations
under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law;
Notes the work of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to
9.
exchange information on best practices, as well as on national legislation and
existing international law, and on the revision of existing United Nations standard
minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners so that they reflect recent advances in
correctional science and best practices, with a view to reporting on its progress to
the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, at its twenty-second
session, and in this regard invites the expert group to benefit from the expertise of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and of the Office of the High
Commissioner and other relevant stakeholders;
10. Recalls the absolute prohibition of torture in international law, and calls
upon States to address and prevent the detention conditions, treatment and
punishment of persons deprived of their liberty that amount to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
11. Urges States to endeavour to reduce, where appropriate, pretrial
detention, inter alia, by adopting legislative and administrative measures and
policies on its preconditions, limitations, duration and alternatives and by taking
measures aimed at the implementation of existing legislation, as well as by ensuring
access to justice and legal advice and assistance;
12. Encourages States to address overcrowding in detention facilities by
taking effective measures, including through enhancing the use of alternatives to
pretrial detention and custodial sentences where possible, access to legal aid and the
efficiency as well as the capacity of the criminal justice system and its facilities;
13. Continues to encourage States to pay due attention to the United Nations
Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for
Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules)8 when developing and implementing
relevant legislation, procedures, policies and action plans, and invites relevant
special procedure mandate holders, the Office of the High Commissioner, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and all other relevant organizations to take
those rules into consideration in their activities;
14. Recognizes that every child and juvenile in conflict with the law must be
treated in a manner consistent with his or her rights, dignity and needs, in
accordance with international law, bearing in mind relevant international standards
on human rights in the administration of justice, and calls upon States parties to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child3 to abide strictly by its principles and
provisions;

4/7

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/67/166

15. Encourages States that have not yet integrated children’s issues into their
overall rule of law efforts to do so and to develop and implement a comprehensive
juvenile justice policy to prevent and address juvenile delinquency, as well as with a
view to promoting, inter alia, the use of alternative measures, such as diversion and
restorative justice, and complying with the principle that deprivation of liberty of
children should be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest
appropriate period of time, as well as to avoid, wherever possible, the use of pretrial
detention for children;
16. Stresses the importance of including reintegration strategies for former
child offenders in juvenile justice policies, in particular through education
programmes, with a view to their assuming a constructive role in society;
17. Urges States to take all necessary and effective measures, including legal
reform where appropriate, to prevent and respond to all forms of violence against
children within the justice system;
18. Also urges States to ensure that, under their legislation and practice,
neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without the possibility of release
nor corporal punishment is imposed for offences committed by persons under
18 years of age, and invites States to consider repealing all other forms of life
imprisonment for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age;
19. Encourages States not to set the minimum age of criminal responsibility
at too low an age level, bearing in mind the emotional, mental and intellectual
maturity of the child, and in this respect refers to the recommendation of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child to increase the lower minimum age of
criminal responsibility without exception to the age of 12 years as the absolute
minimum age, and to continue to increase it to a higher age level;12
20. Also encourages States to collect relevant information concerning
children within their criminal justice systems so as to improve their administration
of justice, while being mindful of the children’s right to privacy, with full respect
for relevant international human rights instruments, and bearing in mind applicable
international standards on human rights in the administration of justice;
21. Stresses the importance of paying greater attention to the impact of the
imprisonment of parents on their children, while noting with interest the day of
general discussion on the situation of children of prisoners, held by the Committee
on the Rights of the Child on 30 September 2011, as well as the summary report on
the full-day meeting of the Human Rights Council on the rights of the child, held on
8 March 2012; 17
22. Invites Governments to provide for tailored and interdisciplinary human
rights training, including anti-racist, multicultural, gender-sensitive and child rights
training, to all judges, lawyers, prosecutors, social workers, immigration and police
officers and other professionals concerned, including personnel deployed in
international field presences;
23. Encourages the regional commissions, the specialized agencies, United
Nations institutes active in the areas of human rights and crime prevention and
criminal justice, and other relevant parts of the United Nations system, as well as
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, including national

_______________
17

A/HRC/21/31.

5/7

A/RES/67/166

Human rights in the administration of justice

professional associations concerned with promoting United Nations standards in this
field, and other segments of civil society, including the media, to continue to
develop their activities in promoting human rights in the administration of justice;
24. Invites States, upon their request, to benefit from technical advice and
assistance in juvenile justice provided by the relevant United Nations entities and
programmes, in particular the Interagency Panel on Juvenile Justice, in order to
strengthen national capacities and infrastructures in the field of the administration of
justice, in particular juvenile justice;
25. Invites the Human Rights Council and the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, as well as the Office of the High Commissioner,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to continue to closely
coordinate their activities relating to the administration of justice;
26. Invites the Office of the High Commissioner and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to reinforce, within their respective mandates, their
activities relating to national capacity-building in the field of the administration of
justice, in particular in post-conflict situations, and in this context to cooperate with
relevant departments of the Secretariat, including the Peacebuilding Support Office,
the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
27. Underlines the importance of rebuilding and strengthening structures for
the administration of justice and of respecting the rule of law and human rights,
including in post-conflict situations, as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity, and in this respect requests the Secretary-General to
ensure system-wide coordination and coherence of programmes and activities of the
relevant parts of the United Nations system, including through the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General and
supported by the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General,
and in cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission, including assistance
provided through United Nations field presences;
28. Invites States, in the context of the universal periodic review mechanism
and in their reports under international human rights treaties, to consider addressing
the promotion and protection of human rights in the administration of justice;
29. Invites relevant special procedure mandate holders of the Human Rights
Council, as well as relevant treaty bodies, to give special attention to questions
relating to the effective protection of human rights in the administration of justice,
including juvenile justice, and to provide, wherever appropriate, specific
recommendations in this regard, including proposals for advisory services and
technical assistance measures;
30. Invites the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to
consider developing a set of model strategies and practical measures on the
elimination of violence against children in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice, in consultation with all Member States and in close collaboration
with all relevant United Nations entities, in particular with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the Office
of the High Commissioner;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session and to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fourth session a
report on the latest developments, challenges and good practices in human rights in
the administration of justice, analysing the international legal and institutional
6/7

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/67/166

framework for the protection of all persons deprived of their liberty, and on the
activities undertaken by the United Nations system as a whole;
32. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of human rights in
the administration of justice at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

7/7
