S/2016/305

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 April 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2217
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) until 30 April 2016 and requested me to report to the Council every
four months. The report provides an update on the situation prevailing in the Central
African Republic from the date of issuance of my previous report, 30 November
2015 (S/2015/918), to 15 March 2016, and on the implementation of the mandate of
MINUSCA.

II. Major developments
A.

Political and electoral developments
2.
During the reporting period, the Central African Republic achieved significant
milestones in its political transition, most notably the peaceful and successful
holding of a constitutional referendum on 13 December and legislative and
presidential elections in December, February and March.
3.
The electoral period was marked throughout the country by generally peaceful
campaigning by candidates and their supporters in accordance with the code of good
conduct signed by all presidential candidates and political parties on 9 and
12 December. With the exception of security incidents that occurred during the
referendum, in which 28 victims were injured, and pending the completion of the
electoral process, the successive election days were free of violence. The Afr ican
Union and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) deployed
observer missions and issued preliminary reports welcoming the generally peaceful
nature of the polls. The International Organization of la Francophonie deployed a
small observation team in Bangui. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation also
deployed its Special Envoy for the Central African Republic.
4.
MINUSCA and members of the United Nations country team undertook, with
national and international partners, a series of activities to promote a political and
security environment conducive to the holding of the elections, including support
for the development and dissemination of the code of good conduct, training for

16-04359 (E)

050416

*1604359*

S/2016/305

political party election monitors and information sessions for presidential candidates
with the National Electoral Authority. MINUSCA also held informal meetings with
presidential and legislative candidates throughout the country and facilitated
meetings between the Coordination Group for the Preparation of and Fol low-up to
the Meetings of the International Contact Group on the Central African Republic
and candidates to impress on them the importance of issue-based campaigns
responding to the aspirations of Central Africans, including with regard to the
implementation of the recommendations of the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation.
5.
The constitutional referendum held on 13 December led to the adoption of the
new Constitution, with 93 per cent voting in favour. On 24 December, following the
announcement by the National Electoral Authority of the provisional results of the
referendum on 17 December, the Transitional Constitutional Court proclaimed the
final results of the referendum, with no appeals registered.
6.
The Transitional Constitutional Court ruled on the eligibility of all presidential
applications on 8 December. The Court invalidated 14 applications for the
presidential race, including those of former President François Bozizé and
anti-balaka leader Patrice Edouard Ngaïssona. Subsequently, the Nation al Electoral
Authority issued the lists of 30 presidential candidates (including one woman) and
1,643 legislative candidates (including 175 women) on 8 and 16 December,
respectively.
7.
Following a three-day postponement, the first round of presidential and
legislative elections was held on 30 December in a largely calm atmosphere, with a
voter turnout of 62.3 per cent. The Transitional Constitutional Court validated the
provisional results of the first round on 25 January. With regard to the legislative
elections, regarding which 415 appeals were registered, the Court annulled the
results and announced that a new first round would need to be held. The appeals
concerned mainly alleged misconduct by National Electoral Authority field
personnel, candidates, local authorities, militias and armed groups, implicating them
in cases of fraud, corruption and intimidation. Complaints also concerned technical
errors regarding ballot printing and the voter register. Consequently, the National
Electoral Authority suspended 17 district managers allegedly implicated in election
irregularities and swiftly organized a nationwide training programme to improve the
performance of polling officials.
8.
The second round of presidential elections was held jointly with the new rou nd
of legislative elections on 14 February. There was a marked improvement in the
overall organization of the 14 February elections, with the majority of polling
stations opening on time with the required materials. The National Electoral
Authority announced the provisional results on 20 February. The Transitional
Constitutional Court registered three appeals regarding the presidential polls, all of
which were rejected. The Court proclaimed the final results of the presidential
elections on 1 March, confirming candidate Faustin Archange Touadéra as President
with 62.69 per cent of the vote, and with Anicet George Dologuélé garnering
37.31 per cent. Voter turnout was 58.88 per cent.
9.
The decision by second-place presidential candidate Mr. Dologuélé to concede
victory following the announcement of the provisional results had a generally
positive effect on the post-electoral environment, including among his supporters.
While Mr. Dologuélé alleged that there had been fraud and other irregularities

2/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

during the second round, he declared that he had decided not to file complaints with
the Transitional Constitutional Court in the interest of peace and stability in the
country, and called on his supporters to accept the results.
10. With regard to the new round of legislative elections, the Transitional
Constitutional Court received 152 appeals. On 14 March, the Court confirmed that
45 candidates (out of a 140-seat Parliament) had been elected during the first round
with an absolute majority, including anti-balaka leader Alfred Yekatom, who is on
the sanctions list of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic. The Court annulled
the results in 10 constituencies, which will require the holding of by-elections. The
new round of legislative elections saw a notably small number of women candidates
elected and admitted to the second round. Only one woman was elected in the first
round, and five women were admitted to the second. The second round of legislative
elections in 85 constituencies is scheduled on 31 March.
11. Important efforts were undertaken by the United Nations, in particular the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), to enable
refugees in neighbouring States to participate in the electoral process. Tripartite
agreements with the Governments of asylum countries hosting Central African
refugees facilitated their participation. UNHCR provided logistical support to
National Electoral Authority officials in gaining access to refugee camps and urban
refugee settlements in Cameroon, Chad and the Congo and deployed registration
materials prior to and during the vote. As a result, Central African refugees voted in
the constitutional referendum and the presidential election in Cameroon, Chad and
the Congo. The Democratic Republic of the Congo did not permit refugees to
register to vote. The turnout rate for the first round of the presidential elections
among the registered refugee population was 61 per cent, while the turnout rate for
the second round was 40 per cent of registered refugees.
12. Financial constraints had an impact on the electoral process until the latter part
of the reporting period. The funding gap was closed through an additional
contribution of $1.3 million by the United States of America to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP)-managed electoral basket fund. Although an
outstanding pledged contribution of $1.7 million remains from the contributions of
ECCAS countries (Cameroon, the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Gabon), it is
expected that the pledge will be disbursed in time for the completion of the last part
of the electoral cycle.
13. In parallel with the electoral process, line ministries and other transitional
institutions continued the implementation of the recommendations of the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation in collaboration with MINUSCA and other
international partners, particularly in the areas of elections, disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and security sector reform. However,
the Bangui Forum follow-up committee, chaired by the Minister of Defence and
composed of members of the Transitional Authority, political parties, armed groups
and civil society, remained largely inactive, although members o f the committee
served as election monitors in Bangui and the surrounding area.

16-04359

3/19

S/2016/305

B.

Reconciliation
14. The United Nations, in cooperation with international actors, continued to
support national stakeholders in promoting reconciliation efforts. MINUSCA
supported the participation of four regional directors appointed by the Ministry of
Reconciliation in local dialogue and reconciliation initiatives. On 11 February,
following considerable efforts to facilitate intercommunal reconciliation, the
predominantly Muslim community in the third district of Bangui and the mainly
Christian community of the Boeing district signed a “non -aggression” pact,
facilitated by MINUSCA and France. The agreement permitted safe access to the
Muslim cemetery in Boeing for the first time since the crisis had started three years
earlier. To sustain progress, MINUSCA and UNDP undertook security and
protection measures and are launching complementary projects on income
generation, social cohesion, early recovery and rehabilitation in the two
communities.
15. MINUSCA, in close coordination with the United Nations country team and
relevant local authorities, carried out rapid-impact labour-intensive projects
alongside other income-generating projects for youth at risk and for other
vulnerable groups across the country to promote social cohesion as well as
rebuilding and to foster trust. Through this initiative, ongoing projects in Bambari,
Bangui, Bouar, Bria and Kaga-Bandoro are employing youth and local communities
in non-skilled work to rehabilitate local infrastructure. More than 12,000 young
people have directly benefited from the initiative.

C.

Security situation
16. The security situation across the country, although still fragile, improved
during the reporting period, notably in Bangui. The visit of Pope Francis to Bangui
on 29 and 30 November, as well as subsequent dialogue undertaken by the Muslim
and Christian communities and others, led to a decrease in tension and violence in
Bangui and throughout the country. The intercommunal rapprochement prompted by
the Pope’s visit brought to an end the isolation of the Muslim enclave in the PK -5
neighbourhood of Bangui, outside of which community members had been unable to
move freely and safely.
17. Crimes such as murder, torture, sexual violence, theft, abduction, destruction
of property and illegal possession of weapons continued throughout the country.
MINUSCA established an operational and situational awareness system in
December to enhance information-gathering and build a database on key events and
incidents, including conflict-related sexual violence. The robust approach and rapid
intervention carried out by MINUSCA, with the support of the French Sangaris
force, in securing the electoral process contributed to an improvement in the overall
security situation.
18. Despite an initial attempt by former Séléka Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique (FPRC) elements to disrupt the constitutional referendum, the
Mission’s robust posture and pressure from the international community, in
particular the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, led former Séléka leader
Noureddine Adam to issue a statement supporting the electoral process, setting the
stage for the peaceful conduct of elections in parts of the country still dominated by

4/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

members of the group. Activities and clashes between opposing armed groups,
particularly elements of former Séléka groups and anti-balaka elements, continued
with lower intensity. On 15 March, the leader of the fo rmer Séléka FPRC,
Abdoulaye Hissène, was detained in Bangui, in conformity with an arrest warrant
issued by the Attorney General related to his alleged involvement in the September
violence. He was freed from the custody of the national gendarmerie by arme d
elements later that day.
19. The start of 2016 saw an increase in activity attributed to the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) in the south-eastern part of the country, particularly in
Mbomou prefecture, a mining-rich area. On 28 December, an attack by presumed
LRA elements was carried out in the village of Chantier Azar, 65 km north -east of
Bria, leaving two persons killed and one wounded. Following that incident, attacks
continued to be carried out by presumed LRA elements on villages around Bria,
including larger and less isolated population centres. The attacks have caused
hundreds of people to flee from their villages in Haute -Kotto and Mbomou
prefectures, with entire villages remaining depopulated. Former Séléka groups
mobilized to respond to the alleged increased LRA threat, posing broader security
concerns.
20. In response, MINUSCA established a Joint Operations Centre in Bria to
enhance operational coordination and information-sharing among MINUSCA, the
African Union Regional Task Force on the Lord’s Resistance Army and the Special
Operations Forces of the United States. MINUSCA also established temporary
operating bases in Sam Ouandja, Ouadda and Ouanda Djallé; conducted increased
ground patrols on the Zemio-Rafai axis, in Bangassou and Bakouma, on the BriaYalinga axis and in Obo; and conducted deterrent aerial patrols in the affected area.
In addition, MINUSCA began collecting and investigating human rights violations
in LRA-affected areas and established an integrated rapid-response team in Bria.
The Secretariat also engaged with the African Union Commission to encourage
additional contributions of resources and capabilities in support of the fight against
LRA.
21. In the central and western parts of the country, violence associated with the
seasonal movement of Fulani pastoralists began with the beginning of the dry
season in early December and was expected to continue until the end of the season
in May. This led to a deterioration in the security situation in the prefectures of
Basse-Kotto, Mambéré-Kadeï, Nana-Mambéré, Ouaka and Ouham after
mid-January. The most prevalent incidents were clashes between Fulani herders and
armed groups (anti-balaka and former Séléka) over cattle thefts and grazing -related
disputes, as well as tax levying. In Niem-Yelewa, Nana-Mambéré prefecture, the
security situation led to the closure of schools in the area. In March in Bambari,
Ouaka prefecture, armed clashes involving alleged anti-balaka, armed Fulani and
former Séléka Union pour la paix en Centrafrique elements lef t at least seven
persons dead and three wounded and caused significant further population
displacement.
22. In the west, the security situation remained challenging, particularly in areas
bordering Cameroon and Chad. Recent developments indicated increase d activities
by the former Séléka Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC) under
Mahamat Al Khatim, as MPC extended its area of influence towards the western
part of the country up to the Paoua area. MPC cooperated with the armed group

16-04359

5/19

S/2016/305

Révolution et justice, which controls the northern part of Ouham -Pendé prefecture
and parts of Ouham prefecture. Moreover, MPC extended its influence towards
Ndélé, in the east, reportedly in order to control trade routes to Chad. Attacks on
convoys remained a persistent threat along the main supply road from Cameroon to
Bangui, although the number of incidents decreased during the reporting period.
MINUSCA continued to provide armed escorts to commercial and humanitarian
convoys travelling on that axis.

III. Protection of civilians
23. The protection of civilians remained the priority focus of MINUSCA. In
response to potential threats of physical violence against civilians during the
electoral period, and particularly in Bangui, the Mission prioritized the devel opment
of a protection-of-civilians strategy for the capital and mainstreamed the protection
of civilians into its integrated electoral security plan.
24. MINUSCA conducted a number of joint protection team missions, involving
humanitarian actors when appropriate and feasible. In Bangui, a joint protection
team uncovered new allegations of human rights violations at the M’Poko airport
site for internally displaced persons, including sexual violence by former Séléka and
anti-balaka elements, the recruitment of children by anti-balaka elements and sexual
exploitation and abuse by international forces, which were swiftly investigated. In
response to those allegations, MINUSCA established a series of mitigating measures
in close coordination with humanitarian partners. Joint protection team missions
were undertaken in the area around Paoua to assess and address the spike in
intercommunal violence and criminality, as well as in other parts of the country to
support a resolution of the tensions existing between pa storalists and farmers. In
Batangafo, where significant population displacement occurred following tensions
in early November triggered by the killing of two young Muslims, MINUSCA
provided support for a weapons-free-zone agreement between armed groups and
initiated pre-disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and community
violence reduction activities. The Mission also took steps to address the growing
threat posed against the population in LRA-affected areas.
25. MINUSCA established a series of mitigating measures for the protection of
internally displaced persons who faced threats caused by the presence of armed
elements in camps and by repeated attacks or criminality. In Bambari, Batangafo,
Kaga-Bandoro and Ngakobo, the Mission carried out joint military, police and
civilian assessments of sites for internally displaced persons in close coordination
with humanitarian partners. It also developed contingency plans for preventing or
responding to internal displacement and initiated training in that are a for uniformed
personnel, including military field commanders.
26. MINUSCA initiated the recruitment of an additional 28 community liaison
assistants, for a total of 52, to be placed alongside field commanders to support the
development of community protection plans as well as coordination and alert
mechanisms. The Mission developed a standard operating procedure on early
warning, alert and rapid response and is progressively setting up Joint Operations
Centres in all field offices to collect and share ear ly warning information and alerts.

6/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

IV. Human rights situation
A.

Violations by armed forces and groups
27. The human rights situation in the Central African Republic remained of
serious concern during the reporting period. MINUSCA documented 269 new
verified incidents of violations or abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed against 915 victims, including 53 women, 48 boys and
30 girls. The violations included arbitrary killings and cases of cruel and inhuman
treatment, conflict-related sexual violence and sexual and gender-based violence, as
well as arbitrary arrest and detention. The Mission documented 18 incidents of
human rights violations and abuses related to allegations of witchcraft, affecting
mainly women and children. Most of the violations reported were committed by
anti-balaka (42), former Séléka (68) and LRA (29) elements and State authorities
(80), including the Central Office for the Suppression of Banditry, the Central
African armed forces, the police, the gendarmerie, the State intelligence service and
State administrative authorities. MINUSCA recorded the injury of 28 victims during
the constitutional referendum of 13 December, whereas no major human rights
violations were reported during the presidential and legislative elections of
30 December and 14 February.
28. From 1 December to 15 March, MINUSCA reported an increase in human
rights abuses perpetrated by presumed LRA elements in Haute -Kotto and Mbomou
prefectures, as detailed in paragraph 19 above, including the abduction of women
and children, who were often subjected to forced labour or sexual violence.
29. MINUSCA and the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights published their first joint report on the human rights situation in the
Central African Republic on 9 December. A joint report was also issued on
21 March on the surge of violence that had occurred in Bangui in September and
October. The report detailed human rights violations against civilians, including at
least 41 who had been killed and at least 17 who had been injured, raped or
subjected to other forms of sexual violence or kidnapped or otherwise unlawfully
detained, as well as the pillaging, looting and destruction of property.
30. MINUSCA continued to support planning efforts by the Transitional Authority
to establish a national commission on human rights and fundamental liberties and a
truth, justice, reparations and reconciliation commission. During the electoral
process, the Mission supported nine capacity-building projects and training
initiatives aimed at increasing awareness of human rights protection in various
locations across the country.

B.

Conflict-related sexual violence
31. During the reporting period, among the 269 documented human rights
incidents, MINUSCA registered 39 allegations of conflict-related sexual violence,
28 of which were investigated and verified. The 39 cases involved 49 victims,
comprising 30 women, 18 girls and 1 boy. Thirty-three of the cases concerned rape,
and 6 concerned attempted rape, forced marriage and/or sexual assault . Of the
33 cases of rape, 23 were perpetrated by multiple actors and 4 also involved
abduction, forced marriage or sexual slavery. Eighteen of the registered cases were

16-04359

7/19

S/2016/305

allegedly perpetrated by former Séléka, 12 by anti-balaka and 2 by LRA elements.
Eleven cases, involving 15 victims (7 girls and 8 women), await f ull investigation
and verification. The actual number of incidents of conflict -related sexual violence
is suspected to be much higher than the number reported.

C.

Child protection
32. From 1 December to 15 February, the country task force on monitori ng and
reporting, which is co-chaired by MINUSCA and the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), documented the killing of 3 children, the injury of 2 children and
the rape of 11 girls by different armed groups. During the reporting period, the
Mission documented 21 incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse allegedly
committed by international forces against children. Nineteen of those cases,
including seven allegations of rape, involved violations committed by MINUSCA
peacekeepers against girls (between 11 and 17 years of age). The Mission recorded
the abduction of 39 children (22 girls and 17 boys) during attacks carried out by
presumed LRA elements in the northern and south-eastern parts of the country.
Twenty-two children (12 girls and 10 boys), some of whom had been abducted in
2012, escaped from LRA. Sixteen of the children who escaped reported that during
their captivity, some children had been used as combatants while others had worked
as porters, cooks and messengers. Seventeen of the children have been reunified
with their families after receiving medical and psychosocial support from
international non-governmental organizations. Five others are still receiving care
and support.
33. During the reporting period, 1,209 children (852 boys and 357 girl s) were
separated from anti-balaka and Révolution et justice armed militias. The children
are currently receiving psychosocial and rehabilitation support through an
international non-governmental organization funded by UNICEF.
34. MINUSCA carried out training and awareness-raising activities on child
protection for 1,722 participants, including 977 peacekeepers and 745 external
partners (non-governmental organizations, political actors, community leaders and
members, and national security forces). The sessions were focused on the protection
of children during the elections, the conduct of law enforcement agents towards
children and the monitoring of child rights violations.

V. Humanitarian situation
35. More than 2.3 million of the 4.8 million Central Africans still depend on
humanitarian assistance. As at 15 March, there were 421,283 internally displaced
persons in the Central African Republic, with more than 185,689 of the internally
displaced living at 97 sites throughout the country. The highest con centrations of
internally displaced persons living at sites were in Ouaka prefecture, with 61,024
living at 10 sites, and in Bangui and Bimbo, with more than 54,120 living at
30 sites. In addition, more than 460,000 Central Africans were refugees in
neighbouring countries.
36. An emergency food security assessment that was conducted by the World Food
Programme and its partners and whose results were published in January revealed

8/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

that the proportion of Central Africans facing food insecurity increased signif icantly
compared with the previous year, reaching half of the population, or nearly
2.5 million people. The proportion of the severely food -insecure increased from
3 per cent in 2014, when a previous assessment had been conducted, to 15 per cent
in late 2015. On 28 December 2015, the Minister of Health declared a monkey pox
epidemic in Bangassou. As at 15 February, the authorities had confirmed 11 cases in
that area.
37. Since the beginning of 2016, more than seven fire incidents have occurred at
sites for internally displaced persons in Bambari, Batangafo and Kaga -Bandoro,
resulting in the loss of shelter and belongings for tens of thousands of the internally
displaced; investigations are ongoing to determine the cause of those incidents.
38. During the reporting period, the Central African Republic also witnessed the
arrival of 7,000 South Sudanese refugees (mostly women and children) in the south eastern part of the country. The findings of preliminary needs assessments
conducted by UNHCR show that the refugee population is in dire need of
humanitarian assistance, lacking access to water, health care and shelter, with
reported cases of malnutrition. The area where the refugees are located is in an
inaccessible part of the country, making it difficult for humanitarian actors to
deliver assistance to refugee and host communities.
39. As at 31 December, the 2015 humanitarian appeal for the Central African
Republic had realized only 52 per cent of the requested funding, representing a
shortfall of $298 million compared with the total funding requirements of the
2015 Central African Republic Humanitarian Response Plan. In finalizing the
2016 Humanitarian Response Plan, humanitarian actors estimated that there was an
urgent requirement of $565 million to meet the country’s most basic humanitarian
needs.

VI. Socioeconomic developments
40. Economic growth in the Central African Republic in 2015 was estimated at
4.3 per cent below the forecast 5.7 per cent. According to the World Bank, average
inflation eased to 5.4 per cent in 2015, with a projected rate of 4.9 per cent in 2016.
After a sharp contraction in 2013, agricultural growth domestic product increased
3.1 per cent in 2015, with projected growth of 4.1 per cent in 2016. At the end of
2015, the State’s fiscal revenues stood at $100.6 million, while primary
expenditures had reached $181 million. State expenditures slowed owing to tighter
control of non-priority spending and improved management of the payment of
salaries. The disbursement of international budget support reached $95.4 million in
2015. External financial contributions in 2016 are expected to reach $163.5 million,
leaving a funding gap of $81.8 million.

VII. Extension of State authority
41. MINUSCA and UNDP, with support from the Peacebuilding Fund, continued
to support the Ministry of Territorial Administration in redeploying some 1,000 civil
servants across the country. The Mission facilitated the registration of the civil
servants and the deployment by road of 427 of them to the prefect ures of Nana-

16-04359

9/19

S/2016/305

Mambéré, Nana-Grébizi, Basse-Kotto, Ouaka, Ouham and Mambéré-Kadéï. UNDP
committed to financing the deployment by road of approximately 400 civil servants
and to mobilizing additional funds for the deployment of remaining civil servants to
remote parts of Bamingui-Bangoran, Haut-Mbomou and Vakaga prefectures.

VIII. Rule of law
A.

Implementation of urgent temporary measures
42. During the reporting period, MINUSCA arrested eight persons and reinforced
its support for the investigation and prosecution of the most serious crimes,
including those falling under the jurisdiction of the Special Criminal Court. The
Mission also supported ongoing investigations related to political unrest that had
occurred in September and October 2015. A Mission-wide working group, in close
coordination with national judicial authorities, examined a list of 87 persons
suspected of having committed serious crimes, including the 17 high -profile
individuals being detained at the Camp de Roux annex of Ngaragba pri son.

B.

Special Criminal Court
43. MINUSCA, UNDP and the United Nations country team continued to support
the Transitional Authority in the establishment of the Special Criminal Court.
Progress included the allocation of premises for the Court and the establishment of a
committee to select national magistrates, registrars and clerks for the Court through
a transparent and competency-based process. MINUSCA and UNDP assisted the
Transitional Authority in seeking financial support for the Court, and the adoption
by the Ministry of Justice of a United Nations project document is pending.

C.

Support for police, justice and corrections
44. MINUSCA, in coordination with the United Nations country team, continued
to undertake capacity-building efforts and support the redeployment of justice,
police and gendarmerie personnel throughout the country. The Mission, in
cooperation with UNDP and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, supported the deployment of magistrates, resulting in the
presence of judges and prosecutors in 24 of the 28 general jurisdiction courts
throughout the country, as well as the resumption of court hearings in Bangassou
and Bria. Together with UNDP, the Mission also supported the rehabilitation of
eight courts and organized training sessions for the personnel of the Bangui Court of
Appeal as well as for 65 magistrates and clerks. In February, the Council of
Ministers approved the emergency strategic plan of the Ministry of Justice,
developed with the support of MINUSCA and UNDP.
45. On 12 December, the Ngaragba prison reopened following the completion of
work to repair the damage caused by the escape of nearly 700 inmates on
28 September. Some 225 prisoners are now incarcerated there. In January, the prison
authorities agreed on a five-year training and human resources plan under which
1,600 required national prison officers would assume responsibility for the control
of prison security formerly provided by military personnel. On 29 February,

10/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

44 newly graduated national prison officers were selected to begin four months of
intensive on-the-job training provided by MINUSCA.
46. MINUSCA, in cooperation with the European Union and the African Union,
began to provide support to the national authorities in developing a capacity building and development plan with respect to the national police and the
gendarmerie. The Mission and the United Nations country team supported capacity building activities and the redeployment of national police and gendarmerie
personnel to Bambari, Bangassou, Bangui, Bossangoa, Bouar, Bria, Kaga-Bandoro
and Ndélé, where co-location and mentoring activities carried out by MINUSCA are
ongoing. The Mission also trained 2,689 police and gendarmerie officers on public
order management, security during the elections, community -oriented policing,
criminal investigation, VIP protection and drug law enforcement techniques.

IX. Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation
47. Important steps were also taken towards the preparation of a national
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme. In January,
the Steering Committee of the United Nations-World Bank Fragility and Conflict
Partnership Trust Fund approved an allocation of $200,000 to support the conduct of
preliminary studies and assessments to shape the development of the national
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation strategy. The
Government of the United States also provided an initial pledge to support a
national pension plan for members of the Central African armed forces, which will
be essential to ensure an army that is right-sized, professional and representative
and to free up posts that could be made available to absorb qualified and vetted
demobilized combatants in accordance with the Agreement between t he Transitional
Government and the armed groups on the principles of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and of integration into the uniformed
State forces of the Central African Republic, signed between the Transitional
Authority and the armed groups on 10 May 2015.
48. MINUSCA continued to provide technical and logistical support for the efforts
of the Transitional Authority to make progress on disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation. New programmes for armed groups launched by the
Mission to implement the Brazzaville and Bangui Forum agreements of July 2014
and May 2015, respectively, consisted of pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities carried out as an interim measure to engage members of
armed groups until the launch of the national disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme. The enrolment of former combatants in
pre-disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities was aimed at
supporting weapons collection and control in high-risk communities in exchange for
food support. This entailed participation in cash-for-work and income-generating
opportunities, implemented in partnership with the United Nations Office for
Project Services.
49. The launch of these projects ahead of a national disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme was prepared by MINUSCA, together
with the national High Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration and Security Sector Reform, through int ensive sensitization activities

16-04359

11/19

S/2016/305

highlighting the value of pre-disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities in improving security at the community level. As a result, more than 2,400
armed elements, including 340 female combatants, were enrolled in such activities
in Bambari, Bangui, Birao, Bouar, Bria and Kaga -Bandoro. The activities contribute
to the reduction of violence in the communities concerned and attract economic
investment as a result of the influx of cash into local economies.
50. MINUSCA, with the support of $3.5 million from the Peacebuilding Fund,
continued to implement community violence reduction projects for armed groups
not eligible for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation,
according to the agreement on disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation reached at the Bangui Forum. Such projects were launched in Ouham Pendé prefecture, in partnership with the International Organization for Migration,
targeting 7,600 beneficiaries, and contributed to a reduction in violence there.

X. Security sector reform and vetting
51. During the reporting period, the deployment of members of the Central
African armed forces in Bangui, operating jointly with local self -defence groups
suspected to be anti-balaka, raised serious concern about the stabilization process.
While the deployments initially had a relatively positive impact on the local security
situation, they were undertaken outside the formal chain of command of the Central
African armed forces and without coordination with the international forces,
creating a risk of further fragmentation of the Central African armed forces and
undermining efforts to restructure them within the framework of a national security
sector reform process. Moreover, a number of the Central African armed forces
elements engaged in acts of extortion of the civilian population.
52. MINUSCA supported the Strategic Committee for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration and Security Sector Reform, comprising national
and international partners, in implementing relevant recommendations of the Bangui
Forum on security sector reform. From 3 to 6 December, the Mission facilitated a
round table on national security, with the participation of 120 State and non -State
representatives. Participants adopted a declaration on principles of national security
that outlined a national security vision, including the main principles and
responsibilities of security sector actors. Subsequently, MINUSCA facilitated the
creation of a committee to draft a national security policy and provided technical
assistance in developing a draft policy. On 17 March, the Strategic Committee for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration and Security Sector Reform
endorsed the national security policy.

XI. Weapons and ammunition management
53. MINUSCA, through the United Nations Mine Action Service, destroyed
74 items of ammunition and explosive ordnance and 8 tons of commercial
explosives, and retrieved 162 various explosives and items of ammun ition. The
Mission also rehabilitated the armouries of two national police and gendarmerie
stations. In addition, it completed the construction of an armoury to store 1,000
weapons and conducted an armourer training session for 40 members of the Central

12/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

African armed forces. The Mission carried out awareness training programmes on
the risk of weapons and explosives for 38,905 beneficiaries.

XII. Coordination of international assistance
54. In the absence of an updated national planning document, the Un ited Nations
country team, in collaboration with MINUSCA, began developing an interim
strategic framework for the period 2016-2017 to inform the development of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework for the period 2018 -2022. The
Mission continued to chair the International Partners’ Forum in Yaoundé, which also
supports the mobilization of resources for the multi-partner trust fund for the
Central African Republic.

XIII. Deployment of the Mission
A.

Military
55. MINUSCA benefited from the temporary deployment of a quick-reaction force
of 250 military personnel from the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire to
strengthen the Mission's support for the provision of security during the elections.
The deployed military strength of MINUSCA was 10,065 troops, or approximately
94 per cent of its authorized strength of 10,750. This included the deployment of
11 infantry battalions together with enabling units, including one military police
unit, four engineering companies, one heavy transport company, three level II
hospitals, three signal companies and three helicopter units, including attack
helicopters. On 29 February, the repatriation of the remaining infantry battalion of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo was co mpleted. The deployment of troops of
a Mauritanian infantry battalion to replace the Democratic Republic of the Congo
military contingent is expected to be completed on 1 April. On 27 February, the
repatriation of a company of 120 military personnel from t he Congo was completed.
Although some troop-contributing countries made progress in improving the
equipment of their contingents, disparities remained and continued to pose a
significant challenge, including with regard to performance, for certain continge nts
that had yet to meet United Nations standards. The Mission maintained 52 operating
bases, comprising 32 permanent and 20 temporary bases.

B.

Police
56. The MINUSCA police component comprised 375 individual police officers
(including 42 women), or 93.75 per cent of the authorized strength of
400 individually deployed police officers, and 1,525 formed police unit personnel
(including 81 women). The total deployment of the formed units represented some
90.77 per cent of the authorized strength of 1,680. Of the 11 police units on the
ground, 8 formed police units and 2 protection units were deployed in Bangui, and
1 formed police unit was in Bouar. The remaining police unit is scheduled to deploy
in April. The deployment of police officers outside Bangui continued, with officers
present in 9 of the 16 prefectures.

16-04359

13/19

S/2016/305

C.

Civilian personnel
57. A total of 1,130, or 68 per cent, of the posts and positions for MINUSCA
civilian personnel were encumbered, including 588 international posts, 355 national
posts and 187 United Nations Volunteer positions. Women constituted 29 per cent of
civilian personnel.

D.

Status-of-forces agreement
58. Regarding the application of the status-of-forces agreement, the Central
African Republic authorities addressed a number of concerns and continued to
demonstrate good-faith efforts to resolve remaining issues. These included
clarification and streamlining of the modalities for ensuring an exemption with
respect to tax on fuel; fees relating to the importation of mission equipment and
supplies; a 2 per cent tax on the salaries and emoluments paid in cash and carried by
civilian personnel when leaving the Central African Republic; and a registration fee
of 12 per cent per annum on residential leases.

XIV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
59. United Nations and humanitarian personnel continued to operate in insecure
conditions. Despite limited security improvements in certain parts of the country,
there continued to be threats against United Nations and humanitarian personnel,
particularly in the northern and eastern parts of the country and in Bangui. United
Nations and humanitarian personnel and assets remained targets of attacks. Eight
serious security incidents involving United Nations civilian pers onnel occurred
during the reporting period, affecting 10 civilian personnel, with one injury
sustained. On the eve of the 30 December elections, unidentified armed elements
attacked MINUSCA uniformed personnel in the sixth district of Bangui, resulting in
serious injuries (gunshot wounds) to three peacekeepers. In an attack carried out by
unknown armed elements in Bria on 13 December, one peacekeeper suffered a
minor injury (a gunshot wound). On 14 March, during demonstrations by students at
the University of Bangui, one peacekeeper was injured.

XV. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
60. Between 1 December and 15 March, MINUSCA recorded 24 allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse against its personnel, involving members of
contingents from Bangladesh, the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Egypt, Gabon, Morocco and the Niger and police personnel from the Niger and
Senegal. In one matter, the nationality of the implicated contingent member is
unknown. On 17 December, the high-level external independent review panel
appointed by the Secretary-General to review the United Nations response to
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by international forces in the Central
African Republic presented its report, which included a series of recommendations
to strengthen the Organization’s response to sexual exploitation and abuse. On
18 December, a day after receiving the panel’s report, the Secretary -General
convened a high-level steering committee including representatives at the Under-

14/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

Secretary-General level from all of the departments involved to review the
recommendations and immediately begin working on their implementation. On
8 February, the Secretary-General also appointed a Special Coordinator on
Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
61. In line with this work and the ongoing implementation of the Secretary General’s enhanced programme of action on sexual exploitation and abuse,
MINUSCA undertook several proactive mitigation and prevention measures,
including with regard to the repatriation of units and the withholding of payment to
relevant contingent members while investigations were ongoing. These included the
creation of joint prevention teams of uniformed and civilian personn el to carry out
risk assessments and coordinate joint activities, including increased military and
police patrols around MINUSCA force and police installations and out -of-bounds
premises. The Mission’s senior leadership visited high -risk areas and delivered
strong messages to sensitize uniformed personnel regarding the zero -tolerance
policy, prohibited conduct and the consequences of serious misconduct. Members of
the United Nations country team joined the Mission’s task force on sexual
exploitation and abuse to develop a holistic approach to combating sexual
exploitation and abuse, to coordinate assistance provided by United Nations civilian
and uniformed personnel to victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, and to ensure
coherence, collaboration and communication with the sexual exploitation and abuse
prevention network of the humanitarian country team. MINUSCA, in coordination
with the United Nations country team, also developed an awareness and
communication campaign. To support those efforts, an inter -agency/
interdepartmental working group was established at United Nations Headquarters in
coordination with MINUSCA to identify the most pressing areas in which the
Mission required urgent support to address the Organization’s integrated response to
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel.

XVI. Financial aspects
62. By its resolution 69/257 B, the General Assembly appropriated the amount of
$814.1 million for the maintenance of MINUSCA for the period from 1 July 2 015 to
30 June 2016. My proposed budget, in the amount of $931.0 million, for the
maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017 has
been submitted to the Assembly for its consideration at the second part of its
resumed seventieth session. Should the Security Council decide to extend the
mandate of MINUSCA beyond 30 April 2016, the resources for maintaining the
Mission would be limited to the amounts approved by the Assembly.
63. As at 7 March 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for MINUSCA amounted to $137.7 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$2,788.9 million.
64. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 January 2016, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2015, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

16-04359

15/19

S/2016/305

XVII. Observations
65. The holding of peaceful presidential elections represents a major milestone for
the Central African Republic. The successful completion of the transition on
31 March will usher in a new era for the country. Hopes are high that peace will
bring real change to people's lives, although the road ahead will not be without
challenges. I applaud the Central African people for peacefully and enthusiastically
demonstrating the will and the courage to open a new chapter in the country’s
history, and express my appreciation to the Head of State of the Transition,
Catherine Samba-Panza, for her leadership in seeing through the country’s political
transition. I would also like to praise the proactive involvement of the region in
taking the transition forward. I congratulate President -elect Touadéra on his victory
in the presidential elections, and I welcome Mr. Dologuélé's acceptance of the final
results. I call upon the elected authorities to ensure that all of the country’s
democratic institutions are in place as soon as possible.
66. The President-elect now has the enormous responsibility of leading the
response to the aspirations of the Central African people. I encourage all actors to
work together in a collaborative manner to ensure the establishment of an inclusive
Government and national institutions that promote the unity of all Central Africans.
The recommendations of the Bangui Forum provide a consensual platform on which
the future Government can build its priorities, without excluding or marginalizing
any Central Africans or their communities. The future Government will need to
focus on national priorities that are aligned with the outcomes of the Bangui Forum,
and will have the duty to ensure that no Central Africans or their communities,
including those who are currently displaced at home or refugees abroad, are left
behind or marginalized. Divisive agendas as well as political and social intolerance
should have no place in the country’s future.
67. The gains achieved through the elections in the Central African Republic are
significant but fragile. Indeed, elections cannot be an end in themselves. As
underlined in my report on the Central African Republic of 3 March 2014
(S/2014/142) leading to the establishment of MINUSCA, while the country’s future
must be written by the Central Africans themselves, there will be no solution to the
crisis in the Central African Republic without the continued active engagement of
the country’s neighbours and the region. The continued commitment of international
and regional partners will be critical to support the realization of priority objectives
that are nationally defined. I urge all national and international stakeholders to
support the new Government in undertaking reforms that reflect the asp irations of
its citizens for lasting change in the areas of governance, security, the rule of law,
human rights and sustainable development, as outlined in the recommendations of
the Bangui Forum. I encourage the Central African authorities and regional an d
international partners to develop a framework of mutual accountability for the
country that can underpin a sustained partnership and longer -term engagement of
the international community in support of the realization of those goals.
68. An early priority for the newly formed Government will be in the areas of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and security sector
reform. I urge the Central African authorities to prioritize continued dialogue with
the fragmented anti-balaka and former Séléka groups to address the long-standing
political, economic and social challenges that have fuelled armed conflict. Such a
dialogue should be underpinned by a broad consensus on the country’s strategic

16/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

priorities and be aimed at achieving a multidimensional approach that links
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and security sector
reform, the restoration of State authority and the establishment of the rule of law, as
well as income-generating and rehabilitation programmes, as part of a continuation
of the Bangui Forum process. I urge all armed groups to engage in good faith in
such an effort, and to commit to contributing to the strengthening of democratic rule
and peace consolidation efforts.
69. I am concerned about the premature redeployment of the Central African
armed forces. The long-term stability of the country will depend in part on an
effective security sector reform process that transforms the national defence and
internal security forces into professional, multi-ethnic, accountable and regionally
balanced forces under the civilian control and oversight of democratically elected
institutions. I urge the newly elected Government to collaborate closely with the
international community to advance the security sector refo rm process and to reach
an agreement with relevant actors on the terms and scope of the country’s future
defence and security forces. I applaud the efforts of the Transitional Authority to
develop a security sector reform strategy based on the recommendations of the
Bangui Forum. I welcome the adoption by national and international actors of the
declaration on principles of national security outlining a national security vision. I
urge the incoming Central African authorities to draw from those efforts and adopt a
vision on security sector reform, as well as to fully engage in and support efforts to
develop appropriate processes and procedures for the vetting of personnel in
security and judiciary organs.
70. I welcome the planned transformation of the European Union Military
Advisory Mission into a European Union training mission that will focus on training
Central African armed forces units in coordination with MINUSCA and other
partners. Such efforts should be complemented with sufficient international sup port
for the Central African internal security forces to ensure a balanced presence of
armed and security forces throughout the territory, based on security requirements.
To that end, the presence of national police and gendarmerie personnel in Bangui
and other parts of the country will also need to be expanded. MINUSCA will
contribute to such efforts through strategic advice, technical and operational
support, mentoring and co-location activities. In that regard, I welcome the efforts
by national stakeholders, supported by MINUSCA and other international partners,
to devise a capacity-building and development plan for the Central African internal
security forces. I encourage other partners to enhance their support in that vital area,
including in terms of equipment and infrastructure.
71. I remain hopeful that the momentum and the gains generated by the elections
and the completion of the transition will encourage further progress towards
national reconciliation, social cohesion and rehabilitation for the be nefit of all
communities. I urge national actors to promote reconciliation at all levels of society
with the full participation of women and young people. I applaud the reconciliation
efforts of religious and community leaders, in particular the agreement between the
non-Muslim community of Boeing and the predominantly Muslim community of
Bangui’s PK-5 neighbourhood, which is aimed at ensuring safe access for Muslims
to their cemetery in Boeing. The United Nations remains committed to supporting
the newly elected President, the Government, civil society and all national actors in
rebuilding not only a viable State, but also the social fabric of the country.

16-04359

17/19

S/2016/305

72. Efforts must be pursued to end the culture of impunity and to strengthen the
country’s justice system. I urge the incoming Central African authorities to fully
commit to addressing that priority. The country’s national courts and law
enforcement institutions must be strengthened, together with efforts to establish the
Special Criminal Court. I encourage the newly elected Government to take all action
necessary to swiftly install the Court, including by appointing national magistrates
through a transparent and competency-based process. I also call upon relevant
partners to provide the critical financial and technical support required for the Court
to function. I am encouraged by the progress made in support of the gradual
redeployment of justice and corrections services across the country, which will
remain a key area of engagement for MINUSCA. I call upo n all the actors
concerned to bring to justice the perpetrators of crimes committed during the unrest
of September 2015 and to proceed with the trials of those already detained for
serious crimes.
73. I am deeply concerned that the percentage of the popula tion facing food
insecurity has doubled. Half of the population, or more than 2.3 million Central
Africans, still depend on humanitarian assistance. Meanwhile, nearly half a million
Central Africans remain internally displaced, with some largely Muslim pop ulations
continuing to live in enclaves in deplorable conditions. More than 460,000 Central
Africans refugees in neighbouring countries have not been able to return home. I
call upon the elected authorities, with the support of the humanitarian community
and international partners, to increase efforts to create conditions conducive to the
voluntary return of internally displaced persons and refugees and to ensure their
access to food, housing, health care and basic education, as well as their safety and
security. I call upon international partners to bridge the financial gap in meeting the
country’s most basic humanitarian needs and reiterate the need for all national
parties to respect unhindered and safe access for humanitarian actors to assist those
in need.
74. I am deeply disturbed by the continuing allegations of misconduct, including
sexual exploitation and abuse, by MINUSCA personnel and other international
forces. I reiterate my determination to ensure that all United Nations personnel
comply with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy regarding misconduct,
particularly sexual exploitation and abuse. The Mission has established a transparent
and victim-driven approach in addressing such cases, and I am committed to
ensuring that perpetrators are brought to justice and that their home countries hold
them accountable. I salute the courage of the victims who have come forward to
report allegations of serious misconduct by United Nations personnel. I call upon
the troop- and police-contributing countries to take enhanced preventive
predeployment measures, including by increasing their forces’ awareness of the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy and by ensuring that disciplinary action is
always taken against any of its members faced with an allegation of abuse. The
United Nations is taking a series of measures in line with Security Council
resolution 2272 (2016) as well as with the recommendations of the high -level
external independent review panel on sexual exploitation and abuse by international
peacekeeping forces in the Central African Republic, which submitted its report on
17 December 2015, and is working to ensure that victims of sexual exploitation and
abuse have access to the help that they need in order to recover.
75. The mandate of MINUSCA is set to expire on 30 April 2016. I intend to fully
consult with the Government, once it has been formed, on the basis of a strategic

18/19

16-04359

S/2016/305

review of the Mission before making recommendations to the Security Council on
the future mandate of MINUSCA. I should therefore like to recommend that the
Council consider a technical roll-over of the mandate pending the installation of the
new Cabinet.
76. I am grateful to my Special Representative for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his tireless efforts in carrying
out the Mission’s mandate. I am deeply appreciative of the work carried out by the
personnel of MINUSCA and the United Nations country team in a demanding
environment. I am also grateful to my Special Representative for Central Africa,
Abdoulaye Bathily, for the role he played in international mediation efforts in the
Central African Republic. I thank the African Union, troop - and police-contributing
countries, ECCAS, the European Union, the World Bank, international part ners and
multilateral and non-governmental organizations for their continued efforts to work
with the population of the Central African Republic towards a better future.

16-04359

19/19
