S/2015/56

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 January 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 26 January 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the sixteenth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemic al Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The present letter covers the period from 23 December 2014 to
22 January 2015.
I am pleased to note that the destruction of the remaining 12 chemical weapons
production facilities in the Syrian Arab Republic is now under way, beginning with
the first and second tunnels. I hope that the delays in the start of these activities can
be overcome and that the anticipated completion date of 30 June 2015 can be met.
With regard to the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial declaration and subsequent
amendments, OPCW technical experts continue their dialogue with the Syrian
authorities. Cooperation between the Syrian authorities and OPCW remains critical
for the resolution of any outstanding issues in this regard.
The third report of the OPCW fact-finding mission that is looking into
allegations of the use of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic
was released on 18 December 2014. That third report, together with the previous
two reports of the fact-finding mission, was subsequently circulated to the members
of the Security Council through a request to the President of the Security Council on
behalf of eight Council members. The work of the fact-finding mission is ongoing. I
take this opportunity to reiterate my deep concern at the findings contained in all
three reports and my unequivocal condemnation of the use of toxic chemicals as
weapons, by any party to the conflict.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex urgently
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-01029 (E)

280115

*1501029*

S/2015/56

Annex
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of Executive Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to
the Council. My report covers the period from 23 December 2014 to 22 January
2015 and also covers the reporting requirements of Executive Council decision
EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/6

15-01029

S/2015/56

Enclosure
Note by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2 (f) of the decision by the Executive
Council (hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1,
dated 27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”)
reports to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision.
In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also submitted to the Security
Council through the Secretary-General. This is the sixteenth such monthly report.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian
Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decid ed that the Secretariat
should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by
subparagraph 2 (f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
This report is therefore submitted in accordance with both above -mentioned
Council decisions and includes information relevant to their implementation during
the period from 23 December 2014 to 22 January 2015.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
4.
In accordance with subparagraph 1 (c) of EC-M-33/DEC.1, the Syrian Arab
Republic was required to complete the elimination of all chemical weapons material
and equipment in the first half of 2014. As reported previously, all declared
chemicals have been removed from the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, while
all declared stocks of the Category 1 chemical have been destroyed. Progress
achieved within the current reporting period by the Syrian Arab Republic in
fulfilling other obligations is described below:
(a) Progress continues to be made with respect to the destruction and
verification of the 12 chemical weapons production facilities (CWPFs) (seven
aircraft hangars and five underground structures) in the Syrian Arab Republic as per
Council decision EC-M-43/DEC.1 (dated 24 July 2014). Destruction operations
started on 24 December 2014 and are currently ongoing at two of the five
underground structures; all auxiliary buildings have been destroyed at both sites,
and the construction of the interior plug and the filling of the tunnel with gravel and
sand have been completed at the first site. With regard to the planned time frame for
completion of operations, it is expected that the first CWPF will be destroyed no
later than the end of January 2015. Preparatory work is expe cted to start soon at one
of the seven aircraft hangars, depending on security and weather conditions. Due to
challenges in the procurement of specialized drilling equipment and explosives, as

15-01029

3/6

S/2015/56

well as other technical problems, the destruction of 12 CWPFs may encounter some
delays.
(b) Pursuant to paragraph 19 of EC-M-34/DEC.1, the Syrian Arab Republic
is required to submit a monthly report to the Council regarding activities on its
territory related to the destruction of its chemical weapons and CWPFs. Th e
fourteenth such report was submitted to the Secretariat on 16 January 2015
(EC-78/P/NAT.2, dated 16 January 2015).
(c) In accordance with subparagraph 1 (e) of EC-M-33/DEC.1 and
paragraph 7 of United Nations Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), the Syrian
Arab Republic shall cooperate fully with all aspects of the implementation of the
decision and the resolution. The Syrian authorities have continued to extend the
necessary cooperation during the reporting period.
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties hosting
destruction activities
5.
Following the complete removal of identified chemicals from the Syrian Arab
Republic on 23 June 2014, destruction activities are nearing completion. The
following subparagraphs provide information on the destruction of the remaining
Syrian chemical weapons at commercial facilities selected pursuant to paragraph 24
of EC-M-34/DEC.1, and at facilities sponsored by States Parties pursuant to
paragraph 7 of decision EC-M-36/DEC.2 (dated 17 December 2013):
(a) As at the cut-off date of this report, Veolia ES Technical Solutions, LLC
in the United States of America had destroyed 65% of the received chemicals. The
destruction of the chemical received at Mexichem UK Limited began in Dec ember
2014. As at the cut-off date of this report, a total of 9.1% of the received chemical
had already been destroyed. Destruction of the remaining chemical at these two
facilities is currently on hold, as technical issues are sorted out.
(b) As at the cut-off date of this report, 45.2% of the DF effluent and 57% of
the HD effluent, which were produced by the neutralization process on board the
MV Cape Ray, had already been destroyed by Ekokem in Finland and at the GEKA
facility in Germany, respectively.
6.
Taken together, the destruction activities described in subparagraphs 5 (a) to
5 (d) above mean that, as at the cut-off date of this report, 100% of the Category 1
chemicals and 89.1% of the Category 2 chemicals had been destroyed, representing
a combined total of 97.8%, including the isopropanol previously destroyed in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The Secretariat will continue to provide such information
during briefings to States Parties in The Hague and through the monthly reports.
Timelines for the completion of the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons were
provided in the overall report on the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme (paragraph 25 of EC-76/DG.16, dated 4 July 2014), which was noted by
the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session. While the Secretariat is not able to give a
forecast at this stage about the completion of destruction of remaining chemical in
the United Kingdom and United States, estimates for Germany and Finland are the
end of March and June respectively.

4/6

15-01029

S/2015/56

Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian Arab Republic
7.
Cooperation with the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) has
continued in the context of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic. In
mid-January, the OPCW, UNOPS, and the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
signed an amendment to the tripartite agreement between them, with the purpose of
updating the scope of requirements attached to the agreement and including new
timelines for the commencement of destruction activities at the 12 CWPFs in
December 2014 and for the completion of destruction of the first CWPF by
31 January 2015. In the meantime, the parties have also finalized negotiations for a
memorandum of understanding (MoU) for the provision of me dical services and
emergency medical evacuation services to the UNOPS and OPCW personnel present
in the Syrian Arab Republic, with a view to an early signing of this MoU.
8.
As at the cut-off date of this report, four OPCW staff members were deployed
as part of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic. From 16 to 18 January,
three additional OPCW staff members were present in Damascus for liaison with
UNOPS, the Syrian authorities, and Syrian companies, with a view to handling the
outstanding issues related to the destruction of Syrian CWPFs, and visited two sites.
A meeting of the Steering Committee also took place at that time. Ambassador José
Artur Denot Medeiros of Brazil, in his capacity as Special Adviser to the Director General on Syria, is expected to visit Damascus before the end of January.
9.
The Director-General has continued to meet with senior representatives of the
States Parties hosting a destruction facility or otherwise providing assistance with
the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons. He also communicated regularly with
senior officials from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. As requested by
the Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of EC-75/2, dated 7 March
2014), the Secretariat has continued to provide regular information briefings to
States Parties in The Hague on behalf of the Director-General.
10. As stipulated by the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session (paragraph 6.17 of
EC-76/6, dated 11 July 2014), the Secretariat and the Syrian authorities continue to
cooperate on outstanding issues regarding the Syrian declaration. At the Forty Eighth Meeting of the Council, the Secretariat issued the “Second Status Report on
the Activities of the Declaration Assessment Team” (DAT) (EC -M-48/P/S/1, dated
14 January 2015), which was noted by the Council, and gave a follow-up
presentation for States Parties on the activities of the DAT. The team will visit the
Syrian Arab Republic for the seventh time before the end of January and will hold
further consultations with the Syrian authorities, with a view to updating the Syrian
declaration.
11. As reported previously, the implementation of additional special monitoring
measures, as specified in Note EC-M-43/DG.1/Rev.1 (dated 21 July 2014), will
include the use of a vault monitoring system, which is based on technology already
in use by the International Atomic Energy Agency. As previously reported, in
cooperation with Aquila Technologies, the OPCW has finalized the administrative
requirements for the first phase of implementing the monitoring system in the
underground structures, and is currently finalizing the requirements for the second
implementation phase. Implementation of the monitoring system is consistent with
the agreed time frame for the planned construction activities related to the interior
plugs. Fibre-optic cables have been already installed and successfully tested in two
internal plugs at two underground structures. Aquila Technologies will organize the

15-01029

5/6

S/2015/56

training of operators of the system in The Hague, as defi ned for the second phase, in
April and May 2015. The construction of the base stations, which will accommodate
the transmission equipment in each underground structure, has already been agreed
with the Syrian contractor and UNOPS, and construction activities have started at
the first site.
Supplementary resources
12. As at the cut-off date of this report, the total contribution received in the Syria
Trust Fund for the Destruction of Chemical Weapons stood at EUR 50.3 million.
Contributions have been received from Argentina, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, the Czech Republic, the European Union, Finland, Germany, India, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. This includes the contributions that
were originally made to the first OPCW Trust Fund for Syria and which have, at the
request of the donor, subsequently been transferred, in part or in whole, to the Syria
Trust Fund for the Destruction of Chemical Weapons.
13. The Secretariat has approached the Syrian Government with a request for
reimbursement of costs relating to verification activities for the period from
September 2013 to August 2014 amounting to EUR 2.3 million. The request was
made in keeping with States Parties’ obligations under Articles IV and V of the
Convention. The Syrian authorities have indicated that they remain unable to cover
these costs on the basis of the reasons stipulated at the time that the Syrian Arab
Republic joined the Convention.
Conclusion
14. The main focus of future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic will continue to be on the destruction of the 12 remaining CWPFs, wh ich
started on 24 December 2014. The Declaration Assessment Team will also continue
its work in the Syrian Arab Republic.
15. The Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) that is looking into allegations of use of
toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic is continuing its work. As
reported previously, the FFM has submitted its third report (S/1230/2014, dated
18 December 2014), with a detailed account of the work that underpins the key
findings presented in its second report. The Mission concluded with a h igh degree of
confidence that chlorine has been used as a weapon in three villages in northern
Syria.
16. On 19 December 2014, the Secretariat received from the Syrian Arab Republic
a classified document with information relating to a number of alleged us es of
chlorine as a weapon. The Director-General has written to the Syrian authorities
proposing that there should be further enquiries to establish facts relating to these
allegations, underscoring at the same time the importance of the safety and securit y
of the team in the conduct of its work. With the agreement of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the document was made available to States Parties in unclassified format
on 20 January 2015.

6/6

15-01029
