30

General AuemhlT-TweUda See1ion

session, a separate section dealing with the effects that
the association of certain Trust Territories with the
Community may have on the development of those Territories, in the light of any surveys of this problem carried out by the Secretary-General in virtue of General
Assembly reStJlution 1153 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
by the Economic and Social Council, the Economic
Commission for Asia and the Far East, the Economic
Commission for Latin America, or other international
bodies, in so far as such surveys are concerned with
the development of those Territories;
3. Resolves to resume examination of this question
at its thirteenth session.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1211 (XII). Situation in the Trust Territories of
the Cameroons under British administration
and the Cameroons under French administration26

The General Assembly,
Having studied the chapters of the report of the
Trusteeship Council which relate to the Trust Territories of the Cameroons under British administration
and the Cameroons under French administration, 27
Noting continued tensions and disturbances in a
certain area of the Cameroons under French administration,
Noting the fact that the amnesty law envisaged by
the Administering Authority has not yet been promulgated,
Taking note of the progress achieved in both Territories a!1~ of _the measur~~ to that effect adopted by
the Admmtstermg Authont1es and by the authorities
of both Cameroons,
Having heard and considered the statements of the
petitioners from these Territories in the course of the
hearings granted by the Fourth Committee,
. Bearing in mind that the Trusteeship Council will,
m the normal course, send a visiting mission to the
two Territories in 1958,
1. Takes note of the pertinent chapters of the report
of the Trusteeship Council;
2. Transmits the statements of the petitioners to
the Trusteeship Council for further study;
. 3. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council take
mto_ account the <;1bservations and suggestions made
dunng the debate m the Fourth Committee, when the
Council considers conditions in the Trust Territories
of the Cameroons under British administration and the
Cameroons under French administration at its twentyfirst session;
~- Expresses the hope that, as a result of the application of ~ppropriate measures, in particular the early
promulgation of the amnesty law by the Administering
Authority, and the renunciation of the use of violence
""This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assembly after consideration of
the report of the Fourth Committee. For the text of the report,
see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session
Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/3779.
'
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Supplement No. 4 (A/3595 and Corr.I), part II, chapters IV
and V.

by all political parties, it will be possible to achieve,
in the Cameroons under French administration, conditions conducive to the early restoration of a normal
situation in the disturbed area, and to the furtherance
of democratic progress and political activities in the
Territory;
5. Is confident that the appropriate steps to be taken
by the Administering Authorities will further facilitate
the realization in both Territories of the final objectives
of the Trusteeship System, in accordance with the free
expression of the wishes of the populations concerned,
taking into account any alternative relative to their
future status ;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to instruct its
next visiting mission, in 1958, to take into account the
observations and suggestions made at the twelfth session of the General Assembly during the examination
of the situation in the two Territories.

729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1213 (XII). Question of the frontier between
the Trust Territory of Somaliland under
Italian administration and Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 392 (V) of 15 December
1950, 854 (IX) of 14 December 1954, 947 (X) of
15 December 1955 and 1068 (XI) of 26 February
1957,
Having taken note of the reports transmitted t9 the
General Assembly by the Governments of Ethiopia28
and of Italy 29 in accordance with the recommendation
contained in resolution 1068 (XI),
Having heard the statements made by the delegations
of Ethiopia and of Italy, including that of the representative of the Government of Somalia, 30
Noting the efforts made by the Governments of
Ethiopia and of Italy in negotiations to reach a solution of the question of the frontier between the Trust
Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration
and Ethiopia,
Noting that, although some progress was made during the discussions, direct negotiations have not resolved
some of the main differences between the parties,
Considering that it is in the common interest of
Ethiopia and the Trust Territory that there should be
a final settlement of the question of the frontier between them before the Territory becomes an independent sovereign State in 1960,
Having regard to the urgency of the matter,

1. Expresses the opinion that a final settlement can
be achieved most expeditiously by a procedure of arbitration;
2. Recommends the parties to establish, if possible
within three months, an arbitration tribunal-consisting
of three jurists, one to be appointed by Ethiopia, one
by Italy and one by agreement between the jurists so
28
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 39, document A/3753.
29
Ibid., documents A/3754 and Add.1.
'"'Ibid., Twelfth Session, Fourth Committee, 734th meeting.

Resolution.s adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

appointed or, failing agreement between them, by His
Majesty the King of Norway-to delimit the frontier
in accordance with terms of reference to be agreed
upon between the two Governments, with the assistance
of an independent person to be appointed by agreement
between them ;

*

31

3. Requests the Governments of Ethiopia and of
Italy to report to the General Assembly at its thirteenth
session on the measures taken by them to give effect
to the present resolution.
730th plenary tneeting,
14 December 1957.

* *

Notes
Election to fill a vacancy in the membership of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories ( item 36)
At its 725th meeting on 2 December 1957, the Fourth Committee, acting on
behalf of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of Assembly resolutions 332 (IV) and 646 (VII) of 2 December 1949 and 10 December 1952, elected
for a three-year period one member to the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to fill the vacancy created by the expiration of the
term of office of PERU.
The following State was elected : BRAZIL.
Election of three members of the Committee on South West Africa
(item 38 (c))
At its 729th plenary meeting on 13 December 1957, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee, elected three members to the
Committee on South West Africa to replace SYRIA, THAILAND and URUGUAY.
The following States were elected: EGYPT, INDONESIA and URUGUAY.
