S/2018/1029

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 November 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
during the period from 21 June to 26 October 2018
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my report of 13 July 2018
(S/2018/703), including of the specific provisions of resolutions 2373 (2017) and
2433 (2018). During the reporting period, the situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm. The
Lebanese Armed Forces continued to consolidate security along the border with the
Syrian Arab Republic as part of extending the control of the Government over all
Lebanese territory. Nevertheless, the reaffirmed commitment by both parties to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) notwithstanding, there remain outstanding
obligations for both parties under the resolution and there was no progress towards a
permanent ceasefire between Lebanon and Israel.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
2.
The UNIFIL area of operations and the area along the Blue Line remained
relatively calm, notwithstanding a serious incident on 4 August when a UNIFIL patrol
was attacked in Majdal Zun (Sector West) (see para. 16). The UNIFIL Head of
Mission and Force Commander and my Acting Special Coordinator for Lebanon
maintained permanent liaison with both parties to de-escalate tensions and continued
to urge them to use established channels to address concerns and refrain from any
action threatening the cessation of hostilities.
3.
UNIFIL continued to monitor the construction works by the Israel Defense
Forces south of the Blue Line, which led to tensions on several occasions. On 30 July,
UNIFIL observed Israel Defense Forces civilian contractors crossing the Blue Line
east of Kfar Kila (Sector East) while initiating earth-digging works, in close proximity
to one of the Lebanese “reservation” areas, triggering the deployment of both the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces on their respective sides of the
Blue Line. The main armament of an Israel Defense Forces tank was pointed no rth of

18-19484 (E)

191118

*1819484*

S/2018/1029

the Blue Line. Following engagement with the parties by the UNIFIL liaison teams,
the Israel Defense Forces withdrew from the area and the civilian contractors
continued their work south of the Blue Line.
4.
In seven additional separate incidents, UNIFIL observed weapons pointed by
the Israel Defense Forces towards the north, including once at Lebanese Armed
Forces personnel and on six occasions at UNIFIL personnel or positions. In addition,
on 14 August, the Israel Defense Forces fired six smoke gr enades, of which at least
one landed north of the Blue Line in Rumaysh (Sector West), setting fire to an area
stretching south and north of the Blue Line. Israel Defense Forces and Lebanese
Armed Forces personnel helped to extinguish the fire. UNIFIL, thro ugh its liaison
branch, de-escalated the situation.
5.
From 5 July to 24 October, UNIFIL recorded 319 Blue Line ground violations,
312 of which were committed by civilians crossing south of the Blue Line, including
208 violations mainly by shepherds and farmers predominantly in the Shabʻa Farms
area, Kfar Kila, and farmers cultivating their fields, mainly near Rumaysh, as well as
77 violations in connection with the Shu‘ayb well near Blida (Sector East). Members
of the Lebanese Armed Forces crossed the Blue Line south-east of Kfar Kila on three
separate occasions on 12 September while photographing the Israel Defense Forces
works. Members of the Lebanese Armed Forces also crossed the Blue Line in Yarun
(Sector West) on 15 October and Kfar Kila on 17 October for unknown reasons. On
25 September, two Lebanese municipal police officers crossed the Blue Line in Kfar
Kila in connection with ground levelling works being conducted north of the Blue
Line. An excavator belonging to the Israel Defense Forces crossed t he Blue Line in
Yarun on 3 September while clearing vegetation along the technical fence. On 30 July,
UNIFIL observed three hunters firing six rounds while south of the Blue Line, close
to Mays al-Jabal (Sector East).
6.
Israel continued to violate Lebanese airspace almost daily, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty. From 5 July to 24 October, UNIFIL
recorded 550 air violations, totalling 2,057 overflight hours. Unmanned aerial
vehicles accounted for 481 of the violations (87 per cent), with the remaining
violations involving fighter jets or unidentified aircraft. UNIFIL protested against all
the violations to the Israel Defense Forces and urged their immediate cessation.
7.
The occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line
by the Israel Defense Forces continued. While the Government of Lebanon has
welcomed the UNIFIL proposal for the facilitation of the withdrawal of the Israel
Defense Forces from the occupied area, shared with the parties in 2011, the
Government of Israel has yet to respond.
8.
The delineation of the maritime boundary between Israel and Lebanon remains
disputed. Lebanon maintains that the line of buoys, unilaterally installed by Isra el,
runs through its territorial waters, and does not recognize it. The United Nations does
not recognize the line of buoys.
9.
Lebanon also alleged that Israel continued to violate its sovereignty by
conducting electronic monitoring, espionage and surveillance through infrastructure
deployed south of and along the Blue Line and devices placed on Lebanese territory.
10. Pursuant to resolution 1701 (2006), UNIFIL continued to assist the Lebanese
Armed Forces in establishing an area between the Blue Line and the Litani River free
of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons other than those of the
Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces
operated a daily average of 67 coordinated activities, including patrols, 16 permanent
checkpoints, 5 temporary checkpoints and 10 counter-rocket-launching operations
across the area of operations, with the Lebanese Armed Forces spot -checking
2/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

vehicles. This level of coordinated activities represents 19 per cent of UNIFIL
operational activities, taking into consideration only those activities that could be
conducted in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces. UNIFIL has
continued to accord priority to certain operational activi ties conducted in close
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, including foot patrols along the Blue
Line and night patrols. It is aiming to increase the involvement of the Lebanese Armed
Forces in civil-military coordination projects by fully utilizing the regional centre for
civil-military coordination for south Lebanon, inaugurated in May.
11. UNIFIL maintained its high operational tempo in line with resolution 2373
(2017), as reiterated in paragraph 20 of resolution 2433 (2018). From July to October,
it conducted an average of 14,346 monthly military operational activities, including
an average of 6,782 patrols. Almost weekly, UNIFIL vehicle, fo ot and air patrols
maintained an operational footprint in all municipalities and villages in the area of
operations. Areas in which the mission had previously experienced a higher number
of restrictions of movement or incidents were visited more frequently. Air
reconnaissance patrols continued to be concentrated over those areas with limited
access for ground patrols, such as private properties, rugged terrain or land
contaminated by explosive remnants of war or anti-personnel mines.
12. UNIFIL continued to focus its operational activities on patrols, in particular foot
patrols, along the Blue Line. It also continued to conduct a high number of night
patrols and enhanced the use of its air assets, increasing its day and night
reconnaissance flight hours per month from an average of 36 hours in July–October
2017 and 54 hours in March–June 2018 to 63 hours in July–September 2018. UNIFIL
maintains close contact with the Lebanese Armed Forces through monthly meetings
and joint operational activities, as well as with local leaders, including to address any
sensitivities with local communities.
13. UNIFIL continued to monitor locations in which the Israel Defense Forces
alleged the presence of unauthorized weapons and infrastructure in the UNIFIL area
of operations but observed no violations of resolution 1701 (2006) at those locations
during the reporting period.
14. In the course of its activities, UNIFIL observed 195 instances of individuals
carrying hunting weapons, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006), mostly in the areas
of Bastrah, Blida, Mays al-Jabal and Sarda (all Sector East) and Yarun. UNIFIL
alerted the Lebanese Armed Forces to each incident. It also expressed its concerns to
the Lebanese Armed Forces regarding reports of gunfire during a funeral on 11 August
in Tyre (Sector West) and the presence of armed individuals during Ashura’
commemorations on 20 September.
15. UNIFIL freedom of movement was generally respected. As detailed in annex I
to the present report, in some instances municipal police officers, local leaders or
members of local communities stopped UNIFIL patrols.
16. One of the most serious incidents involving UNIFIL personnel in recent years
occurred on 4 August, when some 20 individuals in civilian clothes stopped a four vehicle UNIFIL patrol in the village of Majdal Zun, allegedly because the
peacekeepers were taking photographs. During the course of the incident, several
individuals broke windows of the patrol vehicles with hammers, shot at two of the
vehicles as they sought to disengage and poured gasoline on a vehicle, setting it
ablaze. A peacekeeper inside suffered minor burns. Some individuals assaulted the
peacekeepers, punching and beating the patrol commander with sticks as he attempted
to mediate the situation and kicking and dragging another peacekeeper while he was
on the ground. None of the peacekeepers sustained injuries that required medical
treatment. Individuals also pointed weapons at the UNIFIL personnel, including at
close range, snatching their weapons or demanding that they be handed over. The
18-19484

3/20

S/2018/1029

patrol requested Lebanese Armed Forces support immediately. Weapons, ammunition
and equipment were stolen from the patrol, most of which were later returned by the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
17. In its press statement of 9 August, the Security Council condemned in the
strongest terms the attack against UNIFIL and called for a credible investigation to
determine the exact circumstances. UNIFIL completed its internal investigation on
25 September. A UNIFIL military police investigation assessing the actions of the
United Nations personnel has also completed its interim report. UNIFIL has urged the
Lebanese Armed Forces to complete their investigation. The Head of Mission and
Force Commander stressed to interlocutors from the Government of Lebanon that a
full investigation must be conducted and the perpetrators held accountable, a message
reiterated at Headquarters. UNIFIL resumed its regular patrolling in Majdal Zun, in
close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, on 25 September. A second
patrol was conducted on 8 October. Both were completed without incident. UNIFIL
will continue regular patrols in the location.
18. In addition to the above-mentioned incident, individuals in civilian clothes
occasionally attempted to seize UNIFIL property. On 7 July, individuals who were
being stopped by Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL in Kfar Kila attempted to seize
a notebook from a UNIFIL patrol. On 13 July in Ayta al-Sha‘b (Sector West), several
individuals blocked the path of a patrol and attempted to steal a radio. On
6 September, an individual in Shab‘a (Sector East) took a memory card from a
UNIFIL camera. It was later returned by the Lebanese Armed Forces.
19. UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon continued their patrols to areas
surrounding the sites of the Lebanese non-governmental organization Green without
Borders, located close to the Blue Line, conducting an average of 200 vehicle patrols,
20 foot patrols and 10 air reconnaissance patrols per month. Following several
incidents in May in which the patrols were stopped by Green without Borders
personnel, UNIFIL inspected four sites, Marwahin, Ayta al-Sha‘b, Labbunah (all
Sector West) and Udaysah (Sector East), on 21 July, and three additional sites, one in
Labbunah and two in Aytarun (both Sector West), on 27 September. Given that all the
sites were located on private property, the inspections were carried out in close
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces. No violations of resolution 1701
(2006) were observed.
20. Notwithstanding the aforementioned incidents, the relationship between the
local population and UNIFIL remained largely positive. UNIFIL continued to
implement quick-impact projects to support the extension of State authority in the
south and contribute to force acceptance.
21. As described in annexes to my previous reports, UNIFIL has implemented all
recommendations of the strategic review of UNIFIL in 2017 that could be
implemented and continues to adhere to the priorities identified during the review
(see S/2017/202).
22. The Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and UNIFIL
continued to engage with the Lebanese authorities to ensure appropriate follow-up to
the ministerial-level meeting known as the Rome II conference, held in March 2018,
including the commitment of Lebanon to increasing the strength and presence of the
Lebanese Armed Forces in the UNIFIL area of operations through the deployment of
the model regiment and to build the capacity of the Navy. In July, the Government
identified a building in Bayt Lif (Sector West) to be used as the model regiment
headquarters. The Government, in close coordination with UNIFIL and my Acting
Special Coordinator for Lebanon, is discussing implementation modalities with
potential donors.

4/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

23. In support of Lebanese efforts to build the capacity of and in close coordination
with the Lebanese Navy, the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force carried out maritime
interdiction operations throughout the maritime area of operations, hailing an average
of 25 vessels per day. Of the 2,890 vessels hailed during the reporting period, 745
were inspected and cleared by the Lebanese authorities.
24. The Lebanese Navy maintains a maritime picture of its territorial waters through
its eight coastal radar stations. On 12 October, it obtained certification for a second
seaworthy vessel that could remain at sea for up to 48 hours. However, both vess els
for which crews are certified are undergoing maintenance. The Navy continues to lack
the capacity to operate beyond 12 nautical miles from the coast, owing to an absence
of appropriate vessels.
25. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continued to support efforts to build the
capacity of the Lebanese Navy by conducting 389 training sessions aimed at
improving the common operational standards for monitoring and hailing activities.
The Government is reviewing options for increasing its naval capabilities, inclu ding
deploying dedicated naval personnel, conducting training and obtaining additional
assets. UNIFIL is working with the Lebanese Armed Forces to discuss steps towards
the development of a comprehensive and practical plan for the enhancement of the
Navy. As requested in paragraph 7 of resolution 2433 (2018), I will provide an
assessment with recommendations in that regard as part of my next regular report.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
26. UNIFIL hosted two tripartite meetings, on 6 September and 18 October, during
which liaison, coordination and violations of resolution 1701 (2006) were discussed.
The Head of Mission and Force Commander also continued to liaise with the parties
bilaterally to facilitate mutually acceptable solutions to contentious areas along the
Blue Line, emphasizing confidence-building measures, such as the visible marking of
the Blue Line. UNIFIL personnel held frequent bilateral exchanges with both the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces, including on tactical
arrangements aimed at reducing tensions relating to recurring violations or particular
incidents close to the Blue Line.
27. The establishment of a UNIFIL liaison office in Tel Aviv, Israel, continues to be
raised with the Israeli authorities. Their agreement to the UNIFIL proposal in 2008
notwithstanding, the establishment of the office has remained pending.
28. UNIFIL continued to liaise with the Government of Lebanon, non-governmental
organizations and United Nations agencies assisting in building the capacity of
national institutions to protect civilians. UNIFIL also continued to train its personnel
to ensure preparedness to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence.
In August, it facilitated a three-week workshop in Marjayoun (Sector East) for
members of the Internal Security Forces aimed at building national capacity for
protection, which included training on gender sensitivity, human rights and first aid.
Since 2015, 390 individuals have participated in the training. Leadership training was
also provided to Lebanese civil defence centres and firefighting squads in the UNIFIL
area of operations.
29. UNIFIL continued to train military and civilian personnel on gender
mainstreaming and preventing and responding to conflict -related sexual violence. In
accordance with the United Nations system-wide strategy on gender parity, the
mission adopted in March a gender parity strategy for civilian staff in the mission. A
priority for UNIFIL is addressing the gender imbalance among senior staff and in the
contingents serving in the Force. The Head of Mission and Force Commander has
underlined in his meetings with ambassadors and visiting military officials of troop-

18-19484

5/20

S/2018/1029

contributing countries the importance of increasing the number of women serving in
the Force.

C.

Disarming armed groups
30. No progress was achieved with regard to the disarmament of armed groups.
Hizbullah continued to acknowledge publicly that it maintained a military capacity.
On 14 August, its Secretary-General, Hassan Nasrallah, claimed that “Hizbullah
might not be the strongest army in the Middle East, but it is certainly stronger than
the Israeli army” and that “the Lebanese resistance — with its arms, personnel,
expertise and capabilities — is stronger than ever”. On 20 September, in addressing
Israel, he said that, “no matter what you do to cut the route, the matter is over, and
the resistance possesses precision and non-precision rockets and weapons
capabilities”. He added that, “if Israel imposes a war on Lebanon, Israel will face a
fate and a reality it has never expected on any day”. In direct response, the Prime
Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, warned that, “if [Nasrallah] confronts us, he
will receive a lethal blow that he can’t even imagine”. The maintenance of arms
outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and other groups continues to restrict the
ability of the Government of Lebanon to exercise full sovereignty and authority over
its territory.
31. In remarks delivered during the seventy-third session of the General Assembly,
on 27 September, Mr. Netanyahu stated that the Islamic Republic of Iran was
“directing Hizbullah to build secret sites to convert inaccurate projectiles into
precision-guided missiles” and accused Hizbullah of “deliberately using the innocent
people of Beirut as human shields”. In exercising its right of reply in the Assembly,
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran denounced the information
presented by Mr. Netanyahu. On 30 September, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Lebanon, Gebran Bassil, rejected the allegations and convened members of the
diplomatic community on 1 October to a tour of the said sites, while acknowledging
that Hizbullah had made “many statements … affirming [its] possession of precision
missiles”. In reaction, however, Mr. Netanyahu asserted that the members of the
diplomatic community were not brought to the actual underground production facility.
32. Hizbullah denied reports in the media on 19 August that it maintained detention
and interrogation facilities, including in the southern suburbs of Beirut and the Biqa ‘.
33. From 1 June to 20 September, 39 terrorism-related arrests by the Lebanese
Armed Forces and security services were reported, including of suspected affiliates
of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Jabhat Fath al -Sham (formerly the
Nusrah Front). On 1 August, eight Lebanese nationals suspected of havin g previously
fought with ISIL in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq were referred to the judiciary
on terrorism-related charges. On 25 June, two Lebanese fugitives were arrested by
the Lebanese Armed Forces in Baalbek, reportedly for instigating armed clash es. On
26 June, an Internal Security Forces agent was shot at in Yammunah, Biqa‘. On
4 October, the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed in Baalbek following an exchange
of fire between unidentified armed persons.
34. The security situation in the Palestine refugee camps was marked by several
localized incidents. On 23 July, several persons were injured in the Burj Shamali camp
in a personal dispute that escalated into shooting. Between 23 and 27 July, the Joint
Palestinian Security Force apprehended several suspects following grenade attacks in
the Rashidieh camp near Tyre. An individual apprehended by the group Ansar Allah
in the Mieh camp near Sidon on suspicion of the attempted assassination of the
group’s leader, Jamal Sleiman, was later found hanged in the group’s headquarters on
22 July. On 14 September, the Internal Security Forces apprehended an individual,

6/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

allegedly affiliated with Ansar Allah, in Sidon in connection with the attempted
assassination of a Palestine Embassy official in 2017. On 15 October, clashes between
Fatah and Ansar Allah reportedly left 2 persons dead and more than 20 injured.
Further clashes on 25 October left a fighter dead and several others wounded,
including two members of the Lebanese Armed Forces. A ceasefire that went into
effect on 28 October involves the deployment of unarmed members of Hamas,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine and
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine to monitor the agreement. The
fighting resulted in the forced displacement of most residents from the camp,
extensive damage and the suspension of United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) operations.
35. In the Ein El Helweh camp near Sidon, the security situa tion escalated on
15 September when a person was shot dead by the son of a senior figure in the Bilal
Badr extremist group. UNRWA schools were closed for a day. The Joint Palestinian
Security Force in Ein El Helweh, the work of which was put on hold in July amid
tensions between the Fatah and Hamas factions, was reactivated early in October.
General tensions between Fatah and Hamas led the Amal Movement to broker a
reconciliation on 2 August.
36. There was no progress in dismantling the military bases ma intained by the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada,
which continue to compromise Lebanese sovereignty and impede the ability of the
State to monitor and effectively control parts of the border.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
37. Allegations of arms transfers to non-State armed actors continued to be made
and are of serious concern. While taking such allegations seriously, the United
Nations is not in a position to substantiate them independently. Were the allegations
to be proved correct, they would constitute a violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
More information is provided in annex II to the present report.
38. Reports of engagement by Hizbullah in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic
continued. As noted in my report on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
(S/2018/920), on 19 September, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah reiterated that
“we agree that the Government should dissociate itself, but political forces are not
dissociating themselves”, adding that “our presence there depends on the acceptance
and need of the Syrian Government … what is happening in the region determines the
fate of the region and Lebanon”. On 23 September, the President of Lebanon, Michel
Aoun, reportedly stated that Hizbullah was “defending the lands” through its
activities in the Syrian Arab Republic. A number of Lebanese nationals also allegedly
continued to fight with anti-government armed groups in the Syrian Arab Republic.
39. As noted in that same report, in a letter dated 24 August addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/595), the Permanent Representative of
Yemen referenced a reported meeting of the Secretary-General of Hizbullah with a
delegation of Yemeni Houthis on 19 August. In the letter, he raised concern regarding
Hizbullah’s “transfer of advisers and military instructors to the Houthi coup ” as
posing a “serious regional and global threat” and asked the Council, through the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), to
“investigate, within its mandate, [Hizbullah’s] activities that pose a serious threat to
Yemen and to take appropriate measures”.
40. On 25 September, the parliament of Lebanon passed a law authorizing the
ratification of the Arms Trade Treaty. The Treaty is focused on enhancing the
responsibility of Governments to prevent the illegal transfer and circulation of

18-19484

7/20

S/2018/1029

weapons outside State control. Lebanon will be obligated to report annually on the
implementation of the Treaty.
41. In the context of large-scale counter-terrorism and anti-trafficking operations,
the Lebanese Armed Forces reinforced their positions along the border with the Syrian
Arab Republic, deploying land border regiments and constructing watchtowers. On
14 August, the Lebanese Armed Forces Commander, General Joseph Aoun, chaired a
meeting of the joint committee responsible for the United States of America and
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Border Protection Assistance
Programme at the Rayak Air Base Central Training Centre in the Biqa‘ to assess
security along the eastern and northern borders of Lebanon.
42. Cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon further declined.
Nevertheless, Lebanese Armed Forces data show that 1,006 Syrian nation als were
apprehended during the reporting period for entering Lebanon illegally. The Lebanese
authorities arrested 16 individuals in connection with human smuggling. In separate
Lebanese Armed Forces operations, on 22 June, on the outskirts of Masna ‘, an alleged
smuggler was killed and another injured; on 27 September, on the outskirts of
Suwayri, a Syrian national died and four others were injured; and, on 7 October, two
persons were injured in Suwayri.
43. As part of efforts to tackle illicit cross-border trafficking networks in the
Baalbek-Hirmil region, north Biqa‘, the Government of Lebanon bolstered security
for the region, in line with its plan endorsed by the Higher Defence Council on
19 June. On 23 July, a prominent local drug dealer and eight affi liates were killed
during a Lebanese Armed Forces raid in Baalbek, with 41 persons arrested. On
25 September, a Lebanese soldier was killed and six others were injured in a raid in
Hirmil, while a fugitive was arrested. Subsequently, on 1 October, the Leba nese
Armed Forces reportedly arrested 10 fugitives and confiscated weapons, ammunition
and narcotics. The Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security Forces conducted
counter-terrorism operations in informal Syrian settlements, resulting in several
arrests in and around Arsal and Akkar.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
44. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued mine clearance operations along the
Blue Line and in areas south of the Litani River. During the reporting period, there
were two victims of items of unexploded ordnance reported north of the Litani and
one victim south of the Litani: a remnant of war in the form of a cluster bomb
exploded near Hula (Sector East) on 23 September, seriously injuring a local resident.
UNIFIL also observed bushfires exacerbated by the presence of mines in Yarun
(Sector West), Blida, Mays al-Jabal and Hula (all Sector East), which triggered
several uncontrolled explosions. On 16 July, the Lebanese Mine Action Centre
initiated a non-technical survey along 120 million m2 of the north-eastern border to
determine areas for clearance, with support from the Mines Advisory Group and
Norwegian People’s Aid. Several donors committed funds for clearance activities in
line with the survey results.
45. Lebanon featured as an exemplary model for progress at the eighth meeting of
States parties to the Convention on Cluster Munitions, held in Geneva from 3 to
5 September 2018. Of the 50 billion Lebanese pounds ($33 million) pledged by the
Government over the coming five years for cluster munitions clearance, 7.5 billion
Lebanese pounds ($5 million) was allocated in the budget for 2018.
46. Six UNIFIL mine clearance teams and two explosive ordnance disposal teams
cleared 11,439 m 2 of land and destroyed 347 anti-personnel mines, including an item
of unexploded ordnance near a UNIFIL helipad in the Force’s area of operations. Two

8/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

mortar grenades found at a UNIFIL position were stored pending their safe
destruction.
47. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations conducted 58 quality assurance
monitoring visits to the mission’s demining teams to ensure safety and effectiveness
in UNIFIL demining operations and delivered 13 safety and awareness briefings on
landmines/explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices, benefiting
292 United Nations military and civilian personnel.

F.

Delineation of borders
48. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Syrian Arab Republic and Israel
have yet to respond to the provisional definition of the Shabʻa Farms area proposed
in my report of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2007/641).
49. The dispute between Lebanon and Israel over their exclusive economic zones
remained unresolved. In a statement on 1 August, the President of Lebanon stated that
“Israel’s attempts will not prevent us from … taking advantage of our oil wealth, as
we will soon embark on the exploration phase”. Exploration activities by the
consortium of three international oil companies that were awarded licences by
Lebanon in December 2017 proceeded.

G.

Political and institutional stability
50. Since his nomination on 24 May, the Prime Minister-designate, Saad Hariri, has
continued to lead consultations with all political stakeholders to form the new
Government. On 3 September, he presented a proposal for the new Cabinet to the
President. In a statement, the President said that he would continue his consultations
with the Prime Minister-designate.
51. Pending the formation of the new Government, the Speaker, Nabih Berri, called
for joint meetings of parliamentary committees on key legislation and, following
consultations with the Prime Minister-designate, convened the parliament on 24 and
25 September. It, among other things, passed 16 laws, including 1 pertaining to the
Arms Trade Treaty and others connected with the international conference in support
of Lebanese development and reforms agenda on waste management, judicial
mediation, oil and gas transparency, electronic transactions and per sonal data, and the
whistle-blower protection law. Discussions are continuing on the establishment of a
follow-up mechanism to the conference pursuant to the outcome communiqué of
6 April.
52. Subsequent to the parliamentary elections held on 6 May, the es tablished
electoral dispute resolution mechanism, the Constitutional Council, received 17
challenges, which are pending a decision. Meanwhile, on 17 July, the European Union
election observation mission presented its final report, with recommendations on
addressing gaps in regulations governing the financing of campaigns, unequal access
to the media, the underrepresentation of women in the parliament and the capacity of
the electoral supervisory committee. The mission highlighted improvements,
including the new proportional system, out-of-country voting and increased voter
secrecy.
53. Following the Rome II conference, several countries announced new financial
contributions or credit lines to strengthen the Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal
Security Forces in line with their strategic plans. Nevertheless, the implementation of

18-19484

9/20

S/2018/1029

those new commitments has slowed in the absence of a government to forge bilateral
agreements and oversee the coordination of multilateral assistance. Existing bilateral
support programmes continued and, on 26 June in Washington, D.C., the Lebanese
Armed Forces Commander participated in the first meeting of the joint United States Lebanese military cooperation body since 2008.
54. The national human rights institution is not yet operational, with no funding
allocated by the parliament, and its members, appointed on 21 May, not sworn in by
the President. Meanwhile, concerns regarding freedom of expression in Lebanon have
grown. On 16 August, the head of the Lebanese Centre for Human Righ ts was
summoned for questioning by the Cybercrime Bureau of the Internal Security Forces
over a social media post. On 17 August, a consortium of non-governmental
organizations wrote to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression to call for the condemnation of the continued summoning of
activists by Lebanon. Subsequently, the Office of the High Commissioner wrote to
the Director General of the Internal Security Forces, the Minister of Justice and the
Prosecutor General to outline its concerns about restrictions on freedom of expression
and practices that have reportedly accompanied the arrest of some activists and
bloggers.
55. Between 11 and 21 September, closing arguments in Prosecutor v. Ayyash et al.
were presented at the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. After attending the opening of
the final hearings on 11 September, the Prime Minister-designate, stressing the
stability and security of Lebanon, pledged to deal with the verdict of the trial “as a
responsible official who has the responsibility to protect the country and the Lebanese
people”.
56. As at 30 September, 971,667 refugees and asylum seekers had been registered
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
Lebanon, comprising 952,562 Syrian refugees and 19,105 refugees and asylum
seekers of other nationalities. New registrations of Syrian refugees by UNHCR have
been suspended by the Government since 2015. A decrease in the number of registered
Syrian refugees was due mainly to natural deaths, onward movements, resettlement
and spontaneous returns to the Syrian Arab Republic.
57. Individual spontaneous returns of Syrian refugees have continued, wit h 3,430
individuals returning between January and September 2018. Another 3,600
individuals returned during the same period in group movements, facilitated by the
Lebanese General Directorate of General Security in coordination with the Syrian
authorities. While UNHCR was not involved in organizing those returns, it
coordinated with the General Directorate and was present at each departure point.
UNHCR provided support to returning refugees in obtaining their civil documentation
and education certificates and other issues critical for their re-establishment in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
58. On 26 July in Beirut, a high-level Russian diplomatic and military delegation
met Lebanese officials, including the President, the Prime Minister-designate and the
Speaker, to discuss a Russian initiative regarding the return of Syrian refugees. The
formation of a Lebanese-Russian coordination committee was then announced in
September.
59. It is indicated in the forthcoming vulnerability assessment of Syrian refugees in
Lebanon for 2018 that 68 per cent of refugees live below the national poverty line of
$3.84 per day and 51 per cent below the extreme poverty line. Only 27 per cent of
Syrian refugees have legal residency, despite the adoption of circulars in 2017 to
waive fees and ease the process, in line with the Lebanon partnership paper of the
Brussels II conference, held in April.
10/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

60. As at 30 June, the humanitarian resources available for Lebanon in 2018
amounted to $1.26 billion, including $596 million disbursed by donors and
$267 million committed for 2018, in addition to funds carried over from 2017.
Reported figures continue to show a lack of visibility regarding funding available
beyond 2018, with only $250 million reported as commitments for Lebanon,
restricting partners’ ability to plan for more sustainable solutions to critical
humanitarian and stabilization needs.
61. The Lebanon Crisis Response Plan was 34 per cent funded as at 30 June, at
$918 million, including $327 million carried over from 2017. T he continued highlevel donor support to Lebanon notwithstanding, the shortfall in funding resulted in
immediate gaps in the health, water and sanitation, shelter and winter assistance
programme areas for refugees and host communities.
62. Uncertainty over the financial situation of UNRWA and the Agency’s ability to
continue to provide essential services, such as health care and education, led to
peaceful sit-ins, protests and demonstrations. UNRWA schools in Lebanon opened on
1 September, enabling some 37,000 pupils at 65 schools to continue their studies. On
the margins of the opening week of the seventy-third session of the General Assembly,
I participated in a ministerial meeting, co-chaired by Germany, Japan, Jordan,
Sweden, Turkey and the European Union, on 27 September, to underline the
importance of UNRWA for the well-being of Palestine refugees and stability in the
region. The meeting raised an additional $122 million in new pledges for the Agency.
63. Lebanon presented its first voluntary national review at the ministerial meeting
of the high-level political forum on sustainable development on 18 July. Its report
provided an overview of progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. In his presentation, the Deputy Prime Minister, G hassan Hasbani, highlighted
the challenges facing Lebanon, namely the lack of data, the need to increase the
institutional capacity of the public sector and the need for a development agenda.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
64. UNIFIL continually reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measures, in
particular following security threat warnings, and closely coordinated them with the
Lebanese authorities. Security exercises were conducted to test the readi ness of
civilian and military personnel in the event of evacuation during a crisis. In the Arqub
area (Sector East), strict security measures have remained in place, including the use
of armed escorts, for official movements by United Nations personnel.
65. UNIFIL continued to monitor ongoing proceedings in Lebanese military courts
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against the
Force. The Permanent Military Court held hearings on 10 April regarding the attack
against UNIFIL peacekeepers serving with the Spanish contingent in 2007 and in the
case of terror intent opened in January 2014. The next hearings for both cases are
scheduled for 17 December. In the case of the attempted serious attack against
UNIFIL in 2008, in which one of the four convicted perpetrators filed an appeal, the
next hearing is scheduled for 6 November. Three investigations launched into the
serious attacks perpetrated against UNIFIL on 27 May, 26 July and 9 December 2011
are continuing, pursuant to additional judicial instructions issued by the investigating
judge. In the case of the homicides committed in 1980, when two UNIFIL
peacekeepers from Ireland were shot dead and one was injured, the Permanent
Military Court reopened the trial proceedings and held a hearing on 22 October 2018.
The next hearing is scheduled for 14 December. UNIFIL also followed up with the
Lebanese Armed Forces on the incident of 4 August in Majdal Zun (see para. 16).
18-19484

11/20

S/2018/1029

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
66. As at 24 October, UNIFIL comprised 10,519 military personnel, including 530
women (5 per cent), from 41 troop-contributing countries; 233 international staff,
including 76 women (33 per cent); and 580 national civilian staff, including 155
women (27 per cent). The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force comprised six vessels, two
helicopters and 773 of the Force’s total military personnel, including 30 women (4 per
cent). In addition, 55 military observers, including 7 women (13 per cent), from the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization serve with Observer Group Lebanon,
under the operational control of UNIFIL.

V. Conduct and discipline
67. During the reporting period, neither UNIFIL nor the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon received allegations of sexual exploitation
or abuse. They continued to implement and enhance measures to prevent sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse. UNIFIL conducted seven assessment visits to sectors
in its area of operations to assess changes in the risk environment and brief military
commanders on their accountability in respect of conduct and discipline matters. The
United Nations country team’s prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse network
in Lebanon continued to inform local communities of expected standards of conduct
for United Nations personnel and how to report misconduct. UNIFIL and the Office
continued to promote a productive, harmonious and inclusive working environment,
with emphasis on protection against sexual harassment and other forms of prohibited
conduct.

VI. Observations
68. In support of the country’s stability, I call upon the political leaders and all
political parties in Lebanon to accelerate their efforts to form an inclusive
government. The momentum towards renewed institutional governance set in motion
by the parliamentary elections must be sustained for Lebanon to benefit fully from
the road map of international support laid out at the conferences held in Rome, Paris
and Brussels. It is time to set aside differences, intensify dialogue and put the national
interest above partisan politics. A spirit of compromise is required to find common
ground, avert the risk of renewed institutional paralysis and swiftly form a
government that preserves the balance enshrined in the Taif Accords of 1989 and the
Constitution.
69. I also call upon the future authorities to pursue the Lebanese policy of
disassociation, consistent with the Baabda Declaration of 2012), and for all Lebanese
parties and nationals to cease their involvement in the Syrian conflict and other
conflicts in the region. The alleged movement of fighters and war materiel across the
Lebanese-Syrian border violates resolution 1701 (2006).
70. The repeatedly self-acknowledged maintenance of unauthorized weapons
outside State control by Hizbullah and other non-State armed groups, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006), is deeply troubling and poses a dangerous threat to the
stability of Lebanon and the region. Allegations of illegal arms transfers to non-State
armed groups in Lebanon also continue to be made, warranting serious concern. The
United Nations is not in a position to verify these reports independently. Nevertheless,
if they are substantiated, the transfers would constitute a violation of resolution 1701
(2006). The Lebanese steps towards enhanced regulation of international arms
12/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

transfers and trade are welcome. In that connection, I call upon Member States to
uphold their obligations under resolution 1701 (2006) to prevent the sale or supply of
arms or related materiel to entities or individuals in Lebanon other than those
authorized by the Government.
71. Furthermore, I call upon the Government to take all action necessary to ensure
the full implementation of the relevant provisions of the Taif Accords and of
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), which require the disarmament of all armed
groups in Lebanon so that there will be no weapons or authority in Lebanon other
than those of the Lebanese State, in line with the Cabinet decision of 27 July 2006
and earlier decisions of the national dialogue.
72. Continued commitment by all sides to resolution 1701 (2006) remains essential
for the stability of Lebanon and the region. The prevailing lack of fulfilment of the
resolution by Israel and Lebanon and their continued violations are concerning.
Non-compliance increases the risk of tensions and possible escalation into hostilities.
I urge both parties to redouble their efforts towards full adherence to the resolution,
to consolidate the period of calm of the past years and move decisively towards a
permanent ceasefire, as enshrined in the resolution. The United Nations remains ready
to support the parties in that regard. The Organization will continue to support efforts
to defuse tensions through dialogue, to pursue opportunities for confidence -building
and to create an environment conducive to resolving underlying grievances, includi ng
through the continued good offices of my Acting Special Coordinator and UNIFIL
Head of Mission and Force Commander.
73. I strongly condemn the attack of 4 August on United Nations peacekeepers in
Majdal Zun and call upon the Lebanese Armed Forces to co mplete the investigation
and upon the Government to ensure that the perpetrators are held accountable. There
was clear intent by some individuals involved to harm the peacekeepers. It is fortunate
that the incidents did not result in major injuries. The fr eedom of movement of
UNIFIL in its entire area of operations, including along the full length of the Blue
Line, is critical. The Lebanese authorities must fulfil their responsibility to ensure the
safety and unimpeded freedom of movement of UNIFIL personne l.
74. The continued relative calm that has prevailed along the Blue Line since 2006
is a welcome development. Citizens of both Lebanon and Israel have enjoyed its
dividends. It must not be taken for granted, however. In the absence of a permanent
ceasefire, incidents continue to have the potential to escalate swiftly. All stakeholders
must take responsibility and refrain from language and unilateral action that could
increase mistrust and cause the situation to escalate. The constructive engagement of
the parties in the tripartite forum, including on efforts to address disputes relating to
specific areas along the Blue Line, is commendable. I remain concerned, however,
that the absence of an agreement on disputed areas could lead to increased tensions
in the light of the continuing Israel Defense Forces works south of the Blue Line. I
reiterate my call upon both parties to continue to avail themselves of the UNIFIL
liaison and coordination arrangements to the fullest extent possible, and to make
further efforts to identify a way forward to resolve existing points of contention.
75. Israeli overflights of Lebanese territory are a near daily occurrence and reported
to span almost the entirety of the country. This constitutes a violation of resolution
1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. The Israel Defense Forces also continue to
occupy northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line in a long -standing
violation of the resolution. I reiterate my condemnation of all violations of Lebanese
sovereignty and my call for Israel to cease its violations of Lebanese airspace and to
withdraw its forces from northern Ghajar and the adjacent area north of the Blue Line.
76. The dispute over the maritime exclusive economic zones of Lebanon and Israel
remains a flashpoint for tension and mistrust. I encourage the parties to explore
18-19484

13/20

S/2018/1029

avenues to reduce tensions, which will create conditions conducive to dialogue and
for an eventual solution. The United Nations stands ready to support the parties in
such efforts.
77. Strengthening Lebanese State institutions remains central to ensuring stability.
The United Nations will continue to support Lebanon in that regard, in particular to
build the capacity of its security institutions as the sole defenders of the country’s
sovereignty. In follow-up to the Rome II conference, I encourage Member States to
continue to implement existing commitments of support to the Lebanese Armed
Forces and security institutions, drawing on their respective strategic plans, including
in the context of the strategic dialogue mechanism.
78. The progress achieved in the preparations for a model regiment is welcome. I
call upon the Government to step up its efforts to make the regiment operationa l, with
continued support from UNIFIL and the international community. Furthermore, I urge
the Government to prioritize efforts to increase the capability of the Navy. UNIFIL
and my Acting Special Coordinator will continue to support its efforts in that re gard.
79. Moving forward with the President’s commitment to convening a national
dialogue towards a national defence strategy is key to strengthening the ability of
Lebanon to exercise effective State authority. Such a process should be Lebanese owned and Lebanese-led, inclusive, comprehensive and sustainable, and in line with
the country’s international obligations. Earlier decisions of the national dialogue
pertaining to the disarmament of non-Lebanese groups and the dismantling of the
military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command
and Fatah al-Intifada should be implemented.
80. The active engagement of the parliament under the leadership of its Speaker to
advance the legislative agenda, including in connection with the commitments forged
at the international conference in support of Lebanese development and reforms, held
in April, is welcome. Amid the economic challenges facing the country, the reform
agenda agreed upon at that conference has never been more relevant .
81. Women remain underrepresented in Lebanese political life. I reiterate my call
for political actors to adopt measures to increase the meaningful participation and
representation of women at all decision-making levels, also as part of implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
82. I appeal to the President to swear in the members of the national human rights
institution so that it, including its related mechanism aimed at pr eventing torture,
becomes operational, and call upon the parliament to ensure that the institution has
adequate resources to function effectively and independently.
83. Lebanon continues to exercise generosity and hospitality in temporarily hosting
Syrian refugees. The United Nations will seek to strengthen the spirit of partnership
with all actors, in line with international standards, including the principle of
non-refoulement, to ensure the protection and dignity of the refugees while in
Lebanon, as well as their ability to take individual free and informed decisions
regarding their voluntary return.
84. All Palestinian factions must refrain from actions that endanger communities in
Lebanon. Noting the continued serious financial challenges faced by UNRWA, I
express gratitude to those Member States and regional organizations that made new
pledges or increased their existing support at the ministerial meeting on 27 September.
85. As the proceedings of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon move towards a verdi ct,
I applaud the commitment of the Prime Minister-designate on 11 September to dealing
with the verdict responsibly. I look forward to the continued cooperation of the

14/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

Government with the Special Tribunal and call upon all parties concerned to respect
the judicial process.
86. Noting the request of the Security Council in paragraph 12 of its resolution 2433
(2018) with regard to improving the effectiveness and efficiency of UNIFIL and the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, I will respond with
my recommendations to the Council by 31 December.
87. The United Nations remains grateful to all countries contributing military
personnel and equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebano n. I commend the
Acting Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Pernille Dahler Kardel, welcome the arrival
of the Head of Mission and Force Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Stefano
Del Col, and pay tribute to Major-General Michael Beary, who completed his term in
August. I encourage troop-contributing countries to increase the number of women
among military personnel in UNIFIL. Lastly, I thank the civilian and military
personnel of UNIFIL, the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon and the United Nations country team for their continued efforts and
dedication.

18-19484

15/20

S/2018/1029

Annex I
Restrictions on the freedom of movement of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon from 5 July to 24 October 2018
1.
On 9 July, a man in civilian clothes approached a United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) patrol near a mosque in Tiri (Sector West) and gestured to it to
leave the area. Following a discussion with the individual, the patrol proceeded using
an alternative route. It was briefly followed by the man and two other individuals in
civilian clothes on mopeds; the Lebanese Armed Forces were informed. Following
the incident, UNIFIL conducted several patrols at the location without incident until
4 September (see para. 14).
2.
On 13 July, two individuals in civilian clothes with two vehicles stopped a
UNIFIL patrol in Hallusiyat al-Fawqa (Sector West), stating that the patrol could not
proceed without the Lebanese Armed Forces. The patrol requested a Lebanese Armed
Forces patrol to accompany it. As the Lebanese Armed Forces were unable to deploy
support on short notice, the patrol proceeded using an alternative route. On 16 July,
UNIFIL raised the incident with the Mayor of Hallusiyat al -Fawqa, who stated that
that was the second time in 20 days that UNIFIL had patrolled in agricultural areas
close to private farms and that, owing to the prevailing mistrust of UNIFIL in the
area, it was important for the patrols to be conducted in coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
3.
On 13 July, four individuals in civilian clothes with motorbikes blocked the path
of a UNIFIL patrol in the vicinity of Ayta al-Sha‘b (Sector West). They opened the
patrol car’s door and attempted, unsuccessfully, to take the radio. The intervention of
the Lebanese Armed Forces was requested. No damage or injuries were reported.
4.
On 14 July, Lebanese soldiers stopped a UNIFIL patrol near a checkpoint northeast of Udaysah (Sector East). The Lebanese Armed Forces later stated that they had
stopped the patrol for safety reasons, given that the road ahead was impassable for
vehicles.
5.
On 24 July, a barrier across the road leading to a Green without Borders site in
Aytarun (Sector West) prevented a UNIFIL patrol, conducted in coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, from patrolling the area. The patrol continued on an
alternative route to complete its activity.
6.
On 26 July, a barrier across the road leading to a Green without Borders site in
Aytarun (Sector West) prevented a UNIFIL patrol, conducted in coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, from patrolling the area. The patrol used an alternative route
to complete its activity.
7.
On 3 August, a UNIFIL patrol conducted in close coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces was unable to pass a locked gate south of Aytarun (Sector
West). The patrol took an alternative route to complete its activity.
8.
As mentioned in the main report, on 4 August, some 20 individuals in civilian
clothes stopped a four-vehicle UNIFIL patrol in the village of Majdal Zun (Sector
West).
9.
On 10 August, a UNIFIL patrol in Blida (Sector West) was stopped by an
individual in civilian clothes, who gestured with a pistol, pointed towards the ground
throughout, to the patrol not to proceed further. UNIFIL requested the Lebanese
Armed Forces to intervene. After 90 minutes, the patrol leader decided to take an
alternative route to complete the patrol. The Lebanese Armed Forces later informed
UNIFIL that the individual was a municipal police officer and that the patrol had been
stopped because it had been about to enter private property.
16/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

10. On 22 August, the Lebanese Armed Forces stopped a UNIFIL patrol in Udaysah
(Sector East), telling it that the road ahead was blocked and that it could not proceed.
The patrol continued its assignment on an alternative route. Later that day, UNIFIL
received information from the Lebanese Armed Forces suggesting that the patrol had
been stopped because it had been about to enter an area restricted by the Lebanese
Armed Forces. UNIFIL has since patrolled the location without incident.
11. On 24 August, a UNIFIL foot patrol conducted in close coordination wit h the
Lebanese Armed Forces was stopped by an individual in civilian clothes who shouted
at the patrol that he was the Deputy Mayor of Dibbin (Sector East) and that it had to
halt its activity to avoid “serious problems”. Some 15 minutes later, reinforcements
in the form of 20 Lebanese soldiers arrived, whereupon the individual left. The patrol
completed its activity without further incident.
12. On 29 August, a civilian vehicle and a motorbike blocked the path of an
Observer Group Lebanon patrol in Kfar Kila (Sector East). A group of individuals in
civilian clothes subsequently approached the patrol. After a brief discussion, they
agreed to allow it to continue its activity. UNIFIL has since patrolled the location
without incident.
13. On 29 August, UNIFIL observed an individual in civilian clothes photographing
a United Nations position in Balat (Sector East) using his mobile phone. When the
patrol approached him, he blocked the road with his car and claimed that he was the
Mayor of Balat and that the patrol could not enter Balat without being accompanied
by the Lebanese Armed Forces. Shortly thereafter, a second man approached the
patrol, whereupon the first left the area. The second man introduced himself as a
police officer (albeit without presenting an identification card) and told the patrol to
ignore the first individual as he was not the Mayor. The patrol then continued its
scheduled activity.
14. On 4 September, a UNIFIL patrol sent to investigate gunshots in the vicinity of
Tiri (Sector West) was blocked by a civilian vehicle and a motorbike. One of the
individuals blocking the road was verbally abusive towards the patrol. As the
Lebanese Armed Forces were unable to deploy support on short notice, the patrol
returned to its base without completing its planned activity. Following the incident,
UNIFIL conducted several patrols at the location without incident until 10 October
(see para. 16).
15. On 15 September, a UNIFIL patrol was stopped by five individuals in civilian
clothes in Kunin (Sector West). About 30 locals gathered around the patrol and calmly
explained that they did not want UNIFIL to patrol the village during prayer time
without being accompanied by the Lebanese Armed Forces. Shortly thereafter, the
Lebanese Armed Forces arrived and escorted the patrol out of the village, whereupon
it resumed its activity. The same day, a second patrol was stopped by about 10 locals
in the same village on the road leading to the mosque. An off -duty Lebanese soldier
in civilian clothes intervened and calmed down the somewhat agitated crowd and
assisted the patrol in leaving the village. Shortly thereafter, UNIFIL met the Mayor
of Kunin, who gave assurances that patrols were welcome in the area, but that it would
be preferable if they used the main road instead of the narrow road next to the mosque.
UNIFIL resumed patrols thereafter. The incidents took place during the period of
religious commemoration of Ashura’. UNIFIL usually patrols the location without
incident.
16. On 10 October, an Observer Group Lebanon patrol vehicle was stopped by two
young people in civilian clothes in Tiri (Sector West) who told the patrol that it was
not allowed to enter the village unless accompanied by the Lebanese Armed Forces
and that it should leave immediately. On 12 and 13 October, UNIFIL followed up
with the Mayor of Tiri, who said that he did not know who the youths were but
18-19484

17/20

S/2018/1029

underlined that he had not authorized anyone to speak on his behalf. In a meeting with
the Lebanese Armed Forces South Litani Sector on 15 October, the Lebanese Armed
Forces emphasized that local residents had no objection to UNIFIL patrolling the
village; however, they had requested UNIFIL to use the main road through the village
and to avoid using the narrow streets in the centre owing to the size of th e vehicles.

18/20

18-19484

S/2018/1029

Annex II
Implementation of the arms embargo
1.
In paragraph 18 of its resolution 2433 (2018), the Security Council recalled
paragraph 15 of its resolution 1701 (2006), according to which all States were to take
the measures necessary to prevent, by their nationals or from their territories or using
flag vessels or aircraft, the sale or supply of arms and related materiel to any enti ty
or individual in Lebanon other than those authorized by the Government or the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), and requested the Secretary -General to
include in his reporting to the Council an annex on the implementation of the arms
embargo. The Council did not stipulate a United Nations role for monitoring and
verifying the implementation of the embargo. UNIFIL, the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the Secretariat have limited authority
and capacity in that regard. The United Nations, however, remains committed to
supporting overall compliance by the parties with resolution 1701 (2006) in all its
provisions and advancing its implementation. Going forward, the United Nations will
continue to engage with Member States on allegations of weapons transfers and
efforts to address those allegations and other violations of the resolution.
2.
With regard to control of the land border, in 2007, at the invitation of the
Security Council, and in close liaison with the Government, the Secretary -General
dispatched an independent border assessment team to assess the monitoring of the
border with the Syrian Arab Republic and to report back to the Council.
Recommendations from the missions in 2007 and 2008 have been progressively
implemented by the Government. An integrated border management strategy for
Lebanon, funded by the European Union, was subsequently launched in 2012,
finalized in 2014 and sent to the Cabinet for adoption. The strategy’s ongoing
implementation is aimed at improving the ability of Lebanon to secure its border in
accordance with national and international integrated border management standards
and increasing the effectiveness of the border management -related security agencies.
3.
The Lebanese Armed Forces-led Border Control Committee, a working-level
inter-agency body that includes key donors, continues to implement technical
cooperation programmes aimed at enhancing Lebanese capacity to control and
facilitate the movement of people and goods across the borders. The Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon supports the Committee in
promoting the complementarity and impact of border-related United Nations
activities.
4.
The lack of delineation in some areas of the border with the Syrian Arab
Republic notwithstanding, the authority of the Government of Lebanon has been
extended and border control enhanced as the Lebanese Armed Forces reinforced
positions along the eastern border. Four land border regiments are deployed along the
north-eastern border, with the support of Canada, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America. Using watchtowers
and forward operating bases, the regiments were instrumental in counter-terrorism
operations in mid-2017. Regiment troops are being trained at the expanded Rayak
Training Centre with the support of the European Union, the United Kingdom and the
United States.
5.
Legislative steps were also taken to prevent illicit weapons transfers, with
parliamentary adoption on 25 September of a law authorizing the ratification of the
Arms Trade Treaty. Lebanon will be obligated to report annually on the
implementation of the Treaty, which is focused on the r esponsibility of Governments
in exercising oversight to prevent the illegal transfer and circulation of weapons
outside State control. The United Nations stands ready to support the Government in
18-19484

19/20

S/2018/1029

the implementation of the Treaty, including any steps that i t may deem necessary to
adjust its legal framework and oversight system.
6.
Further government efforts aimed at controlling the unauthorized transfer of
arms or related materiel include the arrests of alleged weapons dealers in Arsal,
Hirmil and Baalbek on at least four occasions during the reporting period. Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida affiliates have been reported as recipients
of illegal arms transfers. On 17 July, in Arsal, the Lebanese Armed Forces raided the
residence of a Lebanese national over alleged links to a terrorist organization and
confiscated weapons, computers, communication devices, surveillance cameras and
army equipment found in his possession. Also in Arsal, on 22 July, a Lebanese Armed
Forces patrol located five explosive belts. On 14 August, a wanted Lebanese national
was arrested and weapons and ammunition were confiscated by the Lebanese Armed
Forces in a raid in Buda’i, Baalbek, east Lebanon. On 28 August, in a raid conducted
in the Hirmil area, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrested wanted individuals and
confiscated weapons and ammunition. On 1 October, the Lebanese Armed Forces
conducted large-scale raids using helicopters to locate fugitives on the outskirts of
Hirmil. At least 10 fugitives were reportedly arrested, and weapons, ammunition and
large quantities of illegal narcotics were seized.
7.
Further to section II.D of the main report, some Member States have expressed
concern over the alleged use of commercial air transport by foreign countries to
illegally transfer weapons into Lebanon. In November 2016, Israel alleged air
shipment of weapons from the Islamic Republic of Iran using commercial flights to
Beirut-Rafic Hariri International Airport. The Lebanese authorities denied the
allegations. The Islamic Republic of Iran also denied the allegations at the time (see
S/2016/992). The United Nations is not in a position to substantiate the allegations.
In a letter dated 25 October addressed to the Secretariat, a Membe r State provided
information based on open-source reports that allege that, “since 2006, Iran has
provided Hizbullah with surface-to-air missiles, surface-to-surface missiles, anti-ship
cruise missiles, unmanned aircraft systems, light vehicles, and variou s small arms”
by land and air routes. The Secretariat is not in a position to verify the allegations.
8.
The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force assists the Lebanese authorities in securing
the country’s maritime borders and entry points to help to prevent the una uthorized
entry of arms or related materiel by sea into Lebanon, in accordance with
paragraph 14 of resolution 1701 (2006). It monitors the maritime border and entry
points, inter alia by carrying out maritime interdiction operations in support of the
Lebanese Navy. Since the inception of the Task Force in October 2006, its vessels
have conducted more than 89,500 hailing procedures, leading to some 12,000
inspections by the Navy and Customs Administration. The activities contributed to
the detection of a smuggling attempt on 27 April 2012 (see S/2012/502).

20/20

18-19484
