S/PV.9361

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9361st meeting

Tuesday, 27 June 2023, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18463 (E)
*2318463*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and the previous practice in that regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process; and Mr. James Zogby, President of the
Arab American Institute.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: I am devoting my regular briefing
on the situation in the Middle East to the twenty-sixth
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
The Secretary-General’s written report, which Council
members have already received, covers the period
between 14 March and 14 June.
Let me start by saying that the two weeks we
have had since 14 June have been terrible. Since the
submission of the written report, we have seen an
alarming spike in violence across northern and central
occupied West Bank, leading to numerous Palestinian
and Israeli casualties. Military operations — including
air strikes in the West Bank — clashes, attacks and
extremely high levels of settler-related violence have
continued and intensified dramatically, alongside the
use of more sophisticated weapons by the Palestinians,
including improvised explosive devices and rockets
launched towards Israel. Unless decisive steps are
taken now to rein in the violence, there is a significant
risk that events could deteriorate further.
2/23

27/06/2023

The mounting violence is taking place against
the backdrop of deeply worrisome settlement-related
developments that alter the already fragile dynamics
on the ground, as well as a worrisome deterioration in
relations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority
(PA). In that regard, I welcome today’s calls between
President Isaac Herzog and President Mahmoud
Abbas and between Defence Minister Yoav Gallant
and Secretary-General of the Palestine Liberation
Organization Hussein Al-Sheikh on the occasion of
Eid Al-Adha, in which, according to Israeli statements
released to the media, Israel officials denounced those
settler attacks in the West Bank and recommitted to
holding perpetrators accountable.
On 19 June, an Israeli military operation in the Jenin
refugee camp, in Area A of the occupied West Bank,
led to heavy armed exchanges. An Israeli security force
(ISF) vehicle was struck by a Palestinian improvised
explosive device, injuring eight ISF personnel.
Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the
attack. According to the Israel Defense Forces (IDF),
military helicopters carried out air strikes — the first in
the West Bank since the second intifada — to facilitate
the extraction of military personnel and disabled
vehicles. Over the course of the day, seven Palestinians
were killed by the ISF, including two children, and 90
were injured.
On 20 June, two Palestinians shot and killed four
Israeli civilians, including two children, and injured
four others at a gas station near Eli settlement, north of
Ramallah. One of the perpetrators was shot and killed
by an Israeli civilian at the scene, while the other was
later killed by Israeli forces near Tubas. Hamas claimed
the assailants as members and said the attack was a
“natural response” to the ISF operation in Jenin.
From the night of 20 June through 25 June, Israeli
settlers perpetrated 28 violent attacks against Palestinian
villages across the northern and central occupied West
Bank. In total, one Palestinian was killed, and 54 others
were injured — 37 by the ISF, 16 by settlers and 1 by
an undetermined agent — while four settlers or other
Israeli civilians and one ISF personnel were injured by
Palestinians. The attacks followed a similar pattern,
with large numbers of settlers, many armed — and in
some cases escorted by the ISF — setting fire to dozens
of houses, vehicles and fields owned by Palestinians,
followed by confrontations that have, in many cases,
led to casualties. In some instances, the ISF fired live
and rubber-coated metal bullets at Palestinians.
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Also on 20 June, in Al-Lubban Ash-Sharqiya, a
settler arsonist also targeted a gas station and three
Palestinians, including a child, who were injured.
On 21 June, over 300 Israeli settlers again attacked
the Palestinian village of Turmus Ayya, north-west of
Ramallah. In the ensuing confrontations, one Palestinian
was shot and killed by the ISF, and eight others were
injured by live ammunition. The settler rampage
continued that evening in Urif, south of Nablus, with
hundreds of Israeli settlers again attacking Palestinians,
their property and other structures, including a school
and a mosque.
Over the following days, settlers attacked villages
situated between Nablus and Ramallah, including Jalud,
Sinjil, Deir Dibwan, Umm Safa, Al-Mughayer and,
again, Turmus Ayya. To date, Israeli police have said that
11 Israelis have been detained, including two off-duty
IDF personnel, in relation to the various attacks.
Amid those developments, on the night of 21 June,
armed Palestinians fired towards Al-Jalamah checkpoint,
north of Jenin. An Israeli drone subsequently launched a
missile at their vehicle, killing three Palestinians, one a
child. The IDF said that the three were responsible for
a number of shooting attacks in the West Bank. Two
were later claimed as members by Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and the third by the Fatah-affiliated Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigades.
On 26 June, Palestinians from the so-called
Al-Ayyash Brigades attempted to launch two rockets
from the Jenin area towards Israel. Both fell short in
the occupied Palestinian territory, with no damage or
injuries reported.
Reactions by officials to the numerous incidents
have varied, with some rejecting the violence and
condemning vigilantism, while others are making
deeply alarming, inflammatory statements. On 24 June,
the IDF Chief of Staff, the head of the Israeli Security
Agency and the Israeli Police Commissioner issued a
joint statement condemning the settler attacks, which
they called nationalist terrorism, and vowing to take
steps to combat them. These steps include increasing
the presence of forces, stepping up arrests and widening
the use of administrative detention against individuals
participating in such attacks.
The previous day, an Israeli Minister and Cabinet
member had visited an illegal settlement outpost and
called on settlers to “run to the hilltops” and establish
additional outposts, also illegal under Israeli law. He also

S/PV.9361

called for a widespread military campaign in the West
Bank, urging the ISF to
“blow up buildings [and] assassinate terrorists — not
one, or two, but dozens, hundreds, or if needed,
thousands”.
The Minister’s call to establish unauthorized outposts
was later repudiated by Prime Minister Netanyahu at a
Cabinet meeting, where he said that
“calls to grab land illegally and actions of grabbing
land illegally are unacceptable”
and that Israeli authorities would act to stop them, while
promoting settlement expansion in approved locations.
Meanwhile, Palestinian factions, including Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, celebrated the 20 June attack
against Israeli civilians as an “act of heroism” and called
for additional attacks.
Several concerning developments related to Israeli
settlement expansion took place during the reporting
period. On 18 June, the Israeli Government approved
significant amendments to Israeli settlement planning
procedures that could expedite advancement of Israeli
settlements plans. The amendments remove, inter alia,
the requirement for the Minister of Defense to approve
interim settlement-planning stages, and delegate the
Minister’s authority in that regard to the Additional
Minister in the Ministry of Defense, currently
Bezalel Smotrich.
In response to this decision, the Secretary-General
of the Palestine Liberation Organization’s Executive
Committee Hussein Al-Sheikh announced in a tweet
that the Palestinian Authority would not participate in a
long-awaited meeting of the Joint Economic Committee
scheduled for 19 June. The meeting had been anticipated
as an important opportunity for the parties to discuss
urgent steps to improve their economic relationship
and deliver on existing commitments. Similarly, plans
for a Ministerial meeting of the Negev Forum later this
summer, to be hosted by Morocco, were also postponed.
On 26 June, the Israeli Civil Administration’s Higher
Planning Committee reportedly advanced plans for over
5,500 housing units in Israeli settlements in Area C.
Some 750 units near Eli were added to the agenda after
the 20 June attack there and following an announcement
by the Prime Minister’s Office that Israel’s answer to
terrorism is to strike at it forcefully and build up our
country. The plans advanced reportedly include the
retroactive regularization, under Israeli law, of three
outposts adjacent to Eli.

23-184633/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With regard to other significant developments, on
16 June, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
announced that it had resumed its service delivery to
Palestine refugees in the West Bank after nearly four
months of disruption due to a work dispute with the
West Bank staff union and a strike. UNRWA operations
in the West Bank, including 42 health clinics and 90
schools for more than 40,000 children, have since
fully resumed.
I will now turn to several observations with regard
to the implementation of the provisions of resolution
2334 (2016) during the reporting period. I remain
gravely concerned by the escalating spiral of violence
we are witnessing in the occupied West Bank. I condemn
all acts of violence against civilians, including all acts
of terror, which exacerbate mistrust and undermine a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. The violence must
stop, and all perpetrators must be held accountable. I
am particularly alarmed by the extreme levels of settler
violence, including the large numbers of settlers — many
of them armed — systematically attacking Palestinian
villages, terrorizing communities, sometimes in the
proximity of Israeli security forces. As the occupying
Power, Israel has an obligation to protect Palestinians
and their property in the occupied Palestinian territory
and to ensure prompt, independent, impartial and
transparent investigations into all acts of violence.
I reiterate that security forces must exercise
maximum restraint, use force proportionately and
lethal force only when strictly unavoidable in order to
protect life, and must conduct thorough, independent,
impartial and prompt investigations into all instances
of the possible excessive use of force. Children in
particular must never be targets of violence, and they
must never be used or put in harm’s way. I strongly
condemn any inciteful, provocative statements from
officials on either side that further inflame the volatile
situation on the ground.
I remain deeply troubled by the relentless
expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, which fuels
violence and is impeding Palestinians’ access to their
land and resources, reshaping the geography of the
occupied West Bank and threatening the viability of
a future Palestinian State. In that regard, I note with
alarm the recent decision of the Government of Israel
that may expedite the expansion in Area C. Israeli
settlements constitute a flagrant violation of United
4/23

27/06/2023

Nations resolutions and international law. I call on
the Government of Israel to cease advancing all
settlement activity immediately, end the demolitions
of Palestinian-owned property and prevent the possible
displacement and eviction of Palestinians, in line with
its obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. I urge Israel to approve
plans that can enable Palestinian communities in Area
C and East Jerusalem to build legally and address their
development needs.
In conclusion, I underscore that the speed and
intensity of the security deterioration we are witnessing
on the ground are extremely dangerous. The events
that are unfolding seriously challenge broader stability
and undermine the Palestinian Authority. While the
ceasefire that followed the Gaza escalation in May has
held, there is a constant risk that the events in the West
Bank could spill over into Gaza.
Likewise, the Palestinian Authority’s fiscal and
institutional challenges, exacerbated by funding
shortages, including for United Nations agencies,
affecting the delivery of crucial basic services, remain
concerning and may further aggravate the deterioration
of the situation on the ground. Let there be no
doubt — neither the PA nor the United Nations will be
able to provide humanitarian assistance if donors do
not urgently step up financial support.
In recent days and weeks the United Nations has
remained in close contact with all the parties to help
restore relative calm and change the current disastrous
trajectory. We must act urgently and collectively to stop
the violence. At the same time, it is crucial to bring
the parties back onto a path that addresses the political
issues driving the current dynamics so that the process
of resolving the core issues can begin. The deepening
occupation and settlement expansion, the high levels
of violence against civilians, including acts of terror,
and, critically, the absence of a political horizon,
are rapidly eroding the hope among Palestinians and
Israelis, particularly young people, that a resolution
of the conflict is achievable. I urge all leaders to put
on the brakes and rethink the options. The choice is
clear — either to continue along the downward spiral
of violence and provocations, leading to a political
vacuum, or to turn towards constructive dialogue
linked to concrete actions that can create hope and a
political horizon.
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The United Nations remains committed to assisting
those efforts, and to supporting Palestinians and Israelis
in resolving the conflict and ending the occupation
through the achievement of a two-State solution, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zogby.
Mr. Zogby: I thank you very much, Madam
President, for the invitation and the opportunity to
address all the members of the Security Council today
on the human rights conditions of the Palestinian people
living under Israeli occupation.
From recorded votes in the General Assembly, I
know most Member States’ Governments recognize
the magnitude and urgency of this concern, but many
feel they lack the capacity to end the injustices of the
occupation. Meanwhile, those who have the capacity
to defend Palestinian rights either make do with
statements of concern or take steps that actually enable
the nightmare to continue.
Almost five decades ago, I was invited to address
a United Nations forum on this very issue. I cited
concerns with collective punishment of civilian
populations, massive home demolitions, prolonged
detention without charge, torture, land confiscation and
settlement expansion. Instead of presenting numbers,
I chose to put a human face on the victims. I did so
because while Israeli victims of violence were known,
Palestinians were objectified and depersonalized. It did
not do justice to simply tally up the numbers of the men
in the village whose hands were tied behind their backs,
blindfolded, forced to sit in a village square overnight
on cold ground or in direct sun in the heat of day. They
needed to be known and the impact of that humiliation
and abuse on their families had to be understood. And
what about the thousands of families given an hour to
clear out their belongings before the bulldozers came
to demolish their homes to create a so-called security
corridor or those awakened in the middle of the night as
their homes were invaded, ransacked and photographed
by occupation forces in order to map the neighbourhood,
or the farmer standing powerless as their 100-year-old
orchards were demolished to make way for a security
zone? Behind each incident are real people whose lives

S/PV.9361

were upended and futures darkened, their families
traumatized and angry. Tragically, those same horrors
continued to define the Palestinian reality today.
Annually, the General Assembly speaks to those
violations of rights. Its resolutions are ignored; the
commissions Member States’ create and the human
rights monitors they empower are denounced and
demonized. And when Palestinians prepare a case
for the International Criminal Court (ICC), they are
threatened with sanctions. And yet it remains important
to note that those violations continue to occur daily,
affecting the lives and futures of millions of real
people. Their voices must be heard. Their rights must
be protected.
There are those in my country who denounced
the United Nations for its resolutions on Palestinian
rights. They charge the United Nations with singling
Israel out for criticism and suggest an unhealthy
obsession with Israel. Such a charge is both false
and a denial of Palestinian humanity. In the first
place, the United Nations has a special responsibility
for Israel and Palestine. Israel is the only country
conditionally admitted for membership, obligating it to
implement United Nations resolutions adopted prior to
its admission.
Since then and especially after the 1967 war, Israel
has violated a range of laws and conventions and done
so with impunity. It is not Israel that is being singled out
for criticism, rather it is Israel that is being singled out
by some in my country and excused from accountability
for its behaviour.
The deformities that has created are worrisome.
There is an extremist political culture in Israel today
that is a by-product of that entitlement and impunity.
Polling data demonstrates that a majority of Israelis do
not view Palestinians as equal human beings deserving
of having their rights protected, with a substantial
plurality supporting the annexation of occupied lands
and the expulsion of Palestinians who live there.
At the same time, consider the impact that has had
on the Palestinian people and their political culture.
Think of the Palestinians forced to wait for hours at a
checkpoint to get to a job, return home or visit a family
friend in a nearby village, knowing that, at the end of
the wait, they could be humiliated by a 19-year-old
heavily armed soldier or the child who has witnessed
his father being treated in that manner, and the fear of
families of the little children or the adult detainees.

23-184635/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Given that traumatic nightmare visited upon
millions of Palestinians for the past 56 years, is
it any wonder that a recent poll shows a majority of
Palestinians rejecting moderate leadership, despairing
of peaceful change and now favouring armed struggle?
That tragic deformity in Palestinian political culture is
the result of the continued brutality of the occupation.
It is also important to see the impact the harshness
the occupation is having on the Arab world. While polls
we conducted four years ago found a large majority in
most Arab countries favouring exploring peace with
Israel, saying that it might temper Israel’s behaviour
and stop the violence, more recent polling suggests the
hope has decidedly diminished.
If our goal is to reignite the prospects for peace,
then our focus must be to stay the hand of the occupier
and defend the victims of brutality. Right now, concrete
action is required to help free the imprisoned children,
the detainees and those living under the threat of
demolition, land seizure and settlement expansion.
Palestinian rights must be defended, because
Palestinians are not children of a lesser God. Their
lives and futures are as important as those of any other
people on Earth.
There are actions that can be taken that make a
difference. Council members can collectively challenge
Security Council vetoes, whereas the Governments of
individual Member States can take concrete gestures to
support the Palestinian right to seek judgment from the
ICC or they can implement specific measures holding
Israel accountable for its human rights violations. Israel
needs to know there are red lines which, if crossed,
have consequences. And Palestinians need to know
they are not alone, and violence is not the answer.
Actions, not statements, will contribute to restoring
Palestinian hope, ending Israel’s sense of impunity
and empowering those Palestinians and Israelis who
seek a peaceful future. Only after we have changed the
political dynamic and helped to transform the political
deformities infecting both societies, can a political
horizon emerge and meaningful negotiations take place.
The President: I thank Mr. Zogby for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing, as
well as Mr. James Zogby for his insights. We share their
6/23

27/06/2023

alarm over the violence in the West Bank and remain
deeply troubled by the escalation we have witnessed
this year.
We were horrified by the brutal terror attack on
21 June on Israelis near Eli in the West Bank, which
killed four people and injured several others. We
condemn the attack in the strongest terms, offer our
deepest condolences to the families of those killed and
wish the injured a speedy recovery. We also condemn
the recent extremist settler attacks on Palestinian
civilians, which have resulted in one death, injuries
and significant property damage. We extend our
condolences to the families of those affected and have
underscored to the Government of Israel the importance
of holding fully accountable and prosecuting those
responsible for those acts of violence. As the leadership
of Israel’s security services has acknowledged, it is
vital for community leaders to publicly denounce those
acts and to contribute to the efforts to prevent them.
We are also concerned about the impact of that
violence on the United States citizens who have been
victims of senseless acts of terror this year and of the
recent violence in the West Bank village of Turmus Ayya,
where United States citizens, including Americans, make
up a majority of the population. We are actively engaging
with the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to secure the welfare of our citizens and to
provide equal measures of justice and security for all the
Palestinian and Israeli civilians affected by that violence.
We were also deeply troubled by Israel’s recent
announcement that it would be advancing more than
5,000 settlement units, as well as the reports of changes
to Israel’s system of settlement administration aimed at
expediting the planning and approval of settlements.
Going forward, it will be vital for both Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to take additional steps to
de-escalate tensions. We call on all the parties to refrain
from unilateral actions, including settlement activity,
evictions and the demolition of Palestinian homes,
terrorism and incitement to violence, all of which serve
only to further inflame the situation. There have been
moments over the past week in which some people have
questioned whether such a future is possible. Other
people have warned that we are witnessing an escalation
of violence not seen for more than 20 years. I understand
the reasons for their pessimism. The violence of the
past week must serve as a call to action for all of us in
the Council to redouble our efforts towards peace. The
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United States will continue to work with Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to promote steps aimed at
lowering tensions and restoring trust, which can create
the conditions to bring the parties back to the table.
Finally, while we welcome the end of the strike by
the West Bank Staff Union of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which disrupted services for some of
the most vulnerable, we remain concerned about the
continuing financial crisis facing UNRWA, particularly
as Palestinians are facing a prospect of rising food
insecurity, among other humanitarian needs. Regional
actors and the broader international community must
urgently consider providing UNRWA with greater
financial support.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), on Israeli settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We listened very carefully
to the briefing by Mr. James Zogby, President of the
Arab American Institute. We heard with concern
Mr. Wennesland’s assessment regarding the turbulent
atmosphere in the West Bank as Israel intensifies
its unilateral steps to create irreversible facts on the
ground, primarily through illegal settlement building,
while continuing to forcibly evict Palestinians, destroy
their homes and expropriate their property, alongside the
decisions by the Israeli leadership to legalize outposts in
the occupied territory.
Since the beginning of the year, we have repeatedly
witnessed regular outbreaks of violence both in the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well as along Israel’s
perimeter. In the past two months alone, more than 100
people, including a Russian citizen and members of
his family, have been victims of such escalations. The
most recent raid by the Israel Defense Forces in Jenin
on 19 June, in which seven Palestinians were killed,
resulted in pogroms and clashes between Israeli settlers
and Palestinians, with civilian deaths and injuries on
both sides.
Against a backdrop of violent activity in the
occupied Palestinian territory, the Israeli authorities’
efforts to expand and legalize Israeli settlements have
continued unabated. In May plans were approved for
the construction of more than 600 housing units in
settlements in the West Bank, while access for Israelis to

S/PV.9361

the outpost of Homesh, which was evacuated in 2005, was
officially opened. This month, the Israeli Government
decided to ease the bureaucratic procedures required
for the approval of the construction and development
of more than 4,500 housing units in the West Bank,
which is a violation of international law. The demolition
of Palestinian homes is also ongoing, with some 200
people, including 80 children, evicted in May alone, and
with more than 30 buildings and a donor-funded school
in Bethlehem destroyed. The regular provocations and
violations of the status quo at Jerusalem’s holy sites
are particularly worrisome. In particular, Itamar BenGvir, Israel’s Minister of National Security, once again
made a march to the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, while
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu held an external
meeting at the site of archaeological excavations at the
Temple Mount.
In the absence of any prospects for a revival of the
Middle East peace process, the further deterioration of
the situation in the area of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
can only be cause for concern. The recurring violence
in the occupied Palestinian territory, in parallel with a
weakening of the international legal framework for a
settlement as a result of the Israelis’ unilateral actions,
is a reminder of the danger of a continued vacuum in
the negotiating process. It must be acknowledged that
the situation will remain volatile as long as the parties
fail to reach mutually acceptable agreements on all
final-status issues, based on the universally recognized
international legal framework for a settlement in the
Middle East and a two-State solution, which we have
consistently supported.
We have recently seen some positive developments
in the Middle East region. Against that background, it is
regrettable that the issue of a settlement in the Middle
East, especially its Palestinian aspect, has continued
to be left behind in those processes. For all practical
purposes, collective diplomacy regarding a PalestinianIsraeli settlement has come to a standstill. That is largely
the result of the unilateral decision by the United States of
America and the European Union to freeze the activities
of the Middle East Quartet of international mediators.
In that context, the initiative put forward by Russia’s
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov when he presided over
the Council’s debate on the Middle East (see S/PV.9309),
whereby a consultative meeting could be held between
Russia, the League of Arab States and a group of
countries of the region that are actively involved in the
issue, remains relevant and significant.

23-184637/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We would like to clarify right away that our
proposal is not designed to establish new formats or
structures. Its aim is to confirm and give impetus to
the implementation of previous international decisions
in the area, including the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the Madrid principles, including land for
peace, and a two-State solution, with Palestine and
Israel coexisting in peace and security. Russia is
committed to the creation of a Palestinian State within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Our position is consistent and will not be subject to any
opportunistic changes. We believe that our initiation of
such a discussion could help synchronize the approaches
and efforts of the leading Middle Eastern players
regarding a settlement in the Middle East, including
with respect to overcoming the intra-Palestinian divide
and then helping to establish the necessary conditions
for resuming a direct Palestinian-Israeli dialogue on a
set of final-status issues.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
briefing this morning. I also thank the Secretariat for
the report on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016). Ecuador reiterates its support for the Special
Coordinator’s work, which is increasingly important in
an increasingly difficult environment. We also thank
Mr. James Zogby for his briefing, which we listened
to closely.

27/06/2023

parties to respect international law, human rights
and international humanitarian law, including the
principles of distinction and proportionality, as well as
their obligation to protect civilians.
Four months ago, in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/1, the Council expressed its deep concern
and dismay at Israel’s announcement that it would
continue its construction and expansion of settlements
and legalization of settlement outposts. The presidential
statement also reiterated that the continuing Israeli
settlement activities are seriously endangering the
viability of a two-State solution based on the 1967
borders. On 19 March, following a meeting in SharmEl-Sheikh, the parties issued a communiqué stating
that the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
National Authority reaffirmed their joint readiness and
commitment to working immediately to end unilateral
measures for a period of three to six months, including
a commitment by Israel to ending discussions of any
new settlement units for four months, and to halting the
authorization of any outposts for six months.

We are pleased that a few minutes ago the Council,
through its President, made its voice of consensus heard
and provided information about the consultations held
last Friday on the issue that brings us here today. The
written report that we have received on developments
covering the period up to 14 June is worrisome, and
several of the facts mentioned in it have already been
brought up in this Chamber. The events of the past 10
days are even more deplorable because they make it
clear that caution, restraint and common sense have
been overtaken by inflammatory rhetoric, unilateral
decisions, senseless violence and terror.

Despite that commitment, the Secretary-General
reports that between 14 March and 14 June, Israeli
authorities advanced some 920 housing units in East
Jerusalem and approved 1,890 units in the West Bank.
Only last week, it was announced that they would
advance the planning of thousands of units in settlements
in the West Bank, and that Israel has approved changes
to the Israeli administrative system that will expedite
the authorization of such housing units in the future.
It is disheartening to note that the insistent calls from
the Council and the parties’ voluntary commitments
have been ignored and disregarded. Given the situation,
we reiterate, just as is noted in resolution 2334 (2016),
that the establishment by Israel of settlements in the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes
a flagrant violation of international law and a major
obstacle to the achievement of a two-State solution and
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.

Ecuador firmly condemns violence of every kind
against civilians and any act of terrorism, whatever its
source. We also condemn the glorification of terrorism,
which cannot be tolerated. At the same time, we
stand in solidarity with the victims, Palestinians and
Israelis alike. Those responsible for those reprehensible
acts must be brought to justice and held accountable
for what they have done. We reiterate our call on the

Lastly, it is in the hope of achieving that just and
lasting peace that we reiterate our call to the parties
to demonstrate, through their actions, their willingness
to work for a solution to the conflict, avoid more
provocations and remember that revenge is not justice.
Above all, we call on them to end the dangerous cycle
of violence that prevents the peoples of Israel and
Palestine from living safely in peace and dignity.

8/23

23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Osei-Mensah (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Tor Wennesland, the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Process, for his briefing, and
Mr. James Zogby, President of the Arab American
Institute, for his perspective on the situation in the
Middle East.
We note the Special Coordinator’s emphasis on
the detailed measures being undertaken to restore
calm in the region. We welcome the roles that friendly
Governments have recently played to defuse tensions
in the region, stabilize the situation on the ground and
encourage dialogue and direct negotiations between
senior political figures on both sides to find a political
solution to the conflict.
It is regrettable that the period under consideration
has been characterized by an increase in Israeli settler
activities, which have resulted in the displacement of
Palestinian families, encroachment on Palestinian
lands, physical attacks, arrests without due process
and the killing by both parties of children and unarmed
civilians in the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially the northern West Bank, Gaza and East
Jerusalem. We condemn and express our deep dismay
at the continuing pattern of violent attacks and direct
confrontations between Palestinians and Israelis.
We remain concerned about the developments in
the volatile security and dire humanitarian situations in
the occupied Palestinian territories and beyond, which
have been fomented by actions by both Palestinians and
Israelis during the period under consideration. They
include, first, the Higher Planning Committee of the
Civil Administration of Israel’s decision to expedite
the issuance of construction permits for the planned
construction of 4,560 new housing units in the West
Bank, following the Knesset’s repeal of certain clauses
in the 2005 disengagement law — which ordered the
evacuation of Jewish settlements — in order to allow
Israelis to re-enter four settlements in the occupied
West Bank; secondly, the use of live ammunition by
the Israel Defense Forces in a security operation in a
refugee camp in Jenin on 19 June, which resulted in the
deaths of many Palestinian civilians, including children,
and more than 90 injured to varying degrees; thirdly,
the recent increasing use of provocative statements and
radical policy proposals by notable high-ranking rightwing Israeli and hard-line Palestinian politicians, which
undermine and threaten the prospects for the widely
accepted concept of a two-State solution, and last but
not least, the increase in incidents of rocket fire by

S/PV.9361

Palestinian armed groups and militias from Palestiniancontrolled areas of the occupied Palestinian territories
into Israeli territory and Israeli settler communities
bordering the West Bank, which is an obstacle to peace.
Those unilateral actions run counter to various
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution
242 (1967), reaffirmed in resolution 338 (1973), which
provides the framework for peace negotiations based
on the land-for-peace formula and has become the
foundation for all subsequent negotiations and peace
treaties in the region. We call on both parties to show
maximum restraint and refrain from further unilateral
actions by establishing a joint civilian committee that
will work to promote confidence-building measures.
We emphasize the importance of holding to account all
who are responsible for acts of violence, human rights
violations, war crimes and human rights abuses. We
reiterate our demand that all the parties to the conflict
comply fully with international humanitarian law,
including in relation to the protection of civilians, and
with the Charter of the United Nations and the many
relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016). We appeal to both parties to respect and
recommit to all previous agreements between them,
especially the commitment to de-escalating the situation
on the ground and preventing further violence, as
agreed in the Aqaba and Sharm El- Sheikh declarations.
We call on Israel to exercise maximum restraint and
act responsibly in a manner consistent with international
law by promptly investigating all incidents involving
the alleged disproportionate use of force against
Palestinians, while abiding by its legal obligations and
responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Ghana’s commitment to
playing a meaningful role in finding a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions and a two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 lines.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing. I
also thank Mr. James Zogby for his briefing, which we
listened closely to.
Since Israel’s military raid on Jenin on June 19, the
situation on the ground has deteriorated dramatically.
The intense clashes in the northern part of the occupied
West Bank have resulted in many casualties, including

23-184639/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

young people. The cycle of violence evident in acts of
terror and brutality and the disproportionate use of
force against civilians, including women and children,
must end.
We are concerned about the Israeli Government’s
decision of 18 June to modify the settlement planning
procedures introduced in 1996, and by the advancement
of 4,000 housing units by Israel’s Civil Administration’s
Higher Planning Committee. We reaffirm that the
policies of settlement and the evictions of Palestinians
from their homes and demolitions of those homes are
not only contrary to international law but also increase
tensions and therefore create major obstacles to the
realization of a two-State solution. We urge sincerely
for efforts to achieve that solution and to build a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace. At the same time,
respect for the historical and legal status quo of the holy
sites of Jerusalem is critical to the peaceful coexistence
of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. It represents a key
consensus that neither party should call into question,
which would jeopardize the possibility of dialogue in the
Middle East peace process. To that end, Gabon reiterates
its support for the vital role played by the Kingdom
of Jordan in its official custodianship of Jerusalem’s
Muslim holy sites. We urge all parties to refrain from all
forms of inflammatory rhetoric and posturing and other
provocations that could reignite tensions.
The situation in Gaza remains particularly difficult,
marked by restrictions on the movement of people
and goods to and from Gaza. Those restrictions are
contributing to the precarious living conditions of
more than 2 million Palestinian residents. Although the
movement of goods across the two borders has increased
and the number of exit permits issued by Israel for
work purposes rose sharply during May, the conditions
for eligibility for exit permits remain drastic. We call
for Israel to lift the blockade of Gaza completely, in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009), in order to allow
unhindered access for humanitarian aid. We reiterate our
call for funding for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order
to guarantee the Agency’s stabilizing action at a time
when it urgently needs to restore its operating capacities.
In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its call for
restraint, dialogue and a cessation of hostilities. We
urge the parties to respect the Council’s resolutions, in
particular resolution 2334 (2016), and to implement the
commitments made in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh.
We call for the greater involvement of States that have
10/23

27/06/2023

influence on the parties with a view to achieving a lasting
political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
is worsening tensions throughout the region.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to join others in thanking Mr. Tor Wennesland,
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his detailed briefing. I also took careful note
of the briefing by Mr. James Zogby.
As we have just heard, June was once again
marked by a very high level of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Switzerland reiterates that the
settlements are illegal under international law. They
also constitute a major obstacle to peace based on a twoState solution, as is also noted in resolution 2334 (2016),
which obliges Israel to refrain from taking any measures
that would introduce permanent changes, in particular
demographic and administrative ones, to the occupied
territory. In that respect, Switzerland calls on Israel to
rescind the change announced on 18 June to the approval
procedure for construction in settlements, as well as the
announced construction of more than 4,500 new housing
units in settlements.
Following the operation carried out on 19 June
by Israeli security forces in the Jenin refugee camp,
which cost the lives of seven Palestinians, including
two children, and left nearly 100 injured, we want to
remind the Israeli authorities of their obligations under
international law. In particular, the use of force must
meet the criterion of proportionality and respect all
people’s right to life and security. The use of a helicopter
gunship in Jenin during that operation and the targeted
assassination by drone on Wednesday evening also
mark a worrisome escalation. Switzerland condemns the
acts of violence perpetrated in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular the attack that claimed the lives
of four Israelis, including two minors, near the Eli
settlement on 20 June. Switzerland also condemns the
violence perpetrated this week across the West Bank
by hundreds of armed settlers in retaliation, notably
in Turmus Ayya, in which one Palestinian was killed
and the property of Palestinian residents damaged. We
call for those responsible for those attacks to be held to
account. In that respect, we have noted the Israeli armed
forces’ denunciation of those acts and call for it to be
followed by concrete measures. The armed forces must
assume their responsibility by protecting the Palestinian
population from such attacks.
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The escalation of violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory is alarming, with incidents in 2023 continuing
those of the previous year — 126 civilians, including 35
children, have been killed. The death of a two-year-old
child from an injury sustained during an Israeli operation
in Nabi Salih on 5 June served as a reminder that children
are all too often the victims of the conflict. They should
never be the target of violence or put in danger.

S/PV.9361

again. Turning now to the report presented by the Special
Coordinator on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), let me make three points.

In February the Security Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/1) calling on the
parties to create the conditions necessary for peace. For a
time, the meetings in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh in the
spring had made it possible to resume a dialogue with a
view to reducing tensions, and Switzerland supports the
efforts made in the wake of the presidential statement.
We urgently call on the leaders of all parties to work
for de-escalation and a resumption of genuine talks
addressing the root causes of the conflict. Switzerland
stands ready, including through its good offices, to
support such efforts aimed at restoring a political horizon
based on a two-State solution.

First, the report demonstrates the damaging effect
of what it calls the relentless expansion of settlements
on the prospects for peace. The United Kingdom’s
long-standing position remains unchanged. We oppose
settlements, which are illegal under international law,
and we call on Israel to cease and reverse its policy
supporting their expansion. Secondly, the report also
makes clear the value and importance of the dialogue
that took place between senior Israelis and Palestinians
earlier this year to building trust and managing relations.
We echo the call for all sides to honour the commitments
made in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh. Finally, the United
Kingdom shares the report’s concerns about the shortfall
in the funding for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. The
Agency provides vital services and hope to millions, and
we call on all Member States to work together to address
the shortfall urgently.

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking the Special Coordinator for his helpful update.
We also take note of Mr. Zogby’s briefing.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. I also
listened attentively to Mr. Zogby’s statement.

As we have heard, the security situation in the West
Bank and the occupied Palestinian territory continues to
deteriorate. Last week saw more loss of life and showed
how quickly and unpredictably events can change. It
also underscored the urgent need for restraint, calm
and respect for the dignity of human life. Seven people,
including two children, were killed in an Israeli raid in
the city of Jenin in the West Bank. While the United
Kingdom supports Israel’s right to defend itself, its
security operations must be in line with international
humanitarian law and every effort must be made to avoid
civilian casualties. Terror attacks, such as the killing of
four Israelis near the settlement of Eli by Hamas-affiliated
gunmen on 20 June, are barbaric and unjustifiable
and undermine the safety and security of Israelis and
Palestinians alike. The United Kingdom condemns those
attacks without qualification. The glorification of the
killers by Hamas and other organizations is abhorrent
and heightens tensions where de-escalation is needed.
We also unequivocally condemn recent scenes of settler
violence in Turmus Ayya, where homes and property
were burned down and civilians attacked, resulting in
the death of one Palestinian. Every perpetrator of such
hate crimes should be held to account, and we urge
that steps be taken to prevent similar crimes happening

The Palestinian question is at the heart of the Middle
East issue and bears on the lasting peace, security and
stability of the region. China has always upheld the
principles of fairness and justice on the Palestinian
question and has always firmly supported the Palestinian
people in their just cause for the restoration of their
legitimate national rights. On 14 June, in a meeting with
President Abbas during his visit to China, President Xi
Jinping stressed that the fundamental solution to the
Palestinian question lies in the establishment of a fully
sovereign and independent Palestinian State, based on
the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
President Xi pointed out that Palestine’s economic and
livelihood needs should be met, and that the international
community should step up its development assistance
and humanitarian aid to Palestine. He also called
for adhering to a path towards genuine peace talks,
respecting the historical status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem and refraining from excessive and provocative
rhetoric and actions.
A large-scale, more authoritative and more influential
international peace conference should be convened to
create the conditions for the resumption of peace talks
and contribute concrete efforts to help Palestine and
Israel to live in peace.

23-1846311/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Last week, in the face of escalating tensions in the
occupied Palestinian territories, China, together with
the United Arab Emirates and France, facilitated, on
23 June, the convening of urgent consultations in the
Security Council.
In connection with the briefing just delivered by
the Special Coordinator, I would like to make three
further points.
First, it is important to break the cycle of violence to
pursue common security. The report of the SecretaryGeneral provided an alarming account of violence and
Palestinian casualties in the occupied territories, as
well as civilian casualties on the Israeli side. I would
like to reiterate China’s opposition to unilateral actions
that exacerbate tensions in the occupied territories,
to all violence against civilians and to irresponsible
provocation and incitement. The occupying Power must
fulfil its obligations under international humanitarian
law and guarantee the security of the people and their
property in the occupied territories.
Palestine and Israel are neighbours and cannot be
moved away from each other. No country should pursue
absolute security at the expense of the security of
another country. That is impossible both in theory and
in reality. The international community must give equal
attention to the legitimate security concerns of both
sides and promote a vision of common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security observed by both
sides, which must be encouraged to achieve common
security through dialogue and negotiation.
Secondly, it is important to uphold the international
rule of law and cease unilateral actions to change the
status quo. The construction of settlements in the
occupied territories violates international law and runs
counter to the obligations of resolution 2334 (2016).
Israel recently adopted a new settlement resolution
that streamlines and expedites the settlement approval
process and approved the construction of several
thousand new settlement housing units, about which
China expresses its concern. Every inch of settlement
expansion represents a further squeeze on the living
space of Palestine, a further encroachment on the
land and resources of the occupied territories and a
further weakening of the two-State solution. We once
again urge the cessation of all settlement activities
and unilateral actions to change the status quo of the
occupied territories.
12/23

27/06/2023

Thirdly, it is important to honour political
commitments and advance the two-State solution.
It should be noted that the crisis and instabilities in
the occupied Palestinian territories today are rooted
in the occupation and settlement expansion for over
half a century and in the protracted stalemate of the
Middle East peace process. The fundamental solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian
question lies in the resumption of peace talks and
the implementation of the two-State solution. The
international community must always place the
Palestinian question high on the international agenda
and take practical steps to advance the two-State
solution. The Security Council must demonstrate a
sense of urgency and be prepared to take meaningful
actions, assume its responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations and provide oversight and safeguards
for the implementation of the political commitments.
China stands ready to work with the international
community to actively contribute to a comprehensive,
just and enduring solution to the Palestinian question at
an early date, to the peaceful coexistence of Palestine
and Israel, to the common development of the Arab and
Jewish peoples and to the lasting peace and stability of
the Middle East.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
is seriously concerned about the deteriorating situation
in Israel and the occupied territories. We condemn in the
strongest possible terms all attacks targeting civilians
and in particular the terrorist attack perpetrated on
20 June in the West Bank, which killed at least four
Israelis and wounded several others. France reiterates
its unwavering commitment to the security of Israel
and its citizens.
France condemns the increasing violence by Israeli
settlers against Palestinian civilians, including the
destruction of their homes and property. That violence
must stop. We call on the Israeli Government to respond.
The perpetrators of violence must be brought to justice.
France has expressed its deep concern with regard
to the clashes that occurred on 19 June during an Israeli
army intervention in Jenin, which left at least six
Palestinians dead, including a child, and many wounded
Palestinians. We recall Israel’s obligations under
international humanitarian law on the proportionate use
of force and the protection of civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

France condemns all attacks on civilians, including
those committed against children. In that very
worrisome context, France calls on the parties to avoid
unilateral actions or provocations likely to fuel the
spiral of violence.
The Security Council must respond to the sharp
acceleration in settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territories and ensure compliance with
resolution 2334 (2016). Settlement activity fuels tensions
on the ground and undermines the two-State solution.
France therefore calls on the Israeli Government to
stop building housing units in the settlements. France
calls on Israel to uphold the commitments made
in Aqaba, Jordan, and Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, in
February and March. France will never recognize the
illegal annexation of territories, nor the legalization of
unauthorized settlements.
The Council has a collective responsibility to
defend the two-State solution, even if it is increasingly
precarious. As the Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs of France reminded us, alongside her German,
Jordanian and Egyptian counterparts on 11 May in
Berlin, it is urgent to work concretely towards restoring
a credible political horizon based on a two-State
solution, living side by side in peace and security.
That is the only solution that can bring about a just and
lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
France stands ready to contribute to any peace
initiative. The United Nations, in particular the Special
Coordinator, has an important role to play in supporting
those efforts.
Finally, despite growing humanitarian needs in
the occupied Palestinian territories, the World Food
Programme and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East will be
forced to suspend some of their activities in the West
Bank and Gaza unless they receive new funding. We
call on Member States to contribute to the funding of
humanitarian assistance on which many Palestinians
depend for their survival.

S/PV.9361

the deteriorating security situation on the ground, as
exemplified by the recent clashes in and around Jenin.
We strongly condemn the terrorist attack on 20 June
that killed four Israelis in the West Bank, as well as the
subsequent violence by settlers against Palestinians.
Japan is alarmed by the possible recurrence of such
events during the Eid al-Adha holidays.
Japan is seriously concerned about Israel’s
announcement, on 19 June, regarding its decision to
advance planning for the building of more than 4,000
new units and its announcement, on 21 June, regarding
its decision to advance planning for 1,000 units at the
Eli settlement. Settlement activities are in violation of
international law, constitute a serious obstacle to peace
and undermine the viability of a two-State solution.
We once again call on Israel to cease settlement
activities immediately.
Japan recalls the importance of the joint
communiqués issued in Aqaba and Sharm al-Sheikh
as an outcome of serious efforts to calm tensions.
We strongly call on all the parties concerned to take
concrete steps to ensure de-escalation. In particular,
both Israel and Palestine need to exercise maximum
restraint and refrain from any inflammatory words
or actions.
I would like to take this occasion to draw the Security
Council’s attention to the funding crisis faced by United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA). Commissioner-General
Philippe Lazzarini has warned that by September, just
over two months from now, UNRWA will exhaust its
funds and no longer be able to provide core services
and vital aid on which more than 5.9 million registered
Palestine refugees depend. As for Japan, in 2023,
we have so far contributed a total of $40.1 million.
UNRWA is key to regional peace and stability, and
we urge our Member States to provide the necessary
donations to make sure the Agency is fully funded.

I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland and
Mr. James Zogby for their briefings.

Once again, we underscore the fact that, ultimately,
the only way to resolve this conflict is through direct
dialogue between the parties that leads to a two-State
solution with Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security. We welcome and encourage all
international efforts seeking to create an environment
suitable for such dialogue.

We regret that the situation in Israel and Palestine
remains volatile owing to provocative rhetoric, unilateral
actions and violence. Japan is seriously concerned about

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation to the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland,

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Japan welcomes the united
message of the Security Council.

23-1846313/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for his useful update on the situation in the Middle
East region. We also extend our thanks to Mr. James
Zogby, President of the Arab American Institute, for
the perspective he just shared with us.
We are deeply concerned at the prevailing situation
in Gaza, after recent information of yet another
military attack by Israel against the Palestinian civilian
population in the Jenin refugee camp, in the West Bank.
We strongly condemn such attacks, which result in the
death of civilians, and where humanitarian personnel
and journalists were also targeted.
Mozambique has been following with the great
attention the situation in the Gaza region as well as in the
occupied Palestinian territories, where the escalation
of violence has been increasing. This scenario is the
antithesis of the Sharm El-Sheikh dialogue initiative,
in which the parties showed signs of commitment to the
search for peace solutions.
Mozambique calls for an immediate ceasefire and
a slowdown in the escalation of violence in the region.
We should encourage any hope for ongoing dialogue to
continue in order to avert any more bloodshed.
Mozambique wishes to reiterate its long-standing
principled position of support for the two-State
solution, which respects the Palestinian people’s right
to self-determination and independence, and the State
of Israel’s right to existence. The dialogue for peace, the
dialogue for negotiation and the dialogue for peaceful
coexistence between Israel and Palestine must be based
on this fundamental principle.
The people of Israel and the people of Palestine
deserve a firm political commitment from their
leaders for a sustainable dialogue and for avoiding
violent confrontations, occupations and attacks. In
the same vein, we commend the tireless work of
Special Coordinator Wennesland in the region. He
deserves — and he has — our full support.
Before concluding, I would like to underline the
importance for the Security Council to guarantee
compliance of its relevant decisions, as well as of
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
Humanitarian assistance plays a decisive role
in restoring hope to a long-suffering people. In this
context, we call again for the strengthening of the
role of and support for such humanitarian institutions
14/23

27/06/2023

as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the World
Food Programme.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank the Special
Coordinator for the update and Mr. Zogby for sharing
his perspective with us today.
Again, the key word of our meeting on this issue
is violence. It has been particularly troubling and
worrisome in the course of the last two years. It is
becoming alarming and deadlier, more and more
traumatizing and debilitating. It risks becoming a
normal, banal thing, even with its deadly consequences
and the endless carnage it causes on both sides. Yet we
all know that violence has never been the right answer
and will never be the solution. We should strongly resist
the idea that parties are doomed to a never-ending
conflict — it is a dead end because it kills hope and
annihilates efforts for peace.
Last week was extremely fatal for both sides, and
the loss of life among civilians, including children
and women, is appalling. It is incumbent upon the
parties to act and reverse this horrible trend of violence
and escalation by refraining from unilateral acts,
denouncing provocative actions, inflammatory rhetoric
and incitement, and rejecting extremist calls and
nationalist extremism that trigger destabilization and
insecurity and foment more violence.
Albania strongly condemns the terrorist attack
committed by Hamas in Eli last Tuesday, causing the
death of four Israeli civilians. We stand with Israel and
support its right to self-defence from terror through
proportionate response. Terrorist acts are unacceptable
and unjustifiable and should be condemned by everyone
and at all times, as should the glorification or incitement
for such acts.
We are equally concerned by the impact the
conflict is having on Palestinians, often victims of
disproportionate response. In this respect, we strongly
condemn the repeated acts of ruthless settler violence
towards Palestinian civilians. In a country based on the
rule of law, no one has the right to self-justice, to blind
revenge or collective punishment. We welcome the very
strongly worded joint reaction of the Israeli security
institutions and call on the law-enforcement agencies to
thoroughly investigate all the cases of settler violence
towards civilians, hold those responsible accountable
and take the necessary measures to prevent such acts
in future.
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

International humanitarian law applies equally
and must be fully respected on both sides. We call on
the parties to respect their commitments taken at the
Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings and work for
appeasement. Like others in the Security Council, we
are deeply worried by the recent announcement by the
Israeli Government approving thousands of additional
settlement units and by reports of changes to Israel’s
system of settlement administration that expedite the
planning and approval of settlements. Settlements are
illegal under international law, and they are an obstacle
to peace and a driver of violence and insecurity for
civilians. The full implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) is an international obligation.
In the course of the past 75 years, the efforts for
peace in the Middle East have continued and at times
have produced very encouraging results. In terms of
volume, the countless ceasefires, proposals, plans and
road maps for resolving the conflict between Israelis
and Palestinians could fill an entire room. Yet we must
recognize that today we are no closer to a lasting peace.
Unfortunately, destroying is easier than building, and the
antagonists — the forces against peace — are also very
powerful. At the core of the longest conflict in modern
history lie some fundamental and complex questions,
such as those of identity, the claim to land and the
legitimate right to existence of others.
That is why we fully support a two-State solution,
which in our opinion is the only way to guarantee a
secure Israel and a viable and democratic Palestine, with
Jerusalem as their shared capital, living side by side as
two States for two peoples, fully entitled to equal safety,
security and prosperity. That is of course an uphill path,
and the obstacles are many. But there is no alternative
to peace, and peace is always made by the brave and the
visionary. The sooner a political horizon for a genuine
peace process is restored, the better our chances that we
will no longer need to deplore the endless violence and
its deadly consequences, enabling us instead to focus
on supporting the genuine efforts for a settlement, with
the hope of one day celebrating a long-lasting peace.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I too thank Mr. James
Zogby for his remarks, as well as Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his sobering briefing and his continued
efforts to de-escalate the volatile situation on the ground.
In 2016, the Security Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016), which provides a clear road map towards peace.
Nevertheless, the conflict continues, and serious

S/PV.9361

violations of the resolution persist, pushing us further
away from a credible peace process in the Middle
East. In recent weeks we have again seen alarming and
deadly violence against civilians, which remains a tragic
undercurrent in this prolonged conflict. Malta strongly
condemns the terror attack that took place near the
settlement of Eli in the occupied West Bank last week,
resulting in the killing of four Israeli civilians. There can
be no justification for such appalling acts of violence or
for inciting or glorifying them. The subsequent attacks
by Israeli settlers on Palestinian residents and properties
in the West Bank are also unjustifiable and must not be
allowed to continue to take place with impunity.
We are disturbed by the number of casualties and
injuries resulting from the operations of the Israeli
security forces in the West Bank. Military incursions
such as that in Jenin on 19 June, which left several
Palestinians dead, including children, and more than 90
injured, are deeply concerning. The disproportionate use
of live ammunition and explosive weapons in populated
areas during those operations only contributes to the cycle
of violence. Malta urges Israel to exercise the greatest
possible restraint, abide by international humanitarian
law and prioritize the protection of civilians.
We want to emphasize that too many women and
children, on both sides, continue to unjustly suffer the
consequences of this conflict. We are also concerned
about the detention by Israeli forces of Palestinian
children for alleged security offences, and reiterate
that depriving a child of liberty should be a measure of
last resort and should last only the shortest appropriate
period of time. We also remain concerned about the
involvement of Palestinian youths in terrorist activities.
Malta strongly reiterates its concern about the
Government of Israel’s decisions to expedite the
expansion of settlements and advance the construction
of thousands of settlement housing units in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Such actions take
us ever further from a just and lasting peace and imperil
the viability of an independent, contiguous Palestinian
State. We would like to remind the parties that the
expansion of settlements, the demolition of homes and
the displacement of Palestinians violate international
law and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
including resolution 2334 (2016). They also have
humanitarian repercussions on Palestinian lives. We call
on Israel to halt and reverse such unilateral decisions,
which breed division and further inflame tensions.

23-1846315/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Immediate steps need to be taken to de-escalate
the situation, reverse the negative trends and relaunch
credible negotiations and dialogue between the parties.
We appeal to both sides to hold further meetings in the
Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh quintet format in a spirit of
de-escalation, and to implement the commitments made
in the respective joint communiqués. The international
community should come together to participate in
and support the international and regional diplomatic
efforts aimed at salvaging the stalled peace process. We
must return to a political horizon that is conducive to a
just and comprehensive resolution of the conflict, based
on a two-State solution along the pre-1967 borders,
addressing the legitimate aspirations of both sides, with
Jerusalem as the future capital of two States, living side
by side in peace and security, in line with the relevant
resolutions of the Council and internationally agreed
parameters. We firmly believe that this remains the
only viable path to peace.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing and his valuable work
on the ground. I also thank Mr. Zogby for his insights.
Last week, we witnessed a worrisome surge of
violence in the West Bank, in yet another of the troubling
cycles of spiralling violence that have continued for
years in Israel and Palestine. Israel’s escalating military
actions, including air strikes — the first in the West
Bank in nearly 20 years — are further exacerbating
the tensions. The son of a Brazilian citizen was among
those injured last week, shot in the head and shoulder
during the invasion of the Palestinian village of Turmus
Ayya by Israeli settlers. The scale of the hostilities, the
number of casualties and the use of new armaments
are reigniting the risk of an escalation of tensions
in the West Bank. The reports tell of dangerous and
hate-filled rhetoric, provocations and incitement from
officials on both sides, fuelling violence. Brazil urges
all the parties to promote calm and exercise the utmost
restraint. We strongly condemn all violence against
civilians, whether Palestinians or Israelis. Israel has
an obligation under international humanitarian law to
safeguard the civilian population from violence. We call
on it to adhere strictly to the fundamental principles of
proportionality, precaution, necessity and humanity in
all of its military operations.
Brazil condemns the recent decision by the
Government of Israel to advance the construction
of housing units in existing settlements in the West
Bank, as well as its modification of settlement16/23

27/06/2023

approval procedures in order to expedite the process of
authorization. Those decisions violate international law,
specifically resolution 2334 (2016). As highlighted in the
Secretariat’s most recent report on the implementation
of the resolution, those decisions are reshaping the
geography and threatening the feasibility of a twoState solution. Brazil urges the Government of Israel
to immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities and to fully respect all its obligations under
international law. Demolitions and evictions, including
of internationally funded humanitarian projects
and structures related to income-generation and the
provision of essential services, also represent numerous
human rights violations and raise concerns about the
risk of forcible transfers.
The situation in Gaza also remains critical.
The restrictions to access affect people in need of
medical care and block the availability of essential
medicines. Much more needs to be done to alleviate
the humanitarian situation, improve the economy and
lift the closure, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
Brazil echoes the calls for renewed efforts to restore
the capabilities of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Unless
it receives new funding, the Agency may be unable to
maintain critical services.
Brazil continues to believe that mere administration
of the conflict is not a viable alternative. Resuming
peace negotiations is of paramount importance. But
without political will, there can be no way forward.
Regrettably, the commitments made in Aqaba and
Sharm-El-Sheikh to refraining from provocative
unilateral actions and pursuing de-escalation measures
have not been kept. We urgently need to find ways to
break those terrible cycles and promote an effective
process towards sustainable peace in the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, the Special
Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing and his
efforts against a deeply alarming backdrop. I am also
grateful to Mr. James Zogby for his important remarks
today. It will be crucial to ensure that the warnings we
have just heard are heeded. Last week’s events mark a
dangerous escalation — that much is clear. But we must
acknowledge that they also represent the inevitable
outcome of a moribund peace process. As others have
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

said here today, the situation is approaching a point of no
return, risking a complete breakdown of any semblance
of stability and security. The spectre of the intifada
and the widespread violence that gripped Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory more than two decades
ago looms perilously large. We are courting disaster if
we do not work collectively to avoid that outcome at all
costs. Accordingly, I want to make three points.
First, the situation is long past expressions of
concern and condemnation. The Security Council
and the international community must take on their
responsibilities and move beyond the evidently failed
status quo. It is time for determined, intensified action
to help de-escalate the situation on the ground and
revive the peace process. That means greater diplomatic
efforts at both the regional and international levels. The
international community must also firmly underscore to
the parties that incitement begets incitement, violence
begets violence, and security is ephemeral in the
absence of justice, the rule of law and accountability.
The Council must be unequivocal in its rejection of
all illegal actions in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including those at the core of the current heightened
tensions. That includes Israel’s repeated and violent
incursions into Palestinian cities and villages, especially
Nablus and most recently Jenin. During this month, we
also witnessed the first aerial bombardment in the West
Bank since 2002 — another data point in an alarming
deterioration on the ground that should set the Council’s
alarm bells ringing.
Secondly, the incitement of violence risks
undermining what remains of the hard-won gains of
the past and could also result in regional spillover. In a
visit to an illegal outpost far into the interior of the West
Bank, an Israeli senior official celebrated the settlement
and called for the killing of thousands of Palestinians.
That must be identified for what it is — dangerous and
irresponsible incitement to violence — and condemned
without prevarication. Such statements from the
highest levels of Government fuel grievances and stoke
tensions. Leaders should use their influential positions to
responsibly renounce and condemn hatred and violence,
not feed them.
Two weeks ago, the Council adopted the landmark
resolution 2686 (2023). It recognized hate speech as
a contributor to fuelling grievance and a driver of
outbreaks and escalations of conflict. There is no place
on Earth where the raw elements of conflict fuelled by
hate speech are more evident than in this part of the

S/PV.9361

Middle East. We saw that play out with the burning
of copies of the Qur’an by Israeli settlers last week in
Nablus. Illegal practices in Jerusalem, particularly the
repeated storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, continue to
be a source of domestic and regional tensions. At a time
when the region desperately needs peace and stability
after decades of conflict, it is imperative to prevent such
spillover. The sanctity of religious sites and places of
worship must be upheld.
Thirdly, all the parties must refrain from unilateral
measures and return to the commitments made most
recently at the Aqaba and Sharm-el-Sheikh meetings.
That is the only viable way forward. The most recent
advancements of Israel’s settlement policies, including
the approval of a law to ease and expedite settlement
activities and the retroactive legalization of outposts,
are only two on a long list of alarming developments
undermining the prospects for a two-State solution
and moving all of us towards a one-State reality.
We unreservedly condemn the Israeli Government’s
announcement of more than 5,700 new settlement units,
making this year one of the highest in terms of such
approvals. The Secretary-General’s most recent report on
resolution 2334 (2016) also outlines that unprecedented
pace of settlement expansion. Israel’s settlement
activities violate international law and constitute a major
obstacle to peace.
The United Arab Emirates further calls on Israel
to put an immediate stop to terrorist attacks by settlers,
such as those that took place in the town of Turmus
Ayya, and to prosecute those responsible to the fullest
extent of the law. In that vein, we welcome the recent
contact between President Herzog and President Abbas
earlier today, in which President Herzog condemned the
settler rampages in the West Bank. Additionally, we take
note of the comments by the Israeli Defense Minister,
emphasizing that the settlers who perpetrated violence
against Palestinian citizens will be brought to justice.
We look forward to seeing that accountability process
realized, in line with Israel’s obligations to protect
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Once more, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its commitment to a two-State solution and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, based
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace, security and
mutual recognition. We must not let go of that objective
in this Chamber. Our words and actions matter too much
for the future of both peoples and the entire region.

23-1846317/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Last Tuesday, Elisha Antman,
a 17-year-old who had just finished high school, was
nearing the end of his shift at a restaurant near the
town of Eli. That was Elisha’s very last shift. He had
been working there for nine months. He had saved
up some money and made plans to spend his summer
hiking. Last Tuesday was indeed Elisha’s last shift. But
tragically, he will not be taking a trip this summer. He
will not be hiking. He will not be spending time with
his high school sweetheart Maayan, with whom he had
discussed building a life together. He will no longer
pick up any of his eight younger siblings from school,
whom he loved like the caring older brother that he was.
Elisha will be doing none of those things, because along
with three other innocent Israeli civilians, Elisha was
murdered by Palestinian terrorists whose sole goal was
slaughtering Jews. That is the heartbreaking reality that
Israelis face every single day.
Sadly, the briefings that the Council receives
on Palestinian terrorist attacks are completely
underreported and hardly scratch the surface of what
Israelis endure. Since the start of 2023, 1,337 rockets
and mortars have been fired at Israel. There have been
eight stabbing attacks and an additional eight attempted
such attacks. There have been eight ramming attacks,
the detonation of 68 explosive devices and 157 shootings
by terrorists. Those numbers are already higher than
those in the one-sided United Nations reports that
the Council receives. But I have not finished. Since
1 January, 223 firebombs have been hurled at Israelis
and — listen to this — Israelis have been the target
of 1,728 rock-throwing attacks. Any cars with Israeli
licence plates — including the cars of mothers driving
their children to school and of elderly people on their
way to doctors’ appointments — are potential targets of
Palestinian terror. But the Council does not see those
numbers. Israelis have been the victims of more than
3,500 attacks since the start of this year, and sadly that
number is growing every day.
The reality of Palestinian terror fuelled by the
non-stop incitement and incentivization of violence
that is spewed at every level of Palestinian leadership is
the root cause of the conflict and all the escalation. And
it is precisely that vile hatred that the Council continues
to ignore. I really cannot understand why Council
18/23

27/06/2023

members disregard the promotion by the Palestinian
Authority (PA) of terror and the murder of civilians. I
refuse to accept the lies that the Council is being fed.
The situation on the ground — the terror that Israeli
civilians in Jerusalem, Judea and Samaria face every
single day — is exponentially worse than its depiction
in the briefings that the Council receives.
Before I continue, I want to make one thing very
clear. The State of Israel is a democracy governed by the
rule of law. Extremists who decide to take the law into
their own hands through vigilantism and violence cross
a red line. Rioters who attack innocent Palestinians and
destroy property are not and will not be condoned by
Israel. On the contrary, the Israeli leadership — and
we need no lectures from anyone else — from the
Prime Minister, the President and the Defence Minister
to the military’s Chief of Staff, the Director of the
Israel Security Agency and the Chief of Police, has
condemned those attacks. Israel is working tirelessly to
find those responsible for the recent riots in Judea and
Samaria, and they will be held accountable. In Israel we
condemn any kind of violence in the strongest terms,
and we take action against those who perpetrate it.
Sadly, however, the Palestinian Authority does exactly
the opposite, not only normalizing violence and damage
to property but even the murder of innocent civilians,
including children, as well as terror, violence and the
murder of Jews. The reality of incitement starts at the
very top in Palestinian society, with President Abbas
and his Fatah party officials, and it trickles all the way
down, even to kindergartens.
Palestinians are taught to hate. They are educated
to murder. They are told that martyrdom and jihad are
the only way. And the reason behind that campaign of
incitement is that the Palestinians are interested in one
thing and one thing only — the destruction of the very
notion of a Jewish State. That has been the case from
well before 1967 and even before the establishment of
Israel. Judea and Samaria have absolutely nothing to
do with it. After all, if President Abbas were willing to
accept that Israel is the homeland of the Jewish people,
why would he constantly blame the United Kingdom
over the Balfour Declaration? That is exactly what he
said in the General Assembly Hall when the PA insisted
on commemorating the seventy-fifth anniversary of
Israel and calling it the Nakba — the catastrophe. Such
cancerous hatred has poisoned the minds of children
and adults alike. There are now entire generations of
Palestinians who have no interest in peace but only in
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

spilling Jewish blood. And that is the root of the conflict.
That is what should be addressed and condemned by
each and every one of the Council members today and
always. Nothing will change until the root cause of the
conflict is tackled.
Here I am, sitting before the Council and harshly
condemning the violence perpetrated by Jews against
innocent Palestinians at the hands of a few extremist
Israelis. But where is the Palestinian representative’s
condemnation of young Elisha’s murderer, or of any
act of terror? Does he condemn the recent brutal terror
attack in Eli? Does his President condemn it? Will any
Palestinian leader — anyone at all — condemn it? Of
course not. He will not condemn Elisha’s murder, just
as he did not condemn the murder of Meir Tamari at the
end of May, the heartless killing in April of Lucy Dee
and her two young daughters, Maya and Rina, or any
other vicious act of Palestinian terror. Not only is the
Palestinians’ refusal to condemn terror never mentioned
here, their murderous pay-for-slay policy is also met
with continued silence. That is a disgrace. For the
Palestinian Authority, violence against Jews is not only
not to be condemned, it is to be commended. By law, the
Palestinian Authority allocates hundreds of millions of
dollars to murderers and their families — 7 per cent of
its budget, by the way. That is far more than the welfare
given to Palestinian families living below the poverty
line. The Palestinian Authority rewards terrorists and
incentivizes bloodshed, and it does so with pride.
But sadly, the Council continues to believe that the
situation on the ground is escalating because of building
permits. The twisted culture of hate and incitement that
is permitted from the top down, throughout Palestinian
society, is the only reason that the violence continues.
It is the only barrier to any form of reconciliation. I
therefore want to ask the Council why we hold these
repetitive discussions if the root of the problem is
constantly ignored. How can the Council possibly
intend to prevent violence if even the sick practice
of rewarding terrorists is neither condemned nor
addressed? At every one of these meetings, the focus
is completely skewed. Instead of recognizing the truth
that Palestinian incitement and hate fuel the escalation
of violence, most Council members prefer to blame
Israel. The escalation is not a result of rare acts by
some despicable Israeli extremists who will be brought
to justice. And it surely is not the result of issuing
building permits in communities that already exist.
That is not what drives Palestinian teenagers to take

S/PV.9361

up guns and knives and use them against Israelis. The
violence is purely the result of the toxic brainwashing
of Palestinians sponsored and organized by their
leaders, whether that is the Palestinian Authority
or Hamas and Islamic Jihad, which are designated
terror organizations.
Palestinian terror attacks have been relentless,
regardless of Israel’s various Governments. Whether
they are right-wing, left-wing or centrist, it makes
no difference to the Palestinians. No matter who the
Prime Minister is or who is in the Cabinet, Palestinian
incitement persists, and, as a result, Palestinian
terror persists. Time and time again, Israeli Prime
Ministers offered the Palestinians a State. They offered
negotiations, and time and time again the Palestinians
rejected any peace plan. There is no clearer evidence
that the true goal of the Palestinian leadership is not
the establishment of a Palestinian State but rather the
destruction of the Jewish State. As long as that fact is
ignored and as long as any kind of comparison is made
between neutralizing Palestinian terrorists posing
imminent threats and attacking innocent Israeli victims
of terror, the Council is promoting the Palestinians’
murderous ideology. The very notion of a cycle of
violence is completely false. There is no such thing as a
cycle of violence. Terrorists are murdering Israelis as a
result of poisonous Palestinian incitement, and Israel is
taking action to defend itself. There is no cycle.
Regarding the issue of Israeli building permits in
Judea and Samaria, I would like to clarify again that
those steps are not an impediment to peace, and the
building will not stop. Constructing homes in existing
communities across Judea and Samaria is not an
inflammatory step. Judea and Samaria are the heartland
of the Jewish people, and I know everyone is aware why
we are called Jews. We are called Jews because we are
from Judea. It was the home of our forefathers. It was
where our holy tabernacles stood. It was where our
kings and prophets lived. It is an integral part of our
heritage and who we are, both as a nation and as a faith.
We, the Jewish people, hold moral, legal and historic
rights to the land.
Despite the land being constantly referred to here
as the occupied Palestinian territories, it has never been
the sovereign territory of any Palestinian entity ever.
These are disputed territories, and the Jewish people
cannot be occupiers in our homeland — our own
land. Does the Council know that Israeli communities
make up less than 2 per cent of the entire area? Yet

23-1846319/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

there are hundreds of thousands of Israelis living in
those communities. As shocking as it may seem to
some, Israelis living in Judea and Samaria are human
beings, too, and they too deserve the fulfilment of basic
needs such as infrastructure and housing. The building
there will not stop. I will also add that construction in
existing communities definitely does not prevent the
real first step towards peace, that is, sitting down at the
negotiating table.
When the international community falsely blames
Israel while ignoring the root cause of the conflict, I
constantly ask myself the same question — what is
Israel honestly expected to do tomorrow morning? Are
we expected to simply give in to all of the Palestinian
demands, to turn the hills of Judea and Samaria into
rocket launch pads of terror overlooking Israeli cities,
just like in Gaza? Is that what Israel is expected to
do tomorrow morning? That is not an imaginary
scenario. Just yesterday, two rockets were fired from
Jenin towards Israel. Gaza is ruled today by a jihadist
terror organization that is hell-bent on Israel’s utter
destruction. We all know what would happen to Judea
and Samaria, which members call the West Bank,
if Palestinian elections were held tomorrow, or if
God forbid Israel were to totally withdraw from the
territories. Hamas and other designated terror groups
would win, take control and then throw Palestinian
Authority officials off rooftops, just as they did in Gaza.
President Abbas, who is in the nineteenth year of his
four-year term, does not represent the Palestinian people
today — certainly not the Palestinians in Gaza, but also
not the Palestinians in Judea and Samaria. Again, what
is Israel expected to do until the Palestinians have a
leader who is willing to sit down at the negotiating
table? Should we deny our citizens basic human needs?
Even now, the Palestinian Authority refuses to take any
action against the growing jihadist entrenchment in its
cities and the expanding terror infrastructure being
built right under its nose. Israel will not stand idly by as
Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other new terror
groups such as the Lion’s Den grow in Jenin, Nablus or
Jericho. If the Palestinian Authority will not act against
them, Israel will. Yet once again this discussion is spent
ignoring the true obstacle to a brighter future in the
Middle East, while focusing solely on the Palestinians’
anti-Israel lies and propaganda. It is shameful.
Sadly, these meetings have a tendency to neglect
the real threats to the Middle East. It does not end
with disregarding Palestinian incitement. The Middle
20/23

27/06/2023

East is hurtling down a very short path to region-wide
conflict and bloodshed, yet the Council continually
fails to mention the nuclear Shiite elephant in the room.
Today the Ayatollah regime, the world’s number one
State sponsor of terror, is galloping towards nuclear
weapons. It is funding and arming its terror proxies
across the Middle East — the Houthis in Yemen, terror
groups in Iraq, Hizbullah in Lebanon and Syria, Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Gaza, and the list goes
on. As a result of Iran’s transfer of hundreds of millions
of dollars, arms shipments, the sharing of weaponsmanufacturing expertise and more, those terror groups
have now become terror armies. Their influence is
expanding, their weaponry is advancing, and they
are becoming more emboldened by the day. In recent
weeks, in complete defiance of Council resolutions,
Hizbullah established outposts on Israel’s sovereign
territory. Thanks to Iran, we are closer than ever to
severe escalation on our northern border, and the result
will be far-reaching and devastating.
But the Iranian threat is not merely a regional one.
From cyberattacks in Albania and the endangering of
maritime trade to supplying attack drones used against
Ukrainian civilians, the Ayatollah regime is the cause
of destabilization on a worldwide scale. What else must
happen for the Council to understand that? Just this
weekend, an Iranian terror attack targeting Jews and
Israelis was thwarted in Cyprus. The Ayatollahs are
exporting terror to all corners of the Earth, and they
are doing so with impunity. That is the real impunity.
Imagine what their terror apparatus will look like when
it is protected by a nuclear umbrella. Imagine, if the
Council refuses to take action today, what the response
will be like once Iran has a bomb.
The international community as a whole and the
Council in particular have a responsibility to tackle
true threats. Yet rather than focusing on the root causes
of the most pressing security threats, these meetings
instead ignore what is truly important. That must not
and cannot continue. If the Council is so determined
to find a path to reconciliation between Israel and the
Palestinians, the time has come to harshly condemn
the Palestinian Authority’s incitement and funding of
terror. If the Council aims to truly fulfil its mandate,
it must confront the most pressing threats to global
security, which are Iran and its dangerous proxies.
Please stop ignoring what is truly important and start
taking action where it can make a difference.
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I would like to express my
apologies for the fact that, due to technical errors in
the notes today, the established order of speakers was
not followed. That does not set a precedent for future
meetings of the Council.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I accept your apology,
Madam President.
I will not dignify with a response the customary
barrage of lies and distortion in complete contradiction
to international law, the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the
Security Council and General Assembly. We must reject
that behaviour. To those who repeat it and — judging
from the representative’s body language — their
expression of outrage and resentment, thinking that the
continuation of that behaviour will change the positions
of the members of the Council and the international
community is an exercise in futility. Nevertheless,
stubborn fascist enemies of peace will not learn from
the fact that the Council is not responding in any
positive way to this failed attempt over the meetings that
we have so often. Yet, they continue to behave in that
manner. That is why I will not dignify those assertions,
and I think that the example speaks for itself. These are
the types of peacemakers that the Council is invited to
work with — filled with hatred, rejection of the other,
rejection of any notion of peace, accusing the victims of
being the victimizers. This is the theatre of the absurd.
Those are not the peacemakers that we are extending
our hand to.
Let me now go back to the text of my speech.
Allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
and the brotherly nation of the United Arab Emirates
on assuming the presidency of the Council and for
your efforts to mobilize the Council to address, as it
is its responsibility, the situation in Palestine, notably
the occupation and colonization of our land in breach
of international law and the Council’s resolutions. I
thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his briefing, and I thank
Mr. James Zogby for being with us in this important
meeting of the Security Council and for his powerful
statement. Mr. Zogby has been a good friend of mine for
many years. I am delighted to see him in our meeting
and to see him share with the Council his insights
and thoughts.

S/PV.9361

For years, we have been warning of what is
unfolding before our very eyes, of the cost of Israeli
impunity with regard to the Palestinian people and
peace. This Israeli Government is bringing to its
ultimate conclusion a plan decades in the making — a
State for the settlers in place of the Palestinian State.
Israel has always had a colonial settlers’ agenda,
but now the settlers themselves control Israel and the
agenda. The settlers believe that this is their chance
to get it over with. They look around, they hear a lot
of noise, but see no real resistance except the one
the Palestinians themselves are mounting through
their resilience and steadfastness in keeping their
ancestral land.
The settlers knows that their actions are condemned
worldwide — and that has been demonstrated once
again today — that their image is tarnished, but as long
as they can displace Palestinians and transfer more
settlers, they will continue. The only will facing them
is the will of the Palestinian people. But they have the
military, financial and political advantage. Who cares
about the moral ground and international law if no
resources are deployed to uphold them?
The settlers have at their disposal all the resources
of the Israeli State. So they continue doing all they can
to grab land — they steal, they terrorize, they destroy,
they burn and they kill. The heads of Israeli military
services themselves could not but speak of the settlers’
terrorism. But who will rein it in?
The Council condemned this terrorism — as
it should. But what does one usually do in the face
of terrorism? One arrests and prosecutes. Will that
be done? One blocks accounts and drains financial
means. Will that be done? One prevents terrorists from
travelling. Will that be done? One holds accountable
those who give terrorists the means to perpetrate their
attacks. Will that be done?
The Israeli Government simplified the process for
settlements approval and gave the keys to Smotrich so
that Netanyahu can pretend to be the hostage of the
most extremist elements in his Government, while his
rhetoric and his policies are what got them to power in
the first place.
Israel approved more than 5,000 settlement units
just yesterday. I think that even the Israeli Government
is stunned by how much it can get away with and,
therefore, just keeps crossing every red line, every day.

23-1846321/23

S/PV.9361

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

What would my colleagues here today do if they
were a Palestinian, if their life was made of blockades
and walls, if every day could be their last, killed in
the street or their homes, if settlers or soldiers could
invade their homes and harm their children, if they were
deprived of their land and freedom and if their human
dignity was under daily assault? What would they do if
they faced that situation on a daily basis?
We asked for protection, a protection our people
deserve, a protection they are entitled to. Is protection on
the way? The Council adopted resolutions; the SecretaryGeneral produced reports. Is there any concrete idea
being worked on that would provide some level of
protection for our people and our children? Anything?
I often repeat myself by telling the Council that it
adopted resolution 904 (1994) when the massacre in
Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi took place in 1994. Why does
the Council not implement that resolution and all other
resolution? Who is preventing the Council from doing
so? Resolution 904 (1994) stipulates that settlers should
be disarmed, not given more weapons, and certainly
not be allowed to build new militias of 25,000 settlers
to make up yet another force attacking our people. That
resolution also stipulates a temporary international
presence to protect our people from those who are
supposed to protect us in accordance with international
humanitarian law. When those who are supposed to
protect us, kill us, what are we supposed to do? We come
to the Security Council; it adopts a resolution. Why does
the Council not then implement it in order to provide us
with protection until the end of the occupation, when we
will have independence and freedom in our homeland.
We sought accountability. Does not everyone here
recognize it as the best way to prevent the recurrence of
crimes? Are not Palestinian victims entitled to justice?
Are they less human or less worthy? Are their lives
less relevant?
We have left no stone unturned, pushing for
commissions of inquiry, trying to activate universal
jurisdiction, joining the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Can it be that the ICC is the only institution not
aware of the crimes under way and of the criminals
committing them, when these perpetrators are
confessing their crimes every day, committing them in
broad daylight, legislating them, adopting budgets for
their commission, spelling them out in Government
guidelines and plans, and boasting about them?
22/23

27/06/2023

Why is it that accountability must be immediately
delivered to some and can be obstructed forever for
others, like us? Not listing Israel, given the actions
of Israeli occupation forces and settlers against
Palestinian children, gives them licence to continue
killing and maiming our children, which should have
led to the country being listed in the recent report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2023/363), but the Secretary-General chose not list
Israel in that report.
We were told to be patient, that these are complicated
processes, that they take time, that there are stages and
that violators need to be given every chance before
listing them, as an incentive to correct course. And
then we saw other situations where things were much
simpler and happened much faster — where a different
logic is at play. Our people have fallen victim once
again to these double standards. And, by the way, there
is another victim: the credibility and authority of the
list and of this international law-based order.
What message is being sent to the Palestinian
people? I ask Council members to please think hard:
what message is being sent to the Palestinian people?
No one wins if despair prevails. Let me repeat: no
one wins if despair prevails. Despair will not lead to
surrender; it will lead to more anger. The Palestinian
people are faced with an existential threat, and every
day they become increasingly convinced that there is
no help on the way. I ask the mighty Security Council
and the mighty international community to show them
that help is on the way.
Around this table we have brothers, sisters, friends
and allies. We have people who believe in what we
believe. They believe in the rule of international law.
They believe in the sanctity of life. They believe in just
peace, not unjust wars. Some have experienced firsthand the evils of colonialism. All have fought for their
independence. Many consider that their tenure in the
Security Council must be to preserve and consolidate
the international law-based order. They all support the
two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders; they all
support an independent Palestine living side by side with
Israel. They all condemn settlements. They all condemn
violence and terrorism against innocent civilians.
How, then, is what is happening in Palestine is
possible? If we all stand for and honour these lofty
principles, why is what is happening in Palestine
happening in Palestine? How come it has been happening
23-18463

27/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for so long? It has been 75 years since the Nakba. The
Nakba is what happened to us. We are grateful to the
international community that this year it acknowledged
the Nakba and called for a commemoration at the highest
level in the General Assembly (General Assembly
resolution 77/23). The commemoration happened and
acknowledged the Nakba of the Palestinian people,
which was a giant step in the direction of reconciliation.
How come the entire world cannot stand up to the
settlers and their sponsors? If every Council member
says that settlements are illegal and that they should
stop — and each Council member does — why are we
not succeeding in stopping this evil behaviour — the
theft of our land and the threats to the lives of our
people — from continuing? How come the entire world
cannot stand up to the settlers and their sponsors?
I understand political, geopolitical and diplomatic
realities. That is my job. That is the job of all diplomats
and of all people at this table. I have spent my life
navigating these realities, and yet everything about this
situation feels wrong. Political realism should dictate
action not inaction. The world has invested so much
in peace but has never taken the necessary decisions
to protect its investment from the colonization
that deprived us and the world from the benefits of
this investment.
Is there anything that this Israeli Government
or Israeli settlers would do that would change the
equation and bring about accountability? Do Council
members want the Government or the settlers to do
more before they wake up and do something based
on what they believe and what they have decided? Do
Council members want to see thousands of Palestinian
women and children — civilians — slaughtered at the
hands of terrorist settlers under the protection of the
Israeli authorities before they wake up? Is it not the
Council’s responsibility to prevent these massacres

S/PV.9361

from taking place before they take place? When will
Council members wake up? The Israel Government
and the settlers are betting that there is nothing they
could do that would change the equation and lead to
accountability. They are betting that Council members
will continue not to act. And if they are right — and
they have yet to be proven wrong — if they are right,
God help us all, because what we have seen is not the
last word; what we will see will be even worse.
For the global South, and for many people across the
world, Palestine is an indicator of how healthy or how
ill the international law-based order is. Let me repeat:
Palestine is an indicator of how healthy or how ill the
international law-based order is. They see in our fate
the proof of double standards and injustice, of the fact
that this system is designed to work for some and not
for others. It creates grievances far beyond Palestine. It
entrenches mistrust and misunderstandings.
We should be standing shoulder to shoulder
together, finding ways to provide protection, pursue
accountability and achieve justice, so that freedom
and peace can prevail. Is there anywhere where these
discussions are taking place?
The stakes are too high to just go through the
motions of meeting and stating and condemning. We
repeat ourselves a great deal. These are needed as a
prelude to action, not as a substitute for it. We stand
ready to do our part as Palestinians for as long as we
humanly can. But time is running out. Regardless of how
hard taking the necessary decisions may seem now, the
consequences of not taking them are infinitely greater.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

23-1846323/23
