207

_____________
V_I._ Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committe_e_ . . _ -~-----

the task of the Working Group when 1t considers the
report to be submitted by the Group at its forty-first
session;
6. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Working Group with all necessary
assistance.
JO I st plenary meeting
/4 December 1984

39/112. Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the responsibility assumed by the
United Nations in the field of the prevention of crime and
criminal justice under General Assembly resolution 415
(V) of I December 1950, in particular by convening the
quinquennial congresses on the prevention of crime and
the treatment of offenders,
Recalling its resolution 36/21 of 9 November 1981. in
which it requested the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures for the fullest implementation of the Caracas Declaration95 and for the appropriate preparation of the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/29 of 4 May 1982, in which the Council approved
the provisional agenda for the Seventh Congress, and
1984/45 of 25 May 1984 on the continuation of preparations for the Congress, as well as Council resolution 1984/
51 of 25 May 1984 on technical co-operation in crime prevention and criminal justice.
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1984/154 of 25 May 1984, in which it accepted the invitation of the Government of Italy to hold the Seventh
Congress at Milan from 26 August to 6 September 1985,
Acknowledging that criminality, particularly violent and
organized crime, constitutes a serious threat to the development and security of nations.
Recognizing that constraints of an economic and technical nature impede many countries in their fight against
crime,
Reiterating the necessity for the international community to make concerted and systematic efforts to strengthen
technical and scientific co-operation in crime prevention
and criminal justice and to formulate fair, humane and
effective policies directed towards crime control in the
context of different political and cultural systems, economic and social development and social values and
changes,
Convinced of the important role played by the previous
congresses in promoting understanding, awareness and cooperation and in achieving further progress in this field,
Stressing the need to improve further regional, interregional and international co-operation and co-ordination
in order to intensify the struggle against crime,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Italy for its offer to act as host to the Seventh United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders:
2. Reaffirms its hope that the Seventh Congress will
make an important and useful contribution to the solution
95 Resolution 35/171. annex

of problems related tl> crime prevention and criminal
justice:
3. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/29 and 1984/45 and, in particula~. the recommendation that the Seventh Congress finalize new guiding principles on crime prevention and criminal justice in the context of development;
4. Welcomes also the recommendations made by the
Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1984/51 on
improved modalities of technical co-operation in crime
prevention and criminal justice;
5. Fakes note of the preparatory work carried out by
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, as the
preparatory body for the Seventh Congress, at its eighth
session and by the regional and interregional preparatory
meetings convened in co-operation with the regional commissions, interregional and regional crime prevention
institutes and interested Governments: 96
6. C·alls upon Governments. United Nations bodies.
the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental
organizations, as well as interested non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council, to participate in the Seventh Congress
and to intensify and expand their technical and scientific
preparations for it;
7. Invites the Economic and Social Council at its first
regular session of 1985 to approve the provisional rules of
procedure of the Seventh Congress;
8. Requests the Seventh Congress, under item 3 of its
provisional agenda, lo give urgent attention to the
strengthening of techmcal co-operation in crime prevention and criminal justice, in pursuance of the recommendations of the regional preparatory meetings and the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control;
9. Invites the Seventh Congress to pay particular attention to the question of illicit drug trafficking;
IO. Appeals to Member States to consider contributing
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Social Defence, in
order to enable the Fund to undertake activities of assistance to countries requesting it, and to allocate an appropriate portion of their resources to programmes for the reduction of crime and the improvement of criminal justice:
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
substantive and organizational work of the Seventh
Congress is fully adequate for its successful outcome:
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session, in accordance
with past practice, a report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Sixth Congress, to be prepared for
the Seventh Congress in pursuance of paragraph 4 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/29;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session his views and
recommendations on the implementation of the conclusions of the Seventh Congress;

14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session an item entitled "Crime prevention and
criminal justice: report of the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders".
/0 I st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
% See Official Records 0/'1/,, f.co1101111c and
nwn1 .\'o 6 (F'l984il6), c:hap Ill.

s,,. ,al Council. / 184. Su11p/c
1
