African Republic, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic and Zaire
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

and a half million indigenous African people to date,
thus swelling the ranks of the other millions already
doomed .to permanent unemployment and starvation,
Noting with indignation that South Africa's policy of
bantustanization is also aimed at the creation of internal
bases for the fomenting of fratricidal conflict,
1. Strongly condemns the Pretoria regime for the
killing of defenceless African people protesting against
their forced removal from Crossroads and other places;
2. Strongly condemns the arbitrary arrests by the
Pretoria regime of members of the United Democratic
Front and other mass organizations opposed to South
Africa's policy of apartheid;
3. Calls upon the Pretoria regime to release unconditionally and immediately all political prisoners and detainees, including Nelson Mandela and all other black
leaders with whom it must deal in any meaningful
discussion of the future of the country;
4. Also calls upon the Pretoria regime to withdraw
the charges of "high treason" instituted against the
United Democratic Front officials, and calls for their
immediate and unconditional release;
S. Commends the massive united resistance of the
oppressed people of South Africa against apartheid, and
reaffirms the legitimacy of their struggle for a united,
non-racial and democratic South Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution;
7. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

At its 2602nd meeting, on 26 July 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Yugoslavia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

Resolution 569 (1985)
of 26 July 1985

The Security Council,
Deeply concerned at the worsening of the situation in
South Africa and at the continuance of the human suffering that the apartheid system, which the Council
strongly condemns, is causing in that country,
Outraged at the repression, and condemning the arbitrary arrests of hundreds of persons,
Considering that the imposition of the state of
emergency in thirty-six districts of the Republic of South
Africa constitutes a grave deterioration of the situation
in that country,
Considering as totally unacceptable the practice by
the South African Government of detention without
trial and of forcible removal, as well as the discriminatory legislation in force,
Acknowledging the legitimacy of the aspirations of
the South African population as a whole to benefit from
all civil and political rights and to establish a united nonracial and democratic society,
Acknowledging further that the very cause of the
situation in South Africa lies in the policy of apartheid
and the practices of the South African Government,
1. Strongly condemns the apartheid system and all
the policies and practices deriving therefrom;
2. Strongly condemns the mass arrests and detentions recently carried out by the Pretoria Government
and the murders which have been committed;
3. Strongly condemns the establishment of the state
of emergency in the thirty-six districts in which it has
been imposed and demands that it be lifted immediately;
4. Calls upon the South African Government to set
free immediately and unconditionally all political prisoners and detainees, first of all, Mr. Nelson Mandela;
5. Reaffirms that only the total elimination of apartheid and the establishment in South Africa of a free,
united and democratic society on the basis of universal
suffrage can lead to a solution;
6. Urges States Members of the United Nations to
adopt measures against South Africa, such as the
following:
(a) Suspension of all new investment in South
Africa;
(b) Prohibition of the sale of krugerrands and all
other coins minted in South Africa;

Adopted unanimously at the
2574th meeting.

Decisions

At its 2600th meeting, on 25 July 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Cuba, Kenya,
Mali and South Africa to participate, without vote, in
the discussion of the item entitled:
"The question of South Africa:
"Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17351); 11
"Letter dated 25 July 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mali to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/ 17356)". 37

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure, to the Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid.

At its 2601st meeting, on 26 July 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of the Central
37 Ibid., Supplement for July, August and September 1985.

8

(c)
(d)

(e)
field;

Restrictions on sports and cultural relations;
Suspension of guaranteed export loans;
Prohibition of all new contracts in the nuclear

"The members of the Security Council, deeply
alarmed by the worsening and deteriorating situation
of the oppressed black majority population in South
Africa since the imposition of the state of emergency
on 21 July 1985, express once again their profound
concern at this deplorable situation.
"The members of the Council condemn the Pretoria
regime for its continued failure to heed the repeated
appeals made by the international community, including Security Council resolution 569 (1985) and, in particular, the demand made in that resolution for the
immediate lifting of the state of emergency.
"The members of the Council strongly condemn the
continuation of killings and the arbitrary mass arrests
and detentions carried out by the Pretoria Government. They call, once again, upon the South African
Government to set free immediately and unconditionally all political prisoners and detainees, first of
all, Mr. Nelson Mandela, whose home has lately been
subjected to an act of arson.
"The members of the Council believe that a just and
lasting solution in South Africa must be based on the
total eradication of the system of apartheid and the
establishment of a free, united and democratic society
in South Africa. Without concrete action towards
such a just and lasting solution in South Africa, any
pronouncements of the Pretoria regime can represent
nothing more than a reaffirmation of its attachment
to apartheid and underline its continuing intransigence in the face of mounting domestic and international opposition to the continuation of this
thoroughly unjustified political and social system. In
this context, the members of the Council express their
grave concern at the latest pronouncements of the
President of the Pretoria regime."

(j) Prohibition of all sales of computer equipment
that may be used by the South African army and police;
7. Commends those States which have already
adopted voluntary measures against the Pretoria
Government and urges them to adopt new provisions,
and invites those which have not yet done so to follow
their example;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution;
9. Decides to remain seized of the matter and to
reconvene as soon as the Secretary-General has issued
his report, with a view to considering the progress made
in the implementation of the present resolution.
Adopted at the 2602nd meeting
by 13 votes to none, with 2 abstentions (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of
America).

Decisions
On 20 August 1985, after consultations with the
members of the Council, the President issued the following statement, 38 on behalf of the members of the Council:
"The members of the Security Council have learned
with great concern the intention of the South African
authorities to carry out shortly the death sentence imposed upon Mr. Malesela Benjamin Maloise.
"The members of the Council recall Council resolution 547 (1984), which, inter alia, called upon the
South African authorities not to carry out the execution of Mr. Maloise.
"The members of the Security Council once again
urge the South African authorities to rescind the death
sentence imposed on Mr. Maloise, convinced that the
carrying out of the execution, apart from being a
direct defiance of the above-mentioned Council
resolution, will result in the further deterioration of
an already extremely grave situation."

At the ~623rd meeting, on 17 October 1985, prior to
the adoption of the agenda, •0 the President made the
following statement on behalf of the members of the
Council:• 1
"The members of the Security Council have learned
with indignation and the gravest concern of the South
African authorities' intention to implement the death
sentence imposed on Malesela Benjamin Maloise in
spite of the Council's appeals in this regard.
'
"T~e members of the Council once again draw the
attent10n of the South African authorities to the
Council President's statement of 20 August 1985 and
Council resolution 547 (1984), which, inter alia, called
upon the South African authorities not to carry out
the execution of Mr. Maloise.
"The members of the Council are convinced that the
carrying out of the execution will only result in a further worsening of an extremely grave situation.
"Once again, the members of the Council strongly
urge the South African Government to extend clemency to Mr. Maloise and to rescind his death
sentence."

At its 2603rd meeting, on 21 August 1985, the Council
proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled "The
question of South Africa".

At the same meeting, after consultations with the
members of the Council, the President made the following statement 39 on behalf of the Council:
38 S/17408.

40 The agenda of the meeting was: The situation in the Middle East

39 S/17413.

41

9

S/17575.

.
