Resolutions adopted on reporta of the Third Committee
641 (VD). United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 11 of the Economic
and Social Council to the General Assembly, and noting the high tribute paid by the Council to the work
of the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund as an outstanding example of international
collaboration,
Noting that the Executive Board of the Fund approved 12 in 1952 aid for eighty long-range child-care
programmes in forty-nine countries and territories, and
that the Fund will now be aiding children in seventytwo countries and territories, particularly in underdeveloped areas,
Noting with appreciation the method of the United
Nations International Children's Emergency Fund aid
whereby supplies and equipment are used to make a
permanent contribution to the welfare of millions of
children by encouraging development and extension
within the countries of action on behalf of children,
Commending the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund for the promptness of its aid
in case of emergencies such as floods, earthquakes and
droughts,
Expressing its appreciation that close working relationships have been developed between the Fund and
technical departments of the United Nations and the
relevant specialized agencies, so that there is increasing
joint participation at the earliest stages in the planning
and implementation of aid to child-care programmes,
Bearing in mind that, because of its practical and
material forms, United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund aid is easily and invariably
understood in all parts of tlle world and thus has become an outstanding symbol of constructive United
Nations activities,
Convinud of the importance of contributions to the
Fund in amounts sufficient to fulfil its target programme and budget of $US 20 million for the year
1953,
.
11 See Official Records of tla, General Asstmbly, Sromth
Sission, Supplemtnt No. J.
12 Sec Official Rtcords af the Economic and Social Council,
Fi/lttnlh Session, Supplement No. 2.

29

1. Appeals to governments and private individuals
to contribute to the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund as generously as possible during 1953, so that the target programme of $20 million
may be fulfilled for the benefit of the children of the
world;
2. Appeals to information media to co-operate in
disseminating information concerning the activities of
the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

642 (VD). Integrated economic and aocial
development

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the conditions necessary for social
welfare are many and varied and are inter-related, and
are connected also with the factors necessary for economic development,
Considering that the effectiveness of both national
efforts and international co-operation for social welfare
will be increased to the extent that they are carried out
on the basis of integrated programmes taking into account the various economic and social conditions and
factors and their mutual relationships,
1. Draws the attention of Member States to the
desirability of framing integrated programmes taking
into account the various economic and social conditions
and factors and their mutual relationships, with a view
to promoting the improvement of the living conditions
of the peoples;
2. Recommends to the Economic and Social Council that international co-operation for the improvement
of the living conditions of the peoples, initiated at
the request of Member States, should be carried out
on the basis of integrated programmes in the manner
specified in the foregoing paragraph ;
3. Likewise recommends the Economic and Social
Council to continue its efforts to increase the coordination between the studies and activities carried
out in connexion with social questions and questions
relating to the economic development of the countries
in process of development.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.
