S/2017/414

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 May 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict
Introduction
1.
The present report, covering the year 2016, is submitted pursuant to the
request contained in the statement by the President of the Security Council of
25 November 2015 (S/PRST/2015/23). It is the thirteenth report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Herein, I review the global state of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, discuss recent progress and provide recommendations
aimed at strengthening such protection. The report also responds to the Council’s
request in its resolution 2286 (2016) for enhanced reporting on the protection of
medical care in armed conflict.
2.
Armed conflicts are tearing apart vast swathes of the world and r ecord
numbers of people are in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. 1 Some
97 per cent of humanitarian assistance goes to complex emergencies, the majority of
which involve armed conflicts. 2 Globally, more than 65 million people have been
displaced by conflict, violence or persecution. More than 20 million people,
including 1.4 million children, are on the brink of famine in Nigeria, Somalia, South
Sudan and Yemen. At the same time, among the international community there is a
growing sense of fatigue, even resignation, in addressing the suffering of civilians
in conflict.
3.
All State and non-State parties to conflict must respect international
humanitarian law, and all States must ensure such respect. Yet, in many conflicts,
parties flout their obligations and show contempt for human life and dignity, often
with impunity. Civilians are routinely killed in direct and indiscriminate attacks. As
conflict becomes increasingly urbanized, the impact on civilians reaches new lows,
with bombs and rockets destroying schools, hospitals, markets and places of
worship, while children are pulled from the rubble of their homes. Sexual violence
shatters lives and undermines community cohesion. These horrors are exacerbated
when civilians are deprived of basic relief items and services, sometimes even
besieged for months at a time. Faced with such brutality, millions of civilians are
forced to flee their homes in search of safety. The result is a global protection crisis.
__________________
1

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “Global humanitarian overview 2017: a
consolidated appeal to support people affected by disaster and conflict”.
2
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, World Humanitarian Data and Trends 2016
(New York, 2016).

17-07563 (E)

190517

*1707563*

S/2017/414

4.
In the present report I set out a path to protection — my vision for collective
action to strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict. My overarching
priority is to galvanize the international community to prevent and resolve conflicts
and build sustainable peace. In the long term, the best way to protect civilians is to
tackle the root causes of conflicts, promote human rights and the rule of law,
strengthen governance and institutions and invest in inclusive and sustainable
development. There must be a shift from perpetual reaction to early action,
including the ability to identify and act upon signs of impending or potential
conflict and threats to civilians. A commitment to conflict prevention also compels
us to address illicit and irresponsible arms transfers, which enable conf lict and
undermine protection and peacebuilding efforts. Indeed, although beyond the scope
of the present report, my vision of prevention encompasses not only violent armed
conflict, but also the increasingly complex array of crises that take a significant toll
on humanity and produce unsustainable levels of human suffering.
5.
Where prevention fails, we must make every effort to protect the lives and
dignity of civilians caught up in conflict. In this regard, three protection priorities
clearly emerge across conflicts. First, we must enhance respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law and promote good practice by
parties to conflict. Second, we must protect the humanitarian and medical mission
and accord priority to the protection of civilians in United Nations peace operations.
Third, we must prevent forced displacement and pursue durable solutions for
refugees and internally displaced persons. These protection priorities are
interrelated and mutually reinforcing. In particular, strengthening respect for
international law is a prerequisite to achieving priorities two and three.
6.
Achieving these goals necessitates a multi-faceted approach encompassing a
diversity of actors. An intensified global effort is needed at the int ernational,
regional and national levels to raise public understanding of the human cost of
conflict and enhance respect for international law and the protection of civilians.
The Security Council and Member States must be at the forefront of this effort. In
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Member States committed
themselves to leaving no one behind and to reaching those furthest behind first. The
World Humanitarian Summit, held in 2016, reinforced this vision. Member States
must now take specific action to implement their commitments and ensure that
civilians in conflict, who are among the most vulnerable, are protected. I am
personally committed to ensuring that this becomes a priority in all aspects of
United Nations work.

Protection priority I
Enhance respect for international law and promote good
practice by parties to conflict
Reports of widespread violations indicate a lack of respect for international law
across conflicts
7.
In many conflicts, government forces and non-State armed groups continued to
defy international law by directly targeting civilians and civilian objects, launching
indiscriminate attacks or failing to take all feasible precautions to avoid civilian
harm. Civilians were killed, tortured, raped, enslaved, ab ducted, disappeared, used
as human shields, forcibly recruited or forcibly displaced, among other violations.
In some conflicts, deliberately attacking hospitals, schools and places of worship,
removing humanitarian goods from convoys and besieging entire communities were
strategic methods of warfare.

2/20

17-07563

S/2017/414

8.
These trends were epitomized in the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen, most
visibly in Aleppo in late 2016. Direct attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
such as hospitals and schools, in addition to the indiscriminate use of artillery,
mortars, rockets and air-delivered bombs, were widely reported in both conflicts. In
the Syrian Arab Republic, besiegement of communities remained a deliberate tactic,
triggering allegations that starvation was used as a method of war. Water supplies
were cut off in Aleppo and Damascus, in some cases deliberately, affecting millions
of people (see A/HRC/34/CRP.3, paras. 32-37, and A/HRC/34/64, para. 47), while
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and affiliated groups continued to carry
out suicide bombings, sexual enslavement of women and girls, summary executions,
physical mutilation and other atrocities. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons investigated more than 60 credible allegations of chemical weapon
use in the Syrian Arab Republic. In Yemen, the United Nations found credible
allegations of the use of cluster bombs by coalition forces and of landmines by
pro-Houthi armed groups and pro-Saleh army units (see A/HRC/33/38, paras. 33-36).
9.
Hostilities escalated significantly in Afghanistan, where the United Nations
recorded 11,418 conflict-related civilian casualties (3,498 killed and 7,920 injured),
the highest number since the systematic documentation of civilian casualties began
in 2009. Particularly concerning was the 24 per cent increase in the number of child
casualties (923 killed and 2,589 injured) compared with 2015. Non-State armed
groups continued to target civilians using suicide tactics and improvised explosive
devices, while the number of civilian casualties from air strikes doubled compared
with 2015. The civilian toll also remained high in Iraq (6,878 killed and 12,388
injured). There were widespread reports of serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law perpetrated against Iraqi civilians, in particular by
ISIL. These included attacks targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, the use
of human shields, summary executions, sexual violence, forced marriage,
abductions and forcible recruitment of children.
10. Similar patterns were documented in other conflicts, to varying degrees. In
north-eastern Nigeria and neighbouring Lake Chad basin countries, violations and
abuses were reportedly committed by Boko Haram and in the context of government
counter-insurgency operations. In one of the worst forms of forcible recruitment and
use, Boko Haram used 30 girls and boys for suicide attacks in the Lake Chad basin.
In South Sudan, the protection of civilians continued to deteriorate, in particular
from July. Reported incidents included extrajudicial killings, abductions, sexual
violence and restrictions on freedom of movement by both parties to conflict. In
November, my Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide warned of the risk of
genocide in South Sudan. Genocide does not happen overnight; it is a process that
takes time to prepare. Therefore, it can be prevented. We have a shared
responsibility to do everything in our power to avert the risk and I call upon the
Security Council to take decisive action.
11. In the occupied Palestinian territory, the violence that escalated in late 2015
continued at a reduced level. In December, the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016), in which it condemned a range of measures in the occupied Palestinian
territory that violated international humanitarian law and relev ant resolutions,
calling for an end to all settlement activities, acts of violence and incitement.
12. Endemic sexual violence continued with impunity in many conflicts, as
detailed in my annual report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2017/249). There
were widespread reports of rapes by parties to conflict, mostly in conjunction with
other crimes such as killing, looting, abduction, forced displacement, arbitrary
detention and trafficking in persons. In many cases, the strategic nature of the
violence was evident in the selective targeting of victims from opposing ethnic,
religious or political groups. Patterns of sexual violence were also seen in the
17-07563

3/20

S/2017/414

context of urban warfare, during house searches and ope rations in residential areas
and at checkpoints. I call upon the Security Council, Member States and other
relevant actors to implement the recommendations in that report, including by
supporting the socioeconomic reintegration of survivors, who often suff er lifelong
stigma and exclusion.
13. Children continued to pay a heavy price in conflict. In several conflicts,
including in Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yemen, grave violations against children, in particular killing and maiming,
continued at high levels, as recorded through the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on grave violations against children in situations of armed conflict. The
recruitment and use of children by armed forces and groups also remained a serio us
concern, with significant increases in the Central African Republic, Somalia and the
Syrian Arab Republic.
14. I am particularly concerned about the detrimental impact of conflict on
education. The United Nations Children’s Fund estimates that 246 mill ion children
live in conflict zones and many are deprived of education when their schools are
destroyed, used for military purposes or closed for security reasons or because
teachers have fled. In Afghanistan, nearly half of primary-school-age children are
out of school. In South Sudan, almost 60 per cent of primary-school-age children
are out of school and 1 in 3 schools in conflict-affected areas has been closed. The
military use of 41 schools in Afghanistan was verified through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, and there were 21 new cases of such use in South Sudan. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there were 51 verified attacks on schools,
more than double the number in 2015. Girls’ education continued to suffer, with
threats or attacks against female teachers and pupils in Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali,
Nigeria and the Syrian Arab Republic. I urge all Member States to endorse the Safe
Schools Declaration, an international commitment to protect schools and
universities from being attacked or used for military purposes in conflict.
15. I am also concerned about the plight of missing persons and their families.
According to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the number of
persons reported missing in conflicts has dramatically increa sed since 2014 and in
some contexts has more than quadrupled. I call upon parties to conflict to uphold
families’ right to know the fate of their missing relatives, as provided by
international humanitarian law, and I encourage parties to collaborate with ICRC
and its Central Tracing Agency as a neutral, independent and impartial intermediary.
Greater efforts are needed to avoid civilian harm during urban hostilities
16. Armed conflicts are increasingly being fought in urban areas, 3 affecting an
estimated 50 million people in cities worldwide. 4 Several major cities, including
Aleppo, Fallujah, Juba, Maiduguri, Mosul, Sirte and Ta ‘izz, witnessed intense urban
battles. Owing to high population density and the close proximity of civilia ns and
civilian objects to military objectives, urban warfare entails a greater risk of civilian
death, injury and displacement, in addition to damage to civilian property and
essential infrastructure. Moreover, urban systems such as water and power suppli es
are often interconnected, meaning that damage to infrastructure can have a dire
impact on large numbers of people.
17. Urban warfare is particularly devastating for civilians when it involves the use
of explosive weapons with wide-area effects. Many parties to conflict routinely use
__________________
3

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, States of Fragility 2016:
Understanding Violence (Paris, OECD Publishing, 2016).
4
ICRC, “Urban services during protracted armed conflict: a call for a better approach to assisting
affected people” (Geneva, 2015).
4/20

17-07563

S/2017/414

heavy artillery, aerial bombardment and improvised explosive devices in urban
centres. According to Action on Armed Violence, 45,624 deaths and injuries from
explosive weapons were reported; 70 per cent (32,088) were civilian s. When
explosive weapons were used in populated areas, civilians accounted for 92 per cent
of reported deaths and injuries. Action on Armed Violence recorded the highest
number of civilian deaths and injuries from explosive weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic, followed by Iraq, Yemen and Afghanistan.
18. The use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas also
has dire long-term consequences for civilians, including the destruction of housing,
schools, hospitals, electricity grids and water and sanitation systems, the
displacement of civilians and the loss of education and livelihood opportunities. In
the Syrian Arab Republic, air strikes around Damascus in December damaged an
aquifer and other key water infrastructure, depriving more th an 5 million people of
regular access to potable water for over a month (see A/HRC/34/CRP.3, para. 37).
Globally, this pattern is largely predictable, and its immense scale is undermining
efforts to protect civilians, build lasting peace and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
19. The use of explosive weapons also leaves explosive remnants of war, which
pose a continuing lethal threat to civilians, especially children, and a major obstacle
to reconstruction and the return of displaced persons. The United Nations recorded a
sharp rise in global civilian casualties from landmines and other explosive remnants
of war, with contamination affecting more than 80 countries and territories. In
Afghanistan, 2016 saw the highest-ever recorded number of civilian casualties from
explosive remnants of war (217 killed and 507 injured), an increase of 66 per cent
compared with 2015; 84 per cent of those casualties were children. In Iraq, many
internally displaced persons reported that their homes had been contaminated with
explosive remnants of war, preventing their return. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Mine Action Service estimates that 6.3 million people live in contaminated areas.
The importance of clearance operations and risk education cannot be overstated.
Such operations not only prevent casualties, but also enable civilians to return home
and rebuild their livelihoods and reduce the potential for explosive remnants of war
to be repurposed into improvised explosive devices.
20. Minimizing the impact of urban combat on civilians is a vitally important task
for both attacking and defending forces. This includes taking constant care to spare
civilians and civilian objects, avoiding locating military objectives in or near
densely populated areas and removing civilians and civilian objects from the
vicinity of military objectives. Crucially, I call upon all State and non -State parties
to conflict to avoid the use of explosive weapons with wide -area effects in
populated areas. Parties should also develop and implement operational policies and
practical measures on the use of these weapons to avoid civilian harm. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has compiled examples of existing
policy and practice to assist parties in this regard. The Austrian-led process to
develop a political declaration on the humanitarian impact of the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas provides an important avenue for discussion and action.
I encourage Member States to engage constructively in this process.
All States must use their influence to enhance respect for international law
21. A survey by ICRC of 17,000 people, entitled “People on war: perspectives
from 16 countries”, conducted in 2016, showed that civilians in conflict-affected
countries clearly recognized the value of applying international humanitarian law;
they were acutely aware that war must have limits. It also revealed an alarming
trend among the populations of countries not directly affected by hostilities:
compared with 1999, there is a growing degree of acceptance that civilian death is
17-07563

5/20

S/2017/414

an inevitable part of war. We must counter this narrative and reverse this trend.
Civilian death and suffering would be greatly reduced if existing rules of
international law were implemented effectively.
22. All parties to conflict must comply with their obligations to respect and protect
civilians, but the onus to ensure respect for international humanitarian law does not
rest on them alone. All States are obliged to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances. Their words and actions should encourage
other States and non-State parties to conflict to uphold respect for civilians’ lives
and dignity. Conversely, States must not facilitate violations by financing, arming or
training parties who are at risk of flouting the law. In this regard, military
partnerships provide a unique opportunity to influence parties to conflict and ensure
respect for international law.
Irresponsible arms transfers exacerbate conflict and undermine the protection
of civilians
23. The Security Council has repeatedly recognized that the widespread
availability and poorly regulated transfer of arms and ammunition are key enablers
of conflict and civilian harm. 5 In this regard, I reiterate the recommendations made
in 2016 (see A/71/438-A/CONF.192/BMS/2016/1). The effective implementation of
instruments such as the Arms Trade Treaty and the Programme of Action to Prev ent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects can greatly contribute to protecting civilians. I urge all States to refrain
from exporting conventional arms and ammunition where they are likely to be used
to commit or facilitate serious violations of international humanitarian law or
international human rights law. Rigorous due diligence measures should underpin
this restraint, including the undertaking of risk assessments before authorizing arms
exports and periodic review thereafter. I strongly encourage all States to ratify or
accede to the Arms Trade Treaty and similar regional instruments without delay.
Positive examples of dialogue, policy and practice to enhance the protection of
civilians in conflict
24. There were several important initiatives at the international, regional and
national levels in 2016. In May, the first-ever World Humanitarian Summit was held
in Istanbul, Turkey, with more than 9,000 participants from Member States,
non-governmental organizations, civil society, international organizations, the
private sector and crisis-affected populations. Stakeholders made more than 3,000
commitments to advancing the various elements of the Agenda for Humanity,
including upholding international law and strengthening the protection of civilians. I
urge all stakeholders to translate their commitments into specific action and provide
updates on their progress annually through the Platform for Action, Commitments
and Transformations.
25. The intergovernmental process on strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law, mandated at the Thirty-second International Conference of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva in December 2015, continued to make
progress. Several meetings were held in 2016, with more planned for 2017. I
encourage all Member States to engage constructively in this process.
26. At the regional level, the African Union remained a key partner in protecting
civilians. The African Union Mission in Somalia, supported by th e United Nations,
made important progress in implementing its Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis
and Response Cell and began to develop standard operating procedures to make
__________________
5

6/20

See resolutions 2274 (2016), 2283 (2016), 2296 (2016) and 2313 (2016).
17-07563

S/2017/414

amends for civilian harm resulting from its operations. The North Atlantic Treat y
Organization adopted a policy for the protection of civilians, which is aimed at
instilling a coherent approach to the protection of civilians in all its operations,
missions and activities, including in planning and conducting operations, training,
lesson learning and capacity-building.
27. At the national level, the Government of Afghanistan, supported by the United
Nations, developed a draft national policy on civilian casualty mitigation and
established working groups to support the implementation of policies and practices
to protect civilians in conflict. In Nigeria, the Defence Headquarters committed
itself to developing a national policy on civilian protection and harm mitigation,
following a multi-stakeholder dialogue in November. The Government of the United
States of America issued an executive order setting out policies and practices to
mitigate civilian casualties in military operations, including pre -strike measures
such as enhanced training and capabilities and post-strike measures such as
investigations, public reporting and ex gratia payments.
28. In Colombia, the landmark peace agreement between the Government and the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo was a
welcome development with the potential to transform the lives of those affected by
the conflict. In the Central African Republic, the Government ratified or acceded to
seven core international human rights instruments. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Government continued to implement its action plan to end and
prevent sexual violence and the recruitment and use of children by the military,
including through the prosecution of several commanders. In the Sudan, the
Government signed an action plan with the United Nations to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children in conflict.
29. If implemented effectively, the measures described above could play a
significant role in strengthening the protection of civilians. I urge Member States
and regional and other intergovernmental organizations to develop and implement
holistic policies or strategies on the protection of civilians and civilian harm
mitigation, including training, doctrine and the development of capacities to track
and analyse civilian harm in military operations. This would help t o institutionalize
the protection of civilians in regional, national and local contexts.
30. Important progress was made in addressing the conduct of non -State armed
groups, which are key actors in today’s conflicts. Two additional groups signed the
Geneva Call deed of commitment for the protection of children from the effects of
armed conflict, and one signed its deed of commitment for the prohibition of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict and towards the elimination of gender
discrimination. In the Sudan, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement -North
signed an action plan with the United Nations to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children in conflict. In Colombia, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo increased the age limit for recruitment from 17
to 18 years and began to demobilize children. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Syrian Democratic Forces prohibited the recruitment of persons under 18 years of
age. I encourage non-State armed groups to adopt practical measures aimed at
protecting civilians, working with the United Nations and relevant non-governmental
organization as appropriate.
Systematic data collection, analysis and reporting enhance protection
and accountability
31. Systematic data collection, analysis and reporting facilitate evidence -based
analysis of trends and patterns of civilian harm, inform dialogue with parties to
conflict, deter violations and promote accountability. Human rights monitoring and
17-07563

7/20

S/2017/414

reporting, casualty tracking and gender analysis are critical. In Somalia, for
example, United Nations human rights risk assessments for Somali security forces
and African Union Mission in Somalia operations informed measures to mitigate
civilian casualties and prevent violations. I encourage the development and
improvement of mechanisms to systematically collect information relating to the
protection of civilians, including data disaggregated by sex and age, and to ensure
that it feeds into conflict analysis, prevention and response.
32. Journalists play an important role in conflict situations. Independent and
accurate reporting is essential to expose human suffering, restrain military actors
and put pressure on political actors to find solutions to conflicts and promot e
accountability. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization condemned the killing of 102 journalists. The majority were killed in
conflict situations; countless others were injured. I urge Member States to inform
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of the status of
judicial enquiries into these killings, strengthen protection for journalists reporting
in conflict situations and prevent impunity. The United Nations Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity remains an essential guiding
framework in this regard.
Accountability is crucial to enhance respect for international law and provide
justice for victims
33. Fundamental to enhancing respect for international law is the need to ensure
accountability for violations, for both parties to conflict and individual perpetrators.
There were several positive developments in national-level investigations and
prosecutions, although some initiatives made limited progress. For ex ample, the
Central African Republic took steps to make the Special Criminal Court operational,
including by making progress towards the recruitment of the prosecutor and judicial
staff. In Mali, a joint United Nations-government mechanism was established to
review progress in investigations and prosecutions in key cases; however, the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission, established in 2015, made limited progress.
In the Sudan, the number of cases, in particular cases of sexual violence against
children, handled by the Office of the Special Prosecutor for the crimes committed
in Darfur continued to increase. I urge the Security Council to encourage effective
remedies at the national level for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
34. International investigative and judicial mechanisms can also help to ensure
accountability. For example, the General Assembly adopted resolution 71/248, by
which it established an international, impartial and independent mechanism to assist
in the investigation and prosecution of persons responsible for the most serious
crimes under international law committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011.
35. The International Criminal Court made important progress, including by
completing the trials of Jean-Pierre Bemba (convicted of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in the Central African Republic) and Ahmad al -Faqi
al-Mahdi (convicted of crimes relating to the destruction of religio us buildings and
historic monuments in Timbuktu, Mali). It also began the trial of an alleged Lord’s
Resistance Army commander, Dominic Ongwen, and authorized a new investigation
in Georgia. As the Court’s caseload continues to increase, protecting this
indispensable institution and its work must be a priority. It was therefore deeply
concerning that some States parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court took steps towards withdrawing from the Statute. I welcome the
revocations of withdrawal by the Governments of the Gambia and South Africa and
urge those and other States parties to reaffirm their commitment to the Court. I call
8/20

17-07563

S/2017/414

upon all States to strengthen dialogue, ratify the Statute and cooperate with the
Court to ensure that this essential system of justice is as far-reaching as possible.
36. The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia made further progress
towards the completion of its work, notably by completing the trial of Radovan
Karadžić (convicted of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes). The
sustained political support that the Security Council and Member States have
provided to the Tribunal has been essential to the fulfilment of its mandate. Similar
levels of support should be provided to the Internatio nal Criminal Court to enable it
to fulfil its mandate. I also call upon the Council to refer situations to the Court in
appropriate cases.

Protection priority II
Protect the humanitarian and medical mission and accord
priority to the protection of civilians in United Nations
peace operations
A collective effort is needed to protect medical care in armed conflict:
resolution 2286 (2016)
37. More than 150 years ago, States agreed on a binding set of rules to protect
wounded and sick combatants and those who care for them in conflict. Today it is a
sacrosanct obligation under international humanitarian law to care for and treat all
wounded and sick — civilians and combatants alike — and to respect and protect
them and the medical personnel and facilities that fulfil this mission. In recent
conflicts, however, many hospitals have been treated as part of the battlefield rather
than as sanctuaries for the wounded and sick. The World Health Organizatio n
(WHO) recorded attacks against medical care in 20 conflict -affected countries
resulting in 863 medical personnel being killed or injured. Many incidents were
never investigated, and where investigations were conducted they often failed to
meet international standards, preventing effective corrective action and
accountability.
38. The level of violence affecting medical care is particularly alarming in the
Syrian Arab Republic, where Physicians for Human Rights documented 108 attacks
on medical facilities. Many facilities were damaged beyond repair, depriving people
of medical care just when they needed it most. In one particularly brutal series of
attacks between July and November, multiple air strikes were launched on a square
in the Shiʻar district of Aleppo, where three hospitals, a clinic and the blood bank
were located (see A/HRC/34/64, para. 38). Several air strikes hit the only children’s
hospital in eastern Aleppo, leading to the death of four newborns and undermining
children’s access to health care.
39. Similar patterns were evident in other conflicts, to varying degrees. In the
Central African Republic, the United Nations verified 16 attacks against medical
facilities, while 19 were verified in Yemen. In some cases, medical facilities were
hit notwithstanding the adoption of specific deconfliction measures. For example,
Médecins sans frontières reported that two hospitals that it supported in Yemen were
hit by air strikes in the second half of 2016, even though it had shared the GPS
coordinates with parties to conflict and clearly marked the building roofs.
40. There were also numerous cases of medical supplies being removed from
humanitarian convoys and warehouses. In the Syrian Arab Republic, government
security forces removed medical supplies, including trauma kits, surgical supplies,
anaesthetics and antibiotics, from more than three quarters of inter -agency convoys.

17-07563

9/20

S/2017/414

By the end of the year, the Government had confiscated 75 tons of me dicines and
medical supplies. 6
41. In other instances, parties to conflict used medical facilities for military
purposes, sometimes for months or even years at a time. This exposed facilities and
patients to an increased risk of attack. In Afghanistan, parties successively took over
a health clinic in the district of Jani Khel, Paktiya province, between August and
October, destroying and looting 60 per cent of its medical equipment. In Iraq, ISIL
took over the Salam hospital in eastern Mosul for two years, using it as a base
during intense fighting in December and thereby endangering patients and medical
staff. ISIL also took over the second floor of the Fallujah general hospital for
several months before it was hit by an air strike in May, damaging the emergency
room and other facilities.
42. Every medical worker attacked, every hospital bombed, every medical convoy
looted deprives the wounded and sick of vital care. This jeopardizes life and
exacerbates suffering. For example, WHO estimates that 30,000 people are injured
each month in the Syrian conflict, and without timely treatment many will suffer
lifelong disabilities. Attacks on medical care also have catastrophic longer -term
consequences as facilities close and workers flee, depriving entire communities of
access to medical services. WHO estimates that only 43 per cent of the South
Sudanese health facilities remain functional, providing minimal services. In Yemen,
medical supplies are in chronically short supply, and only 45 per cent of medical
facilities are functioning. In the Syrian Arab Republic, more than half of al l medical
facilities are closed or only partially functioning, and two thirds of specialized
medical personnel have fled the country. An estimated 360,000 women in the Syrian
Arab Republic are pregnant and require reproductive and maternal health services,
which in many cases are not readily available. 7
43. Less-visible impediments to the provision of medical care have also emerged.
In some contexts, States have developed policies or practices that prevent, impede
or punish the impartial provision of medical care in line with medical ethics. In
Afghanistan, the United Nations reported that medical personnel had been
threatened, intimidated, harassed and abducted to prevent the treatment of wounded
or sick opposition fighters. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the Government has on
many occasions withheld approval for the delivery of medical supplies and
equipment in areas controlled by non-State armed groups. Some States have even
enacted legislation that may criminalize the provision of medical care to members
of some non-State armed groups, such as those designated as “terrorist” by the
Security Council or under national law.
44. All parties to conflict have an obligation to respect and protect wounded and
sick civilians and fighters alike. The wounded and sick must not be attacked. They
must receive the medical care and attention required by their condition to the fullest
extent practicable and with the least possible delay, without any distinction except
on medical grounds. Parties to conflict must also respect and protect medical
personnel, units and transports exclusively assigned and engaged in medical duties
and must not punish any person for performing medical duties in line with medical
ethics.
45. The Security Council recalled those rules and called for their full
implementation in its landmark resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of medical
care in armed conflict. The Council urged parties to conflict and Member States to
__________________
6

WHO Syrian Arab Republic, Annual Report 2016 (Damascus, WHO Regional Office for the
Eastern Mediterranean, 2017).
7
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “Humanitarian response plan: JanuaryDecember 2017 — Syrian Arab Republic” (March 2017).
10/20

17-07563

S/2017/414

take action in several areas, including facilitating the safe and unimpeded passage of
medical personnel, assets and supplies; developing effective measures to prevent
and address acts of violence, attacks and threats against medical care; integrating
protection measures into the planning and conduct of military operations; and
conducting effective investigations into alleged violations of international
humanitarian law. In August, upon the Council’s request, the Secretary -General
submitted recommendations identifying practical measures to implement the
resolution (see S/2016/722).
46. Many stakeholders have already taken such steps. Canada and Switzerland
have established an informal group of States to support implementation, notably
through the exchange of good practice. Several Member States are reviewing their
national legal frameworks. The International Committee of Military Medicine,
which encompasses the military medical services of 112 States, urged its members
to put the protection of medical care on the agenda of their political and military
authorities. National Red Cross and Red Crescent societies have continued to
advocate a range of specific protection measures. Efforts are also under way, most
notably by WHO, to improve the collection of data on impediments to medical care.
These are welcome initiatives. I urge all Member States, parties to conflict and
relevant organizations to implement practical measures, such as those contained in
the recommendations submitted pursuant to resolution 2286 (2016), without delay.
Humanitarian access is essential for civilians to receive life-saving assistance
and protection
47. Rapid, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access is critical for an effective
response to the needs of millions of people affected by conflicts. Widespread,
serious and sometimes persistent humanitarian access constraints jeopardized
humanitarian operations. Besides active hostilities, the most severe constraints
included attacks against humanitarian personnel or assets and bureaucratic
impediments, including movement restrictions.
48. There is a particularly urgent need for greater humanitarian access in Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen, where millions are on the brink of famine.
Humanitarian access restrictions imposed by parties to conflict played a ke y role in
this crisis. In Yemen, for example, access denials and restrictions by all parties
severely hampered the humanitarian response. There were difficulties in obtaining
entry clearances from the de facto authorities for essential humanitarian supplie s
such as vaccines. Compounding these constraints, several commercial vessels
destined for Yemeni ports on the Red Sea were deliberately delayed, blocked or
diverted by the coalition led by Saudi Arabia, thereby restricting the import of food,
fuel and other basic commodities. This had grave consequences for civilians as food
imports reached their lowest level since the conflict began.
49. In South Sudan, all parties to conflict impeded deliveries of life -saving
assistance, including through bureaucratic impediments and attacks on humanitarian
personnel and assets. For example, access was repeatedly denied to areas outside the
town of Wau, Western Bahr el-Ghazal. Critical bureaucratic impediments included
the detention and deportation of senior non-governmental organization staff and
interference in recruitment processes following the passing of the Non -Governmental
Organizations Act in February.
50. Parties to conflict also impeded humanitarian access in the Syrian Arab
Republic, with dire consequences for civilians. Government-imposed administrative
procedures severely constrained the delivery of assistance across conflict lines. The
Government approved only 45 per cent of access requests. Meanwhile, the number
of people living in besieged areas doubled, reaching a peak of almost 1 million in
17-07563

11/20

S/2017/414

November. On average, the United Nations was able to deliver assistance each
month to only some 20 per cent of people in besieged areas and less than 10 per cent
of people in hard-to-reach areas, owing to constraints imposed by the parties.
51. In Myanmar, international humanitarian organizations were prohibited from
taking relief supplies into non-government-controlled areas and experienced delays
in obtaining travel authorizations in government-controlled areas. Severe movement
restrictions on Muslim communities continued, impeding access to basic services.
In Ukraine, humanitarian access in non-government-controlled areas remained
challenging owing to bureaucratic impediments imposed by the Government and the
de facto authorities. The ban on all commercial trade with non -governmentcontrolled areas, including the delivery of medical supplies, remained a significant
driver of humanitarian needs.
52. Against this backdrop, I remind all parties to conflict that they have the
primary responsibility for meeting the basic needs of civilians under their effective
control. If these basic needs are not being met, States must not arbitrarily withhold
consent to impartial relief operations in a manner contrary to international law.
Once consent is granted, all parties to conflict must allow and facilitate rapid and
unimpeded humanitarian access, subject to any necessary technical and practical
arrangements. Using starvation of the civilian population as a method of warfare is
strictly prohibited. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recently
commissioned and published the Oxford Guidance on the Law Relating to
Humanitarian Relief Operations in Situations of Armed Conflict, which was
prepared by researchers at the University of Oxford and is aimed at facilitating
policy development and advocacy to support effective humanitarian action.
53. The politicization of humanitarian action also affected the ability of
humanitarian actors to reach affected populations in a sa fe, predictable and
principled manner. Humanitarian action must remain distinct from political or
military objectives and be conducted in line with the principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence. I urge all Member States and parties to
conflict to respect these principles. In a forthcoming study, entitled “Presence and
proximity: to stay and deliver, five years on”, emphasis is laid on the importance of
humanitarian organizations gaining the acceptance of parties to conflict in order to
operate. Member States must not impede humanitarian actors’ efforts to interact
with all relevant parties, including non-State armed groups, and to operate in areas
under their control.
Humanitarian workers and assets must be respected and protected
54. Violence against humanitarian workers and assets continued to impede
humanitarian activities in conflicts, often with devastating consequences for
civilians. Preliminary records from the Aid Worker Security Database show that at
least 249 aid workers were killed, kidnapped or seriously wounded. The
overwhelming majority were national staff. More than three quarters of recorded
incidents took place in five countries, with the highest number in South Sudan,
followed by Afghanistan, the Syrian Arab Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Somalia. Other sources reported much higher figures; for example, in
South Sudan the United Nations recorded that 24 aid workers had been killed, while
in Afghanistan it recorded that 15 aid workers had been killed, 26 injured and 121
abducted. In many cases, violence or threats led to the reduction or suspension of
humanitarian operations, leaving vulnerable people without basic necessities for
their survival.
55. In one egregious incident, an air strike hit a United Nations-Syrian Arab Red
Crescent convoy and warehouse near Urum al-Kubra on 19 September. According to
12/20

17-07563

S/2017/414

the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
the attack killed at least 14 humanitarian workers, injured at least 15 others and
destroyed 17 trucks and vital humanitarian supplies (see A/HRC/34/64, paras. 79-88). 8
56. Enhancing the protection of humanitarian workers and assets necessitates
action on several fronts, as outlined by the Security Council in its resolution 2175
(2014). In particular, parties to conflict must respect and protect humanitarian
personnel and objects, including by taking all feasible precautions when planning or
deciding upon an attack. Member States must ensure that there is accountability for
acts of violence against humanitarian workers and assets in violation of applicable
law.
Protection of civilians must be prioritized in United Nations peace operations
57. United Nations peace operations remain an indispensable tool for protecting
civilians in complex crises. The deterioration of secur ity in many peace operation
contexts, such as Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, together
with high-profile incidents in South Sudan, highlighted the enduring importance of
peace operations and the challenges that they continue to face. These events
reinforced the importance of ensuring that protection remains central to political
strategies and a common focus for all United Nations actors, in addition to an
important area of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
58. Peacekeepers must be given the capacity to fulfil their mandates, supported by
robust political action at all levels. In this regard, I welcome the continuing efforts
to improve training for peacekeepers and I encourage the Security Council and
Member States to support these initiatives. We must be realistic, however, in terms
of what peacekeepers can achieve in situations of extreme violence, in particular
when government forces systematically target civilians. States bear the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, and peacekeepers are not a substitute for political
engagement to tackle sources of violence.
59. Peacekeepers must recognize their responsibility to act, to the full extent of
their mandates and capabilities, to prevent and respond to threats against civilians
and must be held accountable for underperformance or non -performance. In this
regard, I will accord priority to the implementation of relevant recommendations
stemming from, among others, the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations and the independent special investigation into the violence in Juba in
2016. I urge Member States to commit themselves to abiding by the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, endorsed by 40 countries representing
nearly half of all deployed peacekeepers, which articulate an effective guide for
implementing mandates for the protection of civilians. I also call upon Member
States to join me in a collective effort across the United Nations system to detect,
control and prevent sexual exploitation and abuse (see A/71/818 and Add.1).

Protection priority III
Prevent forced displacement and pursue durable solutions
for refugees and internally displaced persons
60. Forced displacement has reached record levels, with more than 65 million
people displaced by conflict, violence and persecution worldwide. Active hostilities
between warring parties, often involving air strikes and shelling in urban areas, are a
__________________
8

17-07563

The United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry suggested lower figures. See S/2016/1093.
13/20

S/2017/414

primary cause of displacement. Concerted efforts are needed at the national,
regional and global levels to prevent forced displacement and find durable solutions
for refugees and internally displaced persons.
61. Around two thirds of those forcibly displaced around the world are internally
displaced persons. Countries with high levels of conflict-induced internal
displacement included Afghanistan, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Iraq, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. Globally,
more than 40 per cent of internally displaced persons are children. Many internally
displaced persons have been displaced multiple times in their quest for safety.
Notwithstanding their overwhelming numbers, internally displaced persons often
receive inadequate attention from their Governments and global leaders; they are the
silent majority of the forcibly displaced.
62. The total number of refugees has surpassed 21 million for the first time.
Almost three quarters of refugees come from just five countrie s and territories, with
the Syrian Arab Republic accounting for the highest number (5 million) followed by
Afghanistan, the occupied Palestinian territory, South Sudan and Somalia. Turkey
hosts the largest refugee population, followed by Pakistan, Lebanon, Iran (Islamic
Republic of) and Uganda. The refugee population in Uganda doubled, mostly in the
second half of 2016, as a result of the conflict in South Sudan. These host States
have shouldered a disproportionate responsibility in responding to the refuge e crisis,
taking in millions of refugees from their war -torn neighbours despite the increased
demands that this places on their own economies and societies. In doing so, they
contribute to conflict management, regional stability and collective security. Th ese
States need significantly more international support to cope with the consequences
of such massive displacement.
63. Active hostilities, especially in urban areas, are a primary cause of
displacement. This is most evident in the Syrian conflict, which has produced some
11.5 million refugees and internally displaced persons. More than 2 million people
were displaced within the Syrian Arab Republic in 2016 alone. Hostilities have also
displaced many people in Yemen, which had over 2 million internally dis placed
persons at the end of the year. In Iraq, more than 620,000 people were internally
displaced in 2016 alone, including in excess of 120,000 in the last two months of
the year during the operation to recapture Mosul. Equally alarming was the new
displacement of 660,000 people within Afghanistan, the highest number on record,
which coincided with the escalation of hostilities.
64. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, on average 2,000 people
were internally displaced from their homes every day, with the total number of
internally displaced persons increasing from 1.6 million to 2.2 million. Some
178,000 people were internally displaced between October and December alone;
almost 90 per cent were fleeing active hostilities. There was also signif icant new
displacement in South Sudan, in particular from July when hostilities escalated in
Juba and elsewhere. In total, more than 1.85 million people were internally
displaced in South Sudan as at the end of the year, including 223,994 sheltered in
United Nations sites for the protection of civilians. In addition, some 760,000
people fled the country, bringing the total number of South Sudanese refugees in
neighbouring countries to more than 1.4 million, including 640,000 in Uganda.
65. Refugees and internally displaced persons were exposed to serious protection
risks, including killings, sexual and gender-based violence, torture, forced
recruitment, trafficking in persons, early and forced marriage and arbitrary arrest
and detention. Children, especially unaccompanied or separated children, are
particularly vulnerable. Several attacks on camps or sites for internally displaced
persons were reported, including in Iraq, Myanmar, Nigeria, South Sudan and the
14/20

17-07563

S/2017/414

Syrian Arab Republic. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there was
continued concern over the Government’s efforts to close such sites at short notice,
such as in March and April in Kitchanga, North Kivu, affecting 43,000 internally
displaced persons. It is incumbent on States to maintain the civili an and
humanitarian character of camps and settlements for refugees and internally
displaced persons, so as to ensure that residents are not subject to forced recruitment
and do not become military targets. Forced returns, including the forced return of
Nigerian refugees from Cameroon, were also a serious concern.
66. Displacement has become protracted in many conflict-affected countries. This
results from a combination of factors, including continuing hostilities and insecurity
stemming from the lack of political resolution of conflicts and inadequate access to
basic services, durable housing and livelihood opportunities. A forthcoming study
commissioned by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, entitled
“Breaking the impasse”, highlights effective practices and provides
recommendations to better respond to protracted internal displacement. In
particular, it articulates the steps needed to achieve collective outcomes for
internally displaced persons over several years, bringing together gov ernment,
humanitarian and development partners.
67. Important efforts to address forced displacement were made. At the World
Humanitarian Summit, it was emphasized that long-term displacement could be
tackled through the new way of working, which promotes greater coherence
between humanitarian and development actors to reduce vulnerabilities, build the
resilience of displaced persons and host communities and promote durable solutions
(see A/71/239, para. 31). In the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,
Member States committed themselves to a more equitable sharing of the burden and
responsibility for hosting and supporting refugees. This is a key element of the
comprehensive refugee response framework and will feature in the future global
compact on refugees. In the Declaration, Member States confirmed that, in line with
the principle of non-refoulement, individuals must not be returned at borders. They
also recognized the need for reflection on effective strategies to prevent and reduce
internal displacement and ensure adequate protection and assistance for internally
displaced persons. In the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations
Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development, it was s tressed that
towns and cities affected by displacement must receive support to meet the needs of
internally displaced persons and host communities. These are welcome initiatives
and I urge all stakeholders to implement their commitments without delay.

Path to protection
My vision for strengthening the protection of civilians in
armed conflict
Prevent and end conflict
68. My overarching priority as Secretary-General is to mobilize all stakeholders to
prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of crisis, including but
not limited to armed conflict. This is the most effective way to protect civilians in
the long term. The human and financial costs of pursuing military solutions to
conflicts are unacceptable. We need a surge in diplomacy for peace, in partnership
with relevant actors, including through the use of my own good offices. Efforts
should focus on dialogue and inclusive peace processes that address the parties’
grievances and underlying causes of violence, leading to sust ainable solutions. This
alone will not be enough, however. In the long term, a holistic approach is required
to address the root causes of conflict, promote human rights and the rule of law,
17-07563

15/20

S/2017/414

strengthen governance and institutions and invest in inclusive an d sustainable
development.
69. Another key step is to improve early-warning and early-action mechanisms
and ensure that we have the capacity and political will to intervene before it is too
late. This is the lesson of innumerable conflicts and the driving force behind the
Human Rights Up Front initiative. We must also address illicit and irresponsible
arms transfers, which enable conflict and undermine protection and peacebuilding
efforts. We cannot achieve these objectives working alone or in silos. While the
primary responsibility for conflict prevention lies with Member States and the
Security Council, a culture of prevention must flow through all aspects of the
United Nations work.
Enhance respect for international law and promote good practice by parties
to conflict
70. Where we cannot prevent conflict, we must strive to prevent civilian death and
suffering in conflict. A key priority is to enhance respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law by encouraging good pr actice
by parties to conflict. Much of the civilian death and suffering that we see in
conflict could be avoided if the parties respected their obligations under
international law and implemented policies and practical measures to avoid civilian
harm in military operations. Enhancing parties’ compliance with international law
not only prevents and mitigates civilian harm, but also improves the prospects for
resolving conflict and building sustainable peace. Systematic accountability for
violations is also crucial to provide redress for victims, deter further violations and
promote peace and reconciliation. Where parties to conflict persist in seriously
violating human rights or international humanitarian law, the Security Council
should take decisive action to ensure accountability.
71. During my tenure, I will facilitate a global effort to mobilize Member States,
civil society and other stakeholders to enhance respect for international law and
strengthen the protection of civilians in conflict. This will inc lude awareness-raising
and advocacy, developing and sharing good practices, and research and dialogue on
the root causes of parties’ behaviour. It will also encompass initiatives to improve
data collection and analysis, together with public reporting on th e human cost of
conflict, which will facilitate evidence-based analysis of trends and patterns of
civilian harm. In addition, I will encourage efforts by Member States and regional
organizations to develop and implement policies to avoid civilian harm in m ilitary
operations. These should include pre-conflict planning, guidance on the use of
particular weapons and tactics, tracking and analysing the impact of operations on
civilians and making amends for civilian harm. Non -State armed groups should also
be encouraged to implement practical measures to avoid civilian harm. This will
require continued engagement with such groups on humanitarian issues relating to
the protection of civilians.
Protect the humanitarian and medical mission and prioritize the protection of
civilians in United Nations peace operations
72. Impartial medical care and principled humanitarian action save lives and
reduce suffering for millions of people in conflict. As famine threatens the lives and
dignity of more than 20 million people in conflict-affected countries, and millions
of others struggle to gain access to the goods and services that they need to survive,
ensuring rapid, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access must be a priority. I
call upon all parties to conflict, in addition to the Security Council, Member States
and other relevant actors, to do everything within their power to facilitate
humanitarian access and create an enabling environment for humanitarian action. I
16/20

17-07563

S/2017/414

further call for specific action to protect medical care in conflict, including by
implementing the recommendations submitted to the Council pursuant to resolution
2286 (2016). The norms that protect medical care in conflict are among the first and
most fundamental expressions of the spirit driving the protection of civilians
agenda, and they demand the highest respect.
73. United Nations peace operations are an indispensable tool to prevent conflict,
protect civilians, achieve political solutions and contribute to lasting peace. They
must have the political backing and material support that they need to perform these
tasks, together with investment in training and capacity-building. Their
effectiveness relies largely on a clearly articulated political p urpose, which only the
Security Council can provide. This must be informed by effective United Nations
assessments, including through mechanisms such as the informal expert group on
the protection of civilians. Peacekeepers must always fulfil their core ob ligation to
protect when civilian lives are at stake, but protecting civilians requires far more
than physical protection by peacekeepers. It is a whole-of-mission endeavour
encompassing civilian, military and police functions such as engaging with local
communities, mediating disputes, monitoring human rights violations and gathering
information to prevent future violence. This must be complemented by robust
political engagement at the international level, including by the Council.
Prevent forced displacement and pursue durable solutions for refugees and
internally displaced persons
74. There cannot be sustainable peace, protection or development worldwide when
more than 65 million people are displaced by conflict, violence and per secution. We
must move beyond perpetually struggling with the consequences of such massive
displacement and began to seriously tackle its root causes. This means preventing
and resolving conflict, strengthening respect for international law and developing
operational policies and practices to protect civilians from hostilities. Fewer
civilians would flee if parties to conflict spared them from the effects of hostilities,
notably by complying with the international humanitarian law principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution. In addition, under international
humanitarian law, parties are prohibited from forcibly displacing civilians unless the
security of the civilians involved or imperative military reasons so demand. We
must also ensure that those who flee their homes receive the protection and
assistance that they need. In particular, all States must uphold the right of those
fleeing persecution and conflict to seek asylum and must ensure that refugees are
protected from refoulement. The Security Council should emphasize these
obligations and promote accountability for violations.
75. The New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants represents important
progress towards a more equitable sharing of the burden and responsibility for
hosting and supporting refugees. I will support Member States to implement their
commitments in the coming years, including through the adoption of a global
compact on refugees. In parallel, we must redouble our efforts to address the plight
of the more than 40 million conflict-induced internally displaced persons.
Throughout my tenure, I will work with affected Governments and other
stakeholders to reduce internal displacement by 50 per cent by 2030 in a manner
that respects the sovereignty of Member States, protects the human rights and
dignity of internally displaced persons, promotes durable solutions and allows
internally displaced persons and host communities to contribute to sustainable
development. The twentieth anniversary of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement, in 2018, offers a unique opportunity for stakeholders to come
together and commit themselves to taking specific action.

17-07563

17/20

S/2017/414

Unified effort throughout the United Nations system
76. I am determined to ensure a unified effort to prevent crisis and protect
civilians in conflict throughout all aspects of United Nations work. This is the very
essence of the Human Rights Up Front initiative. Our collective efforts to reform
the United Nations peace and security, development and management systems will
help to better manage the peace continuum, from prevention and conflict resolution
to peacekeeping, peacebuilding and long-term development. The protection of
civilians must remain a priority throughout this process. This will require concerted
efforts by my special representatives, special envoys, humanitarian and
development coordinators and other senior officials. Coordination between peace
operations and other United Nations components at the headquarters and field
levels, while respecting distinct roles and boundaries, is crucial. We must also
strengthen our partnerships with regional organizations. The full participation of
women and girls is essential at all stages. We must all work together to help the
Security Council and Member States to prevent conflict, protect civilians in conflict
and build inclusive, resilient and equitable societies. Ultimately, protection is a
responsibility spanning the entire United Nations.

Recommendations
77. Building on the recommendations in previous reports on the protection
civilians in armed conflict and in the Agenda for Humanity, I emphasize the
importance of the following measures.
Protection priority I
Enhance respect for international law and promote good practice by parties
to conflict
78. I call upon Member States and parties to conflict to develop, implement and
share operational policies and practical measures to enhance respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law and avoid harm to civilians, with
particular attention to the conduct of hostilities in urban areas.
79.

I call upon parties to conflict:

(a) To stop the military use of critical civilian infrastructure such as
hospitals, schools and places of worship;
(b)
areas;

To avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated

(c) To avoid the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in
populated areas.
80.

I call upon Member States:

(a) To join a global effort to promote greater compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law to enhance the protection of civilians;
(b) To ratify or accede to core international instruments aimed at protecting
civilians, including the Arms Trade Treaty and similar regional instruments, and
ensure that national legislation and policies implement international obligations;
(c) To exert their influence, in particular when participating in military
partnerships, to ensure that parties to conflict comply with international law;
(d)

18/20

To endorse the Safe Schools Declaration;

17-07563

S/2017/414

(e) To engage constructively in efforts to develop a political declaration to
address the humanitarian impact of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas;
(f) To support the systematic collection and analysis of information on the
protection of civilians, including data disaggregated by sex and age and gender
analysis, and ensure that it feeds into conflict analysis, prevention and response;
(g) To adopt the legislative, policy and law enforcement measures necessary
to ensure the effective investigation and prosecution of ser ious violations;
(h) To ratify or accede to the Rome Statute and provide adequate political,
technical and financial support to the International Criminal Court.
81.

The Security Council should:

(a) Use all tools at its disposal to strengthen the protection of civilians and
enhance compliance with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law;
(b) Ensure accountability for serious violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, including by, as appropriate, applying targeted me asures,
supporting national prosecutions and hybrid mechanisms, mandating commissions
of inquiry, fact-finding missions and investigation commissions, referring situations
to the International Criminal Court and providing consistent support to the Court to
enable it to fulfil its mandate.
Protection priority II
Protect the humanitarian and medical mission and accord priority to the
protection of civilians in United Nations peace operations
Humanitarian and medical mission
82.

I call upon Member States and parties to conflict:

(a) To adopt and implement measures, such as those defined in the
recommendations submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2286 (2016), to
protect the wounded and sick and medical personnel, facilities and equipment, and
share best practices and lessons learned;
(b) To adopt clear, simple and expedited procedures to facilitate rapid and
unimpeded humanitarian access.
83.

The Security Council should:

(a) Condemn any instances of arbitrary withholding of consent to impartial
humanitarian relief operations or depriving civilians of objects indispensable to
their survival, including wilfully impeding relief supply and access, and emphasize
that such acts constitute violations of international humanitarian law;
(b) Call upon parties to conflict to comply with their obligation to respect
and protect humanitarian and medical personnel and objects, condemn direct and
indiscriminate attacks against such personnel and objects and call for effective
investigations into and accountability for such incidents.
United Nations peace operations
84.

I call upon Member States:

(a) To endorse the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians and
ensure that military and police personnel provided to peacekeeping operations are
fully equipped and trained to effectively implement mandates for the protection of
civilians, including mandates to prevent sexual violence in conflict;

17-07563

19/20

S/2017/414

(b) To support my initiatives to promote effective and accountable
performance throughout the United Nations system, including in the implementation
of mandates for the protection of civilians.
85. The Security Council should ensure that the protection of civilians is a core
aspect of political strategies for preventing and resolving conflict and that political
solutions drive protection mandates in peace operations, including through
prioritized and sequenced mandates.
Protection priority III
Prevent forced displacement and pursue durable solutions for refugees and
internally displaced persons
86.

I call upon Member States:

(a) To intensify efforts to tackle the root causes of forced displacement by
preventing and resolving conflicts and strengthening respect for international law,
including in protracted conflict;
(b) To uphold the right to seek asylum and the principle of non -refoulement
under international law;
(c) To develop and implement effective strategies, with the support of
humanitarian and development agencies as relevant, to ensure the comprehensive
protection of refugees and internally displaced persons, promote their self -reliance
and resilience, including through education programmes and livelihood
opportunities, and work towards durable solutions.
87.

The Security Council should:

(a) Condemn unlawful acts of forced displacement by parties to conflict, call
for the immediate cessation of such acts and apply targeted measures against the
leadership of the parties responsible;
(b) Remind parties to conflict of their obligation to maintain the civilian and
humanitarian character of camps and settlements for refugees and internally
displaced persons, condemn direct and indiscriminate attacks on such sites and call
for effective investigations into and accountability for such incidents .

20/20

17-07563
