Reeolutiom adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

2. /nstructs the Fourth Committee, acting on behalf
of the General Assembly, to fill such vacancies as may
occur among the non-administering Members of the
Committee;
3. Decides that, at its regular session in 1955, the
General Assembly will examine the question whether
the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories should be renewed for a further
period, together with the questions of the composition
and terms of reference of any such future committee.

3. Invites the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Goveming Territories to study further tht
question of the direct participation, in its discussiovi
on economic, social and educational conditions, of rep·
resentatives of those Territories the inhabitants ol
which have attained a wide measure. of responsibilit;;
for economic, social and educational policies, and to
include recommendations on this question in its re·
port to the General Assembly at its eighth session.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.

402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.
l,i accorda11ce with the ter,ns of re.rolutïons 332 (IV) and
646 (VII), the Fourth Committee, at ils 306th meeting oti
15 De.-embtr 1952, elected, on behalf of the Ge11eral A.fsembly,
fo11r members 10 the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Gtn,'trning Territories to fill the vacant:ies c,•eated by the
expiration of the terms of office of Bran/, Egypt, I,ulia and
the Unioti of Soi>iet Socialist RepHblics.
The States elccted were: BRAZIL, CHINA, I NDIA and IRAQ.

647 (VII). Participation of Non•Self-Governing
Territories in the work of the Committee on
Information Crom Non-Self-Governing Terri•
tories
The Ge,aeral Assembly,
Recalling that, in resolution 566 (VI) adopted on

18 January 1952, the General Assembly invited the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Goveming
Territories to examine the possibility of associating the
Non-Self-Gpverning Territories more closely in its
work and to report the results of its examination of
this problem to the General Assembly at its seventh
session in connexion with the Assembly's consideration
of the Committee's future,
Recalling that it bas been found both possible and
useful to associate Non-Self-Govëming Territories
with the work of technical organs of the United Nations. including the specialized agencies,
Recognizing that direct 'participation of the NonSelf-Governing Territories in the work of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territories can be of further assistance in promoting the
progress of these Territories and their peoples towards
the goals set forth in Chapter XI of the Charter of
the United Nations,
.
Noting that the Members administering NonSelf-C10verning Territories have from time to time
attached qualified persons from these Territories to
their delegations to the Committee,
l. Consider.s it de.sirable that there be associated in
the work of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Goveming Territories qualified indigenous representatives from Non-Self-Goveming Territories, and
invites the Administering Members to make such participation possible ;
2. lwvites the Administering Members to transmit
copies of the reports on economic, social and educational conditions of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Goveming Territories, together with
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, to the
executive and legislative branches of these Territories;
1

33

648 (VII). Factors which should be taken lnto
account in deciding whether a Territory la or
is not a Territory wbose people bave not yet
attained a full meuure of self-government
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the obligation to transmit infor-

mation, accepted in virtue of Article 73 e of the
Charter, by the Members which have or assume responsibilities for the administration of Territories
whose peoples have not yet attained a full measure of
sel f-govemment,
Talei,a9. mto acco""' that this obligation remains in
force wtth regard to each Territory until such time
as the objectives of Chapter XI of the Charter are
fulfilled,
.
Taking into accoi:nt the statement contained in resolution 222 (III), adopted by the General Assembly on
3 November 1948, to the effect that it is essential for
the United Nations to be informed of any change that
may take place in the constitutional status of any NonSelf-Goveming Territory, and that, not later than six
months after the· submission of the aforesaid information, such information as may be required in such cases
should be communicated, including information about
the constitution, legislative acts or executive orders
regarding the govemment of the Territory as well as
about the constitutional relationship of the Territory
to the government of the metropobtan country,
H aving examined the report • of the Ad Hoc Committee on Factors ( Non-Self-Gœeming Territories).
Recognizing that, in deciding whether a Territory
has or bas not attained a full measure of self-government, an enumeration of factors woutd be a usef ut
guide both for the General Assembly and for the Administering Member concemed,
Having regard to its resolution 567 (VI) of 18 January 1952,
1. Approve.s provisionalty the annexed Jist of factors which may serve as a guide, both for the Generat
Assembly and for the Members of the United Nations
which have or assume responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, in deciding
whether a Territory bas or bu not attained-a full measure of self-government;
2. Recognues that ,-each concrete caae should be
considered and decided in the light of the particular
' See document A/Zl 78.
