S/PV.8697

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8697

th meeting
Friday, 20 December 2019, 12.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Craft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Cedano
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aljarallah
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-42648 (E)
*1942648*

S/PV.8697

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 12.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2019/961 and S/2019/962, which contain
the texts of two draft resolutions. The Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolutions.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to briefly
introduce draft resolution S/2019/961 on behalf of the
co-penholders, Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.
In formulating and proposing this draft resolution,
we were motivated by the dire humanitarian situation
in Syria. This morning we once again heard about the
human suffering in the country (see S/PV.8696) through
the personal testimony of a victim of the violence
there. There are still more than 11 million people in
Syria who are in need of humanitarian aid, of whom at
least 4 million depend on the cross-border mechanism
that the Council decided on some time ago in adopting
resolution 2165 (2014). It was the bleak humanitarian
situation that led us to propose the renewal of the crossborder mechanism.
In our discussions and our work on the text, we
consulted with everybody and went through many
iterations. We heard various requests, such as including
five rather than four crossing points, or only two
crossing points. The proposal before the Council is
based on responding to the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people. Our understanding is that there are two
crossing points that are absolutely essential. There
is also a third, to Iraq, which both the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Health Organization say they need to get medical
equipment into Syria. With regard to the fourth crossing
point, which has not been used in the last 18 months, we
2/11

20/12/2019

decided to revisit the possibility of reopening it in six
months if there is a need. We were also willing to reduce
the renewal term from 12 to six months, after which, if
the Council considered that the situation had improved
enough to terminate the mechanism, we would follow
its recommendation.
I urge our colleagues to vote in favour of this draft
resolution, for the people suffering in Syria, and for the
4 million people who depend on the Council to vote in
favour of the text so that their needs can continue to
be met.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation will vote against the
humanitarian troika’s draft resolution S/2019/961, on
the cross-border assistance mechanism in Syria.
The draft resolution, which has been renewed year
after year, is obsolete and does not take into account
the changes that have occurred in Syria since 2014,
when resolution 2165 (2014) was first adopted. At the
time, the mechanism was established under urgent
circumstances, when objectively speaking there were
no other ways to deliver humanitarian assistance to
areas of the Syrian Arab Republic that were not under
Government control.
The Syrian authorities have now restored control
over the greater part of their territory, so cross-border
assistance to those areas is no longer necessary. The
crossing at the border with Jordan has not been used
since July 2018. According to United Nations reports
the deliveries through the checkpoint at the Iraq border
are insignificant and could be made through official
checkpoints under Syrian army control or from Syrian
territory itself. Incidentally, I would like to point out
to my German colleague that according to information
in the Secretary-General’s report on humanitarian
assistance to Syria (S/2019/949), it is 1 million people,
not 4 million, who are using the cross-border assistance.
I also want to remind the Council that a key
paragraph of resolution 2165 (2014), on United Nations
humanitarian agencies’ direct access to the area of
operations, has not been implemented for the entire
existence of the resolution. The militants who still
control some parts of Syria do not allow humanitarian
personnel to enter, preferring to control the process of the
delivery and distribution of assistance independently.
As a result, a significant part of it is not being used
as it was intended. I will say it again. The mechanism
was created as a temporary emergency instrument.
19-42648

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Given the dire situation at the time, it enabled the
informed delivery of humanitarian assistance at a time
when according to international law — article 70 of
Additional Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions and
General Assembly resolution 46/182 — humanitarian
assistance was to be provided with the consent of the
official authorities of the recipient country.
Considering the current situation in Syria, it is
essential that we revert to the established parameters
for humanitarian assistance. The second preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution proposed by
the co-penholders contain a reference to the firm
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria. In that case it is
important to also consider the views of Damascus, the
recipient country, as set out in a letter dated 10 December
from Mr. Faisal Mekdad, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic, addressed to
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock — and here
it is — which clearly outlines the Syrian Government’s
position that keeping the mechanism in its current form
is unacceptable. We cannot all disregard the position of
the recipient country.
From the beginning, the humanitarian troika’s
draft proposal has assumed its automatic renewal every
year without providing for its review or adaptation.
It contained, and still contains, provisions that have
nothing to do with the humanitarian component. In
our view, that approach is dictated by purely political
motives. We indicated our overall concerns about the
text in the first stage of the consultations. When we
saw that we could not work with the document as it was
presented to us, we proposed our own version of the
resolution. Our draft resolution (S/2019/962) focuses
exclusively on the humanitarian aspects while reducing
the unused paragraphs on the passage of humanitarian
assistance. I especially want to emphasize something
that we have said repeatedly, which is that our document
does extend the cross-border mechanism. In the past
we did not support it but we did not block it either, in
acknowledgement of the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian population. This year we are willing to support
it. It provides for access to humanitarian assistance in
north-western Syria, where such aid is still essential.
For our part, we have made an effort to meet our
colleagues’ concerns.
In response, we received a second and then a third
draft from the humanitarian troika, which still include
provisions that are divorced from reality. This approach

S/PV. 8697

is dishonest. We are obliged to repeat this yet again since
our arguments were clearly not heard by our colleagues
during the preparatory stage for today’s vote. However,
we have the impression that our arguments have been
deliberately disregarded. For the sake of humanitarian
goals, we agree to extending the cross-border assistance
mechanism to the areas where it is needed. The sixmonth extension will enable all of us to consider what
we can and should do to ensure the effective use of this
humanitarian assistance. And that should not become a
justification for those of our colleagues who are willing
to block the provision of humanitarian assistance for
the sake of the mechanism’s mandated timeline.
For the reasons I have cited, we cannot support the
humanitarian troika’s draft resolution, and we therefore
call on all who are genuinely interested in preserving
humanitarian assistance in Syria rather than pursuing
political aims to support our draft.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2019/961 and
submitted by Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic,
Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany, Indonesia,
Kuwait, Peru, Poland, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour and two against. The draft resolution
has not been adopted, owing to the negative vote of a
permanent member of the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Aljarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
regret that the Security Council was unable to adopt draft
resolution S/2019/961, presented by the humanitarian
troika, which was exclusively humanitarian in nature,
in order to renew the mechanism for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance across Syria’s borders. We
hope that negotiations can continue on the renewal of
the mechanism, because there is no alternative to it and
4 million people depend on it.

19-426483/11

S/PV.8697

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, given that this is the last meeting
that the State of Kuwait will be participating in for its
term on the Security Council, we would like to express
our appreciation to all the members of the Council
for their collaboration with us for the last two years
in our efforts to ensure that we are shouldering our
responsibility to help maintain international peace
and security We also wish every success to the five
incoming members — Estonia, Niger, Tunisia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and Viet Nam — elected to
a two-year term of office on the Council.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): The Dominican Republic voted in favour
of draft resolution S/2019/961, presented by the
humanitarian co-penholders for the 12-month renewal
of the cross-border mechanism in the Syrian Arab
Republic, on which millions of Syrians depend for their
survival. We were very sorry that the draft resolution
was not adopted. Exactly the same thing happened
exactly three months ago (see S/PV.8623), when a draft
resolution (S/2019/756) that sought to protect the civilian
population of Idlib from attacks and suffering was not
adopted either. We recognize the unstinting efforts of
Belgium, Germany and Kuwait to achieve unity in the
Council on a draft resolution that is essential to the
lives of millions of civilians. We share that aspiration
and worked actively for it. However, we believe that the
Council can still put the needs of the people who hope
for our assistance at the centre of our decisions, so we
reiterate our willingness to continue to seek a way out
of this regrettable situation.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
deeply regrets the fact that the draft resolution set out
by the humanitarian co-penholders and supported by
13 of the 15 members of the Security Council was not
adopted because Russia, followed by China, decided
to exercise its veto and to jeopardize the delivery of
international humanitarian aid to Syria and the survival
of millions of people. It is irresponsible and sinister.
Cross-border humanitarian assistance is of vital
importance for the four million Syrian people who
depend on it. Must we recall that today there is no
alternative to cross-border humanitarian assistance to
deliver vital assistance every day to the hundreds of
thousands of people in need in the regions concerned,
particularly Idlib, because the Syrian regime continues
to weaponize humanitarian assistance for political
purposes and to prevent all those who suffer and are in
need from having equal assistance.
4/11

20/12/2019

France calls on all members of the Security Council
to demonstrate unity and responsibility to pursue
dialogue to renew this vital mechanism, as requested
by the Secretary-General, humanitarian agencies and
the countries of the region. A renewal for only six
months would make no sense in terms of planning
humanitarian operations, which need predictability and
stability in order to be prepared and conducted in an
effective and long-lasting manner.
With respect to the border crossings, I recall
the crucial importance of Al-Yarubiyah, providing
a route for 40 per cent of the medicine required for
humanitarian operations in the north-east. The Iraqi
authorities are also in favour of keeping it open. We
are aware there are political and military issues at the
present stage of the conflict in Syria, but politicizing
and exploiting humanitarian aid must end. We must
not hold the Syrian people hostage and let us get back
to work.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Poland voted in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document S/2019/961
and we regret that we were unable to reach a consensus.
We voted in favour to express our strong support
for the renewal of the mechanism, which enables
humanitarian supplies to cross into Syria, provides
aid to those in urgent need and supports basic service
delivery. Without it, it would be impossible to ensure
lifesaving assistance for millions and reach those in
need. I would like to thank the Belgium, Germany and
Kuwait co-penholders for their tireless efforts during
the negotiations.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru shares the assessment and concern of the United
Nations regarding the serious humanitarian crisis
across much of Syrian territory, and we therefore
support all initiatives that contribute to protecting its
people. We thank the delegations of Germany, Belgium
and Kuwait, in their capacity as co-penholders for
humanitarian issues in Syria, for their tireless efforts
to reach a compromise that would be acceptable to all
members of the Security Council regarding the content
of the draft resolution (S/2019/961) that was submitted
for consideration this afternoon.
We also welcome the transparency and openness
that they brought to this complex negotiating process, in
which we constructively participated with the purpose
of preserving a system on which the lives of millions
of people depend. Peru’s actions on this item and other
19-42648

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

items on the agenda of the Security Council have been
aimed principally at protecting civilians in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Our approach,
which is reflected in the content and provisions of the
draft resolution, underpinned our vote in favour of it.
Consequently, Peru deeply regrets that we were
unable to adopt the draft resolution presented by the
co-penholders, which we view as balanced, timely and
essential. We reiterate the need for the Council, and
its permanent members in particular, to recover their
sense of unity on this very sensitive issue, which is vital
to meeting the heavy responsibilities entrusted to us.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
always attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Syria, supports the international
community in increasing humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian people and supports the active work of
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other international humanitarian agencies. China
has also provided Syria with food, medicine, education,
training, public services and other assistance through
multilateral and bilateral channels and is committed
to improving the humanitarian situation there and
reducing the suffering of the Syrian people.
Regarding the establishment of a Syrian crossborder humanitarian relief mechanism, China has had
consistent reservations. We have always advocated the
need for any operation to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned. The
Syrian Government has the primary responsibility
for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria and
we should prioritize the provision of humanitarian
assistance from within Syria. Cross-border humanitarian
relief is a special relief mechanism adopted in specific
circumstances. It should be evaluated in a timely
manner in light of the developments on the ground.
This mechanism must ultimately be adjusted.
In the meantime, cross-border humanitarian
operations should also strictly follow international
law and the United Nations guiding principles on
humanitarian relief, based on Security Council
resolutions. It is essential to strengthen overall
supervision and ensure fairness, neutrality, credibility
and increased transparency. Relevant relief operations
must be coordinated with the Syrian Government so as
to effectively prevent relief supplies from falling into
the hands of terrorist organizations or being diverted
for other purposes.

S/PV. 8697

China has been making active efforts to promote
consensus on the issue of cross-border humanitarian
relief in Syria among all parties. We regret that the
parties failed to reach agreement on the extension.
As a result of the aforementioned reasons, China was
compelled to vote against draft resolution S/2019/961.
Regarding the differences among parties on
Syrian humanitarian issue, they should be addressed
fundamentally through the Syrian political process. We
urge the parties to continuously strengthen mutual trust
and cooperation in order to jointly create conditions
favourable to the comprehensive political settlement of
the Syrian issue.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.
I am sitting here in a state of shock. The consequences
of the Russian Federation’s and China’s vetoes of draft
resolution S/2019/961 will be disastrous. This decision
is reckless, irresponsible and cruel. Right now in Syria,
4 million people depend on the United Nations crossborder assistance mechanism for medicine, shelter
and food. There is no justification imaginable for any
member of the Security Council leaving vulnerable
Syrian civilians with fewer means of securing vital aid.
Following today’s decision, we must not lose
sight of why the Syrian people need this cross-border
mechanism in the first place. The foundation and
undeniable fact of this matter is that Bashar Al-Assad
has chosen to starve his own people for years in order to
force them to submit to his rule. Every day, Damascus
fails to meet any Government’s basic responsibilities
to promote and protect the peace, prosperity and health
of its very own citizens. The regime’s choices and the
regime’s choices alone are why the United Nations,
humanitarian partners and the Security Council have
had to act in 2014 and in every year since to authorize
the United Nations to utilize four crossing points in
Syria for aid delivery to millions and millions in need.
The Security Council’s cross-border mechanism is
truly one of the most important issues that the Council
oversees every year because of its immediate and direct
impact. We can see with our very own eyes that the
mechanism saves untold Syrian lives every year. And
every year since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014),
we have put aside our political differences and voted,
even with a few Russian abstentions, to renew this
life-saving mechanism.

19-426485/11

S/PV.8697

The situation in the Middle East

The renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) has been
a testament to our shared values and our collective
commitment to millions of Syrians who rely on the
life-sustaining humanitarian aid delivered by the United
Nations. In providing for the sick and the hungry, we
have all overcome our political differences to show
the world that we are capable of doing the right thing.
Unfortunately, for the fourteenth time, the Russian
Federation has abandoned that commitment. We need to
be clear about the direct consequence of that decision.
The lives of millions of innocent Syrian civilians now
hang in the balance, at the height of winter. Russia’s and
China’s votes demonstrate a willingness to turn a blind
eye to the brutal conditions that the Al-Assad regime
continues to subject to its own people and signal that,
while professing to support resolution 2254 (2015),
Russia and China are openly facilitating the regime’s
pursuit of a military victory.
I now resume my function as President of
the Council.
I shall now put to vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2019/962, submitted by the
Russian Federation.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
China, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Russian
Federation, South Africa
Against:
Dominican Republic, France, Peru, Poland, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Belgium, Germany, Indonesia, Kuwait

20/12/2019

I would like to begin by thanking those members
that voted in favour of our draft resolution (S/2019/961).
If the quality of the Security Council’s work is to
be measured by the number of lives saved, then no
other resolution is as important as the cross-border
resolution. As we all know, it is thanks to that mandate
that 4 million people receive humanitarian assistance,
and that assistance accounts for 41 per cent of total
assistance provided to Syria. As co-penholder of the
Syrian humanitarian dossier, we conducted an inclusive
and transparent drafting process for over a month. We
arrived at a compromise text that is balanced, clean and
strictly humanitarian and reflects the various points of
view expressed in the Council.
Furthermore, the draft resolution on the renewal
of cross-border assistance, as proposed by the
co-penholders, accurately reflects the situation on
the ground in Syria. It responds to a humanitarian
situation that has not changed and remains devastating
for millions of Syrians. No Syrian actor is at present
in a position to provide humanitarian assistance to all
the outlying regions in the country where the needs
are greatest.
Today is a sad day for the Council and for the
Syrian people. As co-penholder, we shall continue to
pursue a solution that allows for the continuation of this
important mechanism. Millions of people depend on it,
but we cannot compromise on the essentials.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I echo the statement
made by the representative of Belgium. Today is a sad,
sorry and truly dreadful day for the people of Syria.
It is a day that I hope the Council will never repeat. I
would like to say once again to the Minister of Kuwait
how much we appreciate the effort that his delegation
put into this effort, and I am sorry that he should have
to be here to see the outcome.

I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.

The United Kingdom cast two votes today. We voted
for the first draft resolution (S/2019/961) because United
Nations cross-border assistance remains critical to the
4 million people who depend on it for the life-saving
aid that is as critical today as it has been every year
since 2014, when the resolution was first allowed to be
adopted, as it has been each year until now.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): We fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Germany on behalf
of the three co-penholders before the vote. Allow me to
provide a few additional remarks.

The Russian Federation and China gave no credible
explanation for their vetoes or for the cynical attempt
to score political points by presenting a second draft
resolution (S/2019/962) that halved the number of
crossings and halved the length of time. There is no

The President: The draft resolution received five
votes in favour, six against and four abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, having failed to
obtain the required number of votes.

6/11

19-42648

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

justification for that. Indeed, the Secretary-General
has said that we are seeing further deterioration of an
already extremely difficult humanitarian situation for
people throughout Syria, where over 11 million people
remain in need of assistance. No one therefore can
pretend that things are improving on the ground.
I listened very carefully to what the Russian
representative said, and I heard him say that his
delegation was motivated “exclusively by the
humanitarian aspects”. Even by known standards,
that statement is breathtaking in its hypocrisy. The
veto of the first draft resolution and the presentation
of the second are not acts that address humanitarian
concerns. They do not meet the formal written request
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) to the Council. They do not help the
millions of ordinary citizens in Syria whose lives are
now in jeopardy, and they certainly do not help the
United Nations or the cause of multilateralism. Now
the responsibility lies with the Syrian and Russian
authorities. It is they who will now be responsible for
the people whose lives hang in the balance. I hope that
the Russian taxpayers are feeling generous.
The United Kingdom voted against the Russian text
because we will not negotiate with a gun held to our
heads over a cynical offer that would save fewer lives
than we know is needed and that the United Nations has
very clearly set out as necessary. But it is important even
at this juncture to look ahead, given how many lives
remain at stake. The United Kingdom therefore hopes
that the Council can pass through this sorry episode and
return to discussions ready to identify a productive and
effective way through that meets OCHA’s needs before
10 January 2020, when the current mandate expires.
I have previously said in this Chamber that Russia
should not play dice with people’s lives. Four million
lives are at stake, and we need to keep that critical fact
before us as we try and sort out this dreadful mess.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): To be brief, I can only
echo what was said earlier by my Belgium and United
Kingdom colleagues. This is a very sad day for the
Syrian people and the Security Council. China and
Russia bear an enormous responsibility. We are going
into the holiday season now, and 4 million people in
Syria do not know if in the next year, after 10 January
2020, they will still receive food, be able to feed their
babies or get medicine.

S/PV. 8697

We went very far and received a lot of criticism.
There were questions as to why we did not put five
or four and why were we ready to do six plus six,
and so on. We were criticized a lot by many around
the table, but we were ready to compromise. We tried
to get everybody on board. My Russian colleague put
something on the table and said, “take it or leave it”. Is
that Russian diplomacy — not being ready to negotiate,
not giving anything and just saying “do it or not”? With
respect to his remark that it is not 4 million but only
1 million people who are suffering — what kind of
cynicism is that?
My Chinese colleague said very clearly that
China supports the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). OCHA asked for this.
It asked for more than what we offered. How can he be
against that? I again ask the representatives of Russia
and China to not let the people down. We are ready to
work hard to see to it that after 10 January 2020 there
will still be a possibility for those suffering people
to survive.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Our decision to vote
against draft resolution S/2019/962 was based on a
strong feeling that the unconstructive methods of
proceeding with such an important document are not
in line with the highest standards that the Security
Council should embody. The draft submitted by the
representative of Russia did not meet the conditions
necessary to provide lifesaving humanitarian assistance
to the people of Syria.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): My delegation is taking the
floor following the voting on draft resolutions S/2019/961
and S/2019/962, on the cross-border mechanism.
Indonesia voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2019/961, submitted by the co-penholders, since
the text is the result of in-depth efforts to find middle
ground for divergent positions among Security Council
members. The draft reflects compromise and ways to
address concerns that were raised. In that regard, we
thank the co-penholders for facilitating the process. We
also appreciate the efforts of Russia in submitting draft
resolution S/2019/962, on the renewal of the mechanism,
in the spirit of improving humanitarian assistance to
Syria. However, my delegation believes that the draft
was not exhaustively discussed by all Council members
and does not fully address the needs of the 4 million
people in need.

19-426487/11

S/PV.8697

The situation in the Middle East

My delegation deeply regrets that we have been
unable to agree on a solution today. As I mentioned
in my statements yesterday (see S/PV.8694) and this
morning (see S/PV.8696), civilian lives are at stake
and we are responsible for addressing this urgent issue
immediately. It is fair to say that we are all equally
unhappy. However, this is not about the happiness of
Council members. This is mainly about the lives of
4 million people in need of lifesaving humanitarian
assistance. I cannot offer a magic formula to resolve this
deadlock because we do not need one. What we need
as Council members is a simple formula that is based
on genuine dialogue, with pure humanitarian goals that
avoid the politicization of the issue. What we need is
a resolution that guarantees access for humanitarian
assistance — a simple resolution, a piece of paper that
contains a mandate for us to work for humankind.
Indonesia stands ready to actively support the
continuation of our common goal to save Syrian lives.
They are innocent, apolitical and in need of our genuine
help. This is not the end. We must continue to work
for the sake of the Syrian people. There should never
be an end to saving lives. I call upon all colleagues,
members of the Council, to continue to work on this
noble endeavour. The Syrian people need us all.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): South
Africa is extremely disappointed that the mandate
of the Syrian cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism could not be renewed today. During the
course of the negotiations, South Africa’s position
was and remains that we must ensure the renewal of
that lifesaving humanitarian assistance programme.
South Africa voted in favour of both draft resolutions
(S/2019/961 and S/2019/962) in an effort to accomplish
that goal, as lifesaving assistance to the people of Syria
remains critical.
Today’s
unfortunate
outcome,
or
rather
non-outcome, is an indictment of our failure to carry
out our responsibility as the Security Council. It once
again underscores the need for us to evaluate the
decision-making processes of the Council, particularly
the need for concurring votes of the permanent
members. We urge all parties to continue efforts and
consultations to ensure that the cross-border assistance
mandate is renewed before 10 January 2020.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
my earlier remarks, I set out China’s position on
draft resolution S/2019/961, concerning the Syrian
8/11

20/12/2019

humanitarian issue. I would like to underscore that
China firmly rejects the groundless accusations
levelled against it by the United States of America and
other countries. As is well known, China has always
been constructive and responsible in dialogue and
consultations. We have been calling on the parties
concerned to take proactive steps to build consensus.
Our concerns are entirely justified and legitimate.
Like the positions of any other country, our position
is indisputable. Our independent voting decisions are
made on the basis of our principled positions and are
not subject to accusations by any party.
The current situation in Syria is exactly the result
of erroneous action by certain countries. Therefore, it
is they who really should be reflecting on their own
actions and who should be called on to answer all the
questions before us. If they are genuinely concerned
about the Syrian people amd the humanitarian situation
in Syria, why did they not vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Russia? They have had every
opportunity to demonstrate and fulfil their commitment
to the Syrian people. That shows once again that they
are hypocritical in expressing their care or attention.
They are practicing typical double standards, which is
a concrete example of politicizing humanitarian issues.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are deeply disappointed with the vote
on draft resolution S/2019/962 on the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism. My British
colleague mentioned breathtaking hypocrisy, and I
concur with her. However, we have a different view as
to who was hypocritical in this situation. My German
colleague, as is now customary, attempted to lecture
us about diplomacy today and reproached us for an
unwillingness to compromise. We have already made
a significant compromise on the draft resolution but
for some reason that was not appreciated. We are
asked to make compromise after compromise, over
and over again, and essentially to return to the same
co-penholders’ text for draft resolution S/2019/961,
which was unacceptable to us in the first place. We
were frank about that right from the start, although for
some reason the co-penholders still did not believe it.
One could say that what we really observed
today were the double standards of the self-styled
humanitarian stewards of the welfare of the Syrian
people. We were willing to extend the mechanism
and, as many put it, to give our swift approval in the
interests of delivering assistance to Syrians in areas
19-42648

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

where that assistance was indeed essential. Meanwhile,
those colleagues of ours who constantly accuse Russia
of obstructing those efforts and speak of the lofty
standards and principles of humanism, have themselves
killed the mechanism, using arguments that can neither
be justified nor withstand criticism.
Let me ask the Council a rhetorical question. Who
won today? Nobody. Who lost? Those same Syrian
people about whom those who blocked our draft
resolution today assured us today of their unceasing
concern. We have already talked about the reasons for
our proposal to reduce the mandate for the cross-border
mechanism’s time frame and reduce the number of
crossing points. But the most important thing, which
I want to emphasize, is that we were willing to extend
the mechanism. No one should try to cover that up. Will
the Syrian people whom the humanitarian assistance is
intended for understand the point of our disagreements?
What difference does six months or 12 months mean to
them? We will not accept the reproaches we have heard
today. What are we being reproached for? Is it because
they did not accept our draft resolution extending the
cross-border mechanism? They have deprived the
Syrians of the cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism. Do not attempt to shift blame for that on us.
What will they tell the press when they leave the
Chamber today — that Russia killed the cross-border
mechanism? Or will they trumpet this story in their
media outlets? But how will they explain the fact
that they voted against the Russian draft resolution,
which provides for the extension of the provision of
humanitarian assistance to people in need in Syria
through the cross-border mechanism? Unfortunately,
it is clear to us that some of our partners pursue
not humanitarian but other goals while endlessly
politicizing the humanitarian arena, again and again.
Russia will continue to deliver humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian people and continue to work to rebuild
their country, which has been destroyed largely as a
result of foreign intervention.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Today the United States of America voted against
draft resolution S/2019/962, authored by the Russian
Federation, because it mocks our values and principles.
It defies the recommendations of the Secretary-General,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and international non-governmental

S/PV. 8697

organizations, and, most importantly, from the start it
has been a disingenuous attempt to prevent a life-saving
cross-border mechanism from functioning for Syrian
civilians. Russia’s goal today was simple. It wanted to
score political points. It was interested only in creating
a public spectacle and tarnishing the credibility of the
Security Council. For Russia, this was not about saving
Syrian lives. In truth, its text was never meant to be
a good-faith compromise. From the start, Russia took
a cynical, take-it-or-leave-it approach with regard to
its draft resolution. It failed today because failure is
the outcome Russia wanted on the issue of life-saving
humanitarian aid to Syria. Let the record clearly reflect
that fact. Russia proposed a draft resolution destined to
fail because it would rather see Syrian civilians starve
than disappoint Bashar Al-Assad.
The United States asked for five crossing points
to be authorized for 12 months. That position was
informed by our values, whereby we have an obligation
to the least fortunate of our brothers and sisters. We
wanted more United Nations aid going to more Syrians
through the most direct access routes available. OCHA
also supported the addition of a fifth crossing point
at Tel Abyad on the same humanitarian basis and
assessment of need. We fought hard to keep four of the
crossing points open with a view to ensuring greater
United Nations access for delivering much-needed aid.
Reluctantly, for the sake of maintaining a reasonable
amount of aid flows, we were willing to compromise to
authorize three crossing points for 12 months, but that
compromise was not enough for the Russian Federation
or for China.
The Russian Federation and China’s vetoes of the
co-penholders’ draft resolution (S/2019/961) show that
their engagement on that matter was never serious.
For them, it was never about saving lives or the United
Nations mechanism. To the members of the Council
who argue that the humanitarian situation in Syria
has changed and that the cross-border mandate should
reflect that change, I ask them today — will millions
of Syrians be fed by shutting off access to their only
source of food? Will sick women, men and children be
healed by shutting off access to their only source of
medicine? Those questions answer themselves.
What is not clear is how the Council’s mandate
to maintain peace and security will be advanced by
today’s vetoes. The Russians owe the Council, the
people of Syria and the international community that
explanation. We know that no credible answer will come

19-426489/11

S/PV.8697

The situation in the Middle East

from those who have chosen to deny aid to millions of
Syrians in need. The outcome of today’s vote is bitterly
disappointing, but I now want to speak directly to the
Syrian people. The United States remains committed
to them. We are committed to defending the voiceless,
feeding the hungry and ensuring that the displaced and
the orphaned receive the humanitarian aid that they
must have to survive. We are the largest humanitarian
donor in the world, providing $10.5 billion to the
Syrian people, and we will continue to support them.
We are proud of our principled stance on assisting
every Syrian in need. We will continue to shine a light
on those who choose not to help. Going forward, we
will do everything in our power to support principled
humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, I want to be absolutely clear. Yes,
today is a very sad day. However, today’s vote is not the
end of this conversation. We will continue to press for
a solution for the Syrian people. We will never cease
to defend those who find themselves without food or
medicine. And today we hold on to an unwavering hope
that a solution will be found for the Syrian people, who
need us today more than ever.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation once again regrets the
insistence of certain members of the Security Council,
notably the humanitarian co-penholders, on adopting
the unconstructive approach reflected in their draft
resolution S/2019/961, the content of which is a
departure from the stated humanitarian purposes.
Regrettably, they continue to take an unbalanced
approach to drafting and submitting such draft
resolutions, based on the brinkmanship deployed
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) every time it comes to renewing the
resolution on the cross-border mechanism. OCHA
officials manipulate data and statistics, ignoring the
flaws and negative aspects of those processes that
until this very today continue to lead to assistance
falling into the hands of armed terrorist groups and
to not reaching those who need it. That is the current
situation in Idlib and in its surrounding area, controlled
by the terrorist Al-Nusra Front group. The survival of
the Al-Nusra Front actually depends on the support of
10/11

20/12/2019

the Turkish regime, which commits aggression, and on
controlling the humanitarian assistance delivered from
the Turkish territory.
The behaviour of the co-penholders is a dangerous
and unprecedented departure from reality. They have
bent to the will and pressure of the Turkish regime. In
the first version of draft resolution S/2019/961, they
attempted to add a new border crossing, which would
have been used, of course, to support the objectives of
the military aggression of the Turkish regime against
my country.
In more explicit terms, I affirm that the terrorist
Turkish regime — an aggressor that has facilitated
the entry of foreign terrorist fighters into Syria and
continues to direct and support the criminal activities
of the terrorist Al-Nusra Front in Idlib — wants the
United Nations pay today for the damage incurred by
its aggression in north-eastern Syria. That is one of the
many examples of the erratic behaviour of sponsors of
this draft resolution.
We ask their delegations the following questions.
If they claim to be concerned about helping the Syrian
people, why have they remained silent and turned a
blind eye to the pillaging of the gas and oil wells in
Syria? Why are they ignoring their occupation by
American forces? Those who wish to help the people
of Syria must be honest, show courage and demand that
the Syrians be allowed to reclaim the resources that the
terrorists and the so-called international coalition have
pillaged and destroyed.
My Government rejects draft resolution S/2019/961,
submitted by the humanitarian co-penholders, in its
entirety, owing to its fundamental flaws in both form
and substance. We explained its shortcomings in a
letter dated 15 December, addressed by the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs to Mr. Mark Lowcock, and
in a letter dated yesterday, addressed by the Permanent
Mission of my country to the Secretary-General and
the President of the Security Council in response to the
sixty-fourth report on the humanitarian issue in Syria
(S/2019/949), as well as in the statement we delivered at
yesterday’s Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8694).
For us, it is important to underscore the fact that
the focal point for taking humanitarian action in
Syria is the capital, Damascus, in accordance with the
fundamental principle underlying respect for national
sovereignty. Anything else would simply be an example
of a new, pathetic attempt to compromise Syria’s
19-42648

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

national sovereignty and undermine the political status
of the State of Syria.
We call on Member States that are committed
to respecting international law and maintaining
international peace and security to keep the humanitarian
issue sheltered from politicization. We also call on them
to support the role and status of the Syrian Government
as the main and true partner on humanitarian and
development issues. We call on all Member States to
reject the political conditions and dictates imposed
by certain Governments to hamper efforts to rebuild,
recover and return displaced persons. Above all, we
call on Council members, especially the co-penholders,
to immediately lift the coercive unilateral measures
imposed on the people of Syria. Such measures amount
to collective punishment, the negative consequences of
which belie the claims of those imposing them that they
seek to serve the interests and well-being of the people.
My Government thanks all who helped to prevent
the adoption of draft resolution S/2019/961, presented
by the humanitarian co-penholders, for the sake of
safeguarding the principles of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, chief among which
is respect for the sovereignty of States and the rules
governing humanitarian action.
In conclusion, I remind everyone in this Chamber,
without exception, that ending the humanitarian
repercussions imposed on my country by terrorism,
as well as support for the political process under
way, requires a different approach that goes beyond
humanitarian assistance, enables the lifting of
restrictions imposed on the Syrian Arab Republic and
facilitates genuine reconstruction and relief efforts in
the economic, industrial, agricultural, investment and
service sectors. It is nothing other than unadulterated
hypocrisy for certain people to come to the Council
and talk about the humanitarian crisis in Syria while
their policies of collective punishment, blockade and
military occupation run contrary the interests of the
Syrian people
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be brief. I
have a practice in this Chamber of stepping in when

S/PV. 8697

I see criticism of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to defend the humanitarian
wing of the United Nations, the members of which
care far more about the Syrian people than their own
Government and are working in extraordinarily difficult
circumstances to save lives. I think that it behoves all of
us to pay tribute to them for that.
The President: Regardless of the outcomes of the
votes today, it is clear that there is a commitment from
the Security Council to help the Syrian people and to
save lives. The presidency will work closely with the
co-penholders to ensure that negotiations continue over
the coming days and that we find a solution that we can
all support.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of December, I would like to express my
sincere appreciation of the delegation of the United
States to the members of the Council, especially my
colleagues the Permanent Representatives, their teams
and the secretariat of the Council for all of the support
it has given us.
At the beginning of the month, I said that the
theme of our presidency was to look ahead to 2020 and
to think about what we should be doing as a Council
to make the world a better place. I appreciate my
colleagues work to do just that, and we look forward to
a new year filled with potential within the Council. But
we could not do any of our work without the hard work,
support and positive contributions of every delegation
and representatives of the Secretariat, including the
conference service officers, interpreters, verbatim
reporters and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on
behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of
Viet Nam good luck in the month of January. I would
like, on behalf of the Council, to express our sincere
appreciation to the five outgoing members: Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland.
Over the course of the past two years, they and their
teams have become part of the Security Council family.
Their presence and positive contributions during their
terms on the Security Council are noteworthy, and they
will be missed.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

19-4264811/11
