THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

t11

MEETING:

1 FEBRUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2195) . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . , , . . . , . , . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . .. . . . . .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Chargk d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Malawi to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13764) . . . . . . . . . . . . . a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.2195

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srlpplments
of the O&icrl Reco~fs of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutinm
rrrlti
Decisiorzs of the Security Corrncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2195th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President: Mr. Peter FLORIN
(German Democratic Republic).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional

Adoption of the agenda

2.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Malawi to the United Nations addressed to
the President ofthe Security Council (S/13764)

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
.fiom Russian):
Since this is the first official meeting of the Security
Council in February, I should like, on behalf of the
members of the Council, to pay a tribute to the representative of France, Mr. Jacques Leprette, for his
tireless efforts, his great diplomatic skill and his innate
French courtesy with which he guided the work of the
Security Council during the month of January. I am
sure that these words express the feeelings of all
the members of the Security Council.
Adoption of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Malawi
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13764)
The PRESIDENT

1980, at 3 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaorli
(Algeria), Mr. Tlorr (Botswcrnn),
Mr.
Rotr Kowi
(Cuba), Mr. Ahdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Dennis (Liberia), Mr. Muwmnhn (Mnlnwi), Mr. Monteiao (Mozntnbique), Mr. Ahubakar (Nigeria), Mr. Shnrf (Somalia), Mr. Mkapa [United Republic of Tamnnia),
Mrs. Nguyetl Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam), Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kamarlda wa Kumanda (Zaire)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2195)

1.

2.

1 February

(intrrpretatiorz

from

RL/ss~uI?):

Jn accordance with the decisions taken at the 2192nd
to 2194th meetings, I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Liberia, Malawi,
Mozambique,
Nigeria, Somalia, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia and Zaire to
Participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fi’0117 Russian):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Ghana, Kenya and Uganda in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sekyi(Ghalza),
Mr. Mailla (Kenya) and Mr. Wapenvi (Uganda) took
the places reserved for them at the sjde of the Council
chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT
(i/ltL~,~~,‘etation fro177
Russian);
I should like to inform the members of the Security
Council that I have received a letter dated 1 February
1980 from the representatives of the Niger, Tunisia
and Zambia, which states:
“We, the undersigned, members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that the Security Council, pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, extend an invitation to Mr. Callistus Ndlovu, representative of the Patriotic Front
of Zimbabwe, to participate
in the consideration
of the item ‘Question concerning the situation in
Southern Rhodesia’ ” [S/ 137761.
If there is no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Ndlovu pursuant
to rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.

5. Mr. AHSAN (Bangladesh): Mr. President, I should
like at the outset to express our warm congratulations
on your accession to the presidency of the Council

with a view to attaining the fundamental
to which all of us are committed.

for this month. We do this particularly because of the
close and cordial relations that exist between our two
countries. I am confident that under your experienced
and capable leadership our work will be conducted
with efficiency and purpose. I also take this opportunity
to extend our grateful thanks to Mr. Leprette, the
representative
of France, who conducted our affairs
with so much skill and dispatch during the difficult
month of January.

objectives

I 1. The PRESIDENT
(inteI.pretcrtion.~um
Rrrsshu):
The next speaker is the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Usman Abubakar. I welcome
him here, and invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

t
!
I

12. Mr. ABUBAKAR
(Nigeria):
Mr. President,
I should like to begin by congratulating you on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council.
I want most sincerely to thank you for giving me this
opportunity
to participate in this important debate of
the Council on the situation in Southern Rhodesia. ,
The period between now and independence in Zim- j
babwe is so critical that the Council must act quickly !
to save the British colonial authorities from them- !
selves. Otherwise, the mechanism so carefully pre- 1
pared to safeguard the conduct of fair and free elec- ?
tions prior to the independence of Zimbabwe will be 1
irreparably damaged through flagrant violations of the ;
Lancaster House Agreement* by Governor Soames
and his interim Administration.

6. The Security Council has been seized of the
question of Southern Rhodesia for a very long time
indeed. It has consistently sought to further the cause
of decolonization
in that Territory and the emergence
of a sovereign independent State. The Council, therefore, exercises a particular responsibility
over the
course of events in that troubled Territory.
7. Only a short while ago [2181sl mecli,lg],
the
Council had occasion to welcome the Lancaster House
Agreement’ as a historic pledge of peace. The Agreement marked the beginning
of a process which,
through the commitment
of all concerned parties to a
new Constitution,
a cease-fire and elections, would
lead to free and unfettered exercise by the people of
Zimbabwe of their inalienable right to self-determination, freedom and independence. Advances were real
and opportunities
gave hope of realization.
Legality
in Rhodesia was restored and the inevitability
of
genuine majority rule recognized.

13. The last debate on the situation in Southern
Rhodesia [ihitl.], in which Nigeria had the privilege of
participating
as a member of the Security Council,
was significant in many respects. While it left the
verdict to history concerning the claim of Her
Majesty’s Government to be a miracle worker which
single-handedly
resolved the entire question of the
rebellion in Southern Rhodesia at the Lancaster House ;
Conference, the Security Council did not fail to spotlight the underlying
problems which the British i
colonial authorities would have to address once the I
colony returned to legality if the Lancaster House ’
Agreement was to be implemented objectively.

8. No one has done more to bring this process into
being than the valiant people of Zimbabwe under the
dedicated leadership of the Patriotic Front. It was
through their struggle and sacrifice that the promise
of a peaceful and democratic change in that troubled
country finally took shape, It is only natural, therefore, that they, as well as the members of the world
community
which extended to them full support
throughout, should be genuinely concerned that what
was gained in the battlefield might be lost, and the
Patriotic Front put at a clear disadvantage ~%ir-r~is
other contending parties in the elections.

14. The first problem was the intense suspicion that
existed in the minds of the Africans about Britain’s
motives and intentions. The rebellion in Southern
Rhodesia lasted 14 years. It led to the senseless killing
of more than 20,000 Zimbabweans and the wanton
destruction
of countless lives and’ property in the
neighbouring countries. Throughout the period of the
rebellion, not only did the administering Power, which
had the primary responsibility
of putting down the
rebellion,
pursue pussy-footing policies of improvisation and collusion with the upartheicl
rbgime of
South Africa, but,‘as the London Sundcry ~‘~/?Ics of
27 January
1980 revealed, the United Kingdom
Government
literally condoned the breaching of the
mandatory sanctions that were imposed by the Security
Council against the rebel rkgime. That Sundrr~ Ti111es
article, in exposing the perfidious and cavalier manner
in which the British authorities dealt, for instance,
with the Bingham report,2 cited annex III of that report,
on evidence of criminal offences, which listed more
than 300 directors of Shell and British Petroleum
as
we11 as several senior officials of the British Foreign
Office who contravened the sanctions order. To

9. My delegation views with deep regret the provocations that have taken place in Rhodesia, which violate
the Lancaster House Agreement
and prevent its
faithful implementation.
The continued presence of
troops and mercenaries of the racist South African
to genuine majority rule
rCgime, whose opposition
needs no elaboration, cannot but cause my delegation
serious apprehension.
We condemn South Africa’s
continued
interference
in Southern Rhodesia. We
believe that the Council is charged with specific
responsibility
to call for prompt and adequate remedial
action. Crucial responsibility
in this context also
devolves upon the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, fully and impartially
to implement the
Agreement,
10. Finally,
we believe that, in spite of serious
provocations,
there exists a basic consensus that the
Council should continue to play a constructive role
2

by the British authorities. Paragraph 3 of the statement
by the Chairman of the Conference on 11 December
1979 says that “there can be no question of surrender
by either side”. How then can Lord Soames allow the
so-called Rhodesian forces to retain their arms and
to behave as if they were still in rebellion against the
British Government and at the same time aver that the
13 freedom fighters of the Patriotic Front were killed
in cold blood because they refused to surrender to the
Rhodesian forces, their inveterate enemies?

compound British perfidy on the matter, the United
Kingdom Government
recently announced that its
Dirkctor of Public Prosecutions
would no longer
prosecute anyone connected with that shameful traffic
and the proven violations of the decisions of the
Security Council. Given this background of suspicion
and lack of trust, the British Governor, Lord Soames,
not only should have been fair in the performance
of his functions, but should have been seen to be fair.
15. The second problem was the implementation
of
the Lancaster House Agreement itself. Everything
hinged on faithful respect for the spirit and letter of
the Agreement. Annex E of the report of the ConRhodesia,
stitutional
Conference
on Southern
published in Her Majesty’s Stationery Office document Cmnd. 7802,’ stipulated the terms and conditions of the cease-fire agreement.

19. Bernard Shaw once observed with characteristic
Irish wit that the English are moral only when they
are uncomfortable.
I was therefore not surprised to
hear the British representative admit that Lord Soames
had assigned an independent
role to the so-called
auxiliaries and at the same time confirm that “The
auxiliaries are part of the Rhodesian forces and were
declared as such at Lancaster
House”.
[Ihid.,

16. The main difficulties, to which the representative
of the United Kingdom referred in his statement of
30 January [2192ncl rneetir?g], in the way of effective
observance of the cease-fire were self-evident. No
one expected that the violence and disruptions of a
IO-year war could be turned off like water from a
spigot; hence the various arrangements, mechanisms,
commissions and undertakings
provided for in the
Agreement. The statements of the Chairman of the
Lancaster House Conference made on 11 and 15 December 1979’ were equally pertinent. A primordial
condition of the cease-fire was prescribed in annex E,
paragraph 1 of the Agreement:
“This agreement”
-that is, the cease-fire agreement-“will
take effect
on a basis of strict reciprocity’“.
Nowhere in the
British representative’s interesting statement was there
any indication that Lord Soames had scrupulously
abided by this essential condition of reciprocity or of
equal treatment of all the forces that complied with the
cease-fire agreement, nor did he say that Lord Soames
was treating the Patriotic Front forces that are now
complying with his directions as honourably and as
lawfully as the Rhodesian forces that have accepted
his authority.

ptrrri. 51.1

20. The auxiliaries are a band of bandits that should
have been disbanded long before the cease-fire agreement was signed. It is inadmissible
that they should
be officially deployed purportedly
to help the police
to contain breaches of the cease-fire or let loose in the
rural’areas to terrorize and intimidate people at will.
They are being encouraged to create dangerous
conditions, which now make the projected free and fair
elections impossible. It is insensate to argue that
In many important
ways, the auxiliaries’
activities
are increasingly
related to the reestablishment of civilian administration
in the tribal
trust lands where they are engaged in attempts to
promote the inhabitants’
return to normal life”.
[lhid., pcrrcr. 52.1
“

**.

Nothing

could be farther from the truth.

21. I do not want my statement to be seen as an
angry rebuttal of what the British representative
told
the Council, but I must say that he went too far in
trying to justify the presence of South African troops
in Southern Rhodesia and in playing up the so-called
.concessions made by Bishop Muzorewa
and the
illegal rhgime of the rebel, racist white settlers at the
Lancaster House Conference. Muzorewa and Smith
were part of the British colonial disease in Rhodesia.
Had they produced the cure or any answer to the
problem, there would not have been any need for the
Lancaster House Conference. They personified the
rebellion and illegality in that Crown Colony. They did
not therefore make any concessions. History denied
them that privilege. The victories of the Patriotic
Front forces on the battlefield denied them that right.
The British authorities in their realism saw to it that
Muzorewa and Smith were in no position to make
concessions, Indeed, Smith should have been arrested
and hanged in the Tower of London as a traitor and
mass murderer.

17. Instead, contrary to the cease-fire agreement,
Lord Soames has not only failed to confine the former
illegal rigime’s
so-called Rhodesian forces to their
bases, but he has also deliberately been deploying
them officially and permitting
them to undertake
random operational
duties that both threaten the
security of the Patriotic Front forces and jeopardize
the maintenance of the cease-fire. But for the maturity
and sense of honour of the Patriotic Front forces
that have led almost 22,000 of their men to assemble
in their less than sufficient designated areas, there
would not be any cease-fire to speak of today.
18. The brutal murder of seven members of the
Patriotic Front forces at Lupane three weeks ago and
of six others on their way to assembly points by the
so-called Rhodesian forces is yet further proof of the
flagrant violation , ,~I
of the Lancaster House Agreement
3

22. The Smith-Muzorewa
tragic collusion
with
South Africa in the rebellion
against the British
Crown in open defiance of African and world public
opinion ought not to be used as a reason for tolerating
the presence of South African troops anywhere in
Southern Rhodesia. It is duplicitous to say that South
African troops are in Southern Rhodesia to protect
a vital lifeline. What lifeline, I ask? Is the Beit Bridge
more vital than were the thousands of lives that South
African forces have destroyed in Zimbabwe in the
past 14 years? Is it more vital than the economic and
social life of the entire country and of the neighbouring
countries which South African troops have dislocated?
23. The question of the presence of South African
troops and mercenaries in Southern Rhodesia is not
yet behind us. This may be unfortunate, but it is true.
The withdrawal of one or two companies of South
African troops from Beit Bridge will not change anything. Her Majesty’s Government
must honour its
commitment
to expel all South African troops and
mercenaries from Southern Rhodesia. It is common
knowledge that there are thousands and thousands
of South African troops in the country in gross violation of the Lancaster House Agreement. According
to knowledgeable
Western press sources, there are
more than 5,000 South African airmen and regular
soldiers at the moment in Southern Rhodesia serving
as distinct units or fully integrated into the rebel
defence and security forces. There are South African
parachute battalions at Rutenga and Chirundu. There
are South African air force personnel flying the Mirage
jets, helicopters and light aircraft that the illegal regime
acquired just before the Agreement was negotiated.
All these must be expelled, as no self-respecting
African will accept a government installed on the
sufferance of South African armed forces.
24. Nigeria does not see the role of the United Kingdom in Southern Rhodesia as that of an impartial
referee. We see it as a role of leadership, of a colonial
Power determined,
with the support of the entire
international
community,
to discharge its obligations
to all the people of Rhodesia, black and white. The
new British Administration
should take the lead, the
initiative,
in creating the requisite conditions and
climate of reconciliation
and normalcy. It should
encourage constructive
developments,
such as the
one reported by Mr. Jay Ross in The Washington
Post of 31, January 1980, according to which the
Patriotic Front guerrillas and the Rhodesian police now
carry out joint patrols, even without the assistance of
the monitoring
forces, to escort groups of Patriotic
Front supporters to their assembly camps. The British
authorities,
particularly
Governor Soames, should
open and improve communication
lines with the
leadership of the Patriotic Front. In this connection,
I fully agree with Mr. Paul E. Tsongas, United States
Senator from Massachusetts,
who suggested after
his recent visit to Southern Rhodesia and other African
countries, including Nigeria, that a policy of frequent,
direct and regular contact between Governor Soames

and the political parties, particularly
the Patriotic
Front, would remove most of the deep-seated suspicion which taints the work of the Governor at present,
25. In the view of Nigeria, and I am glad to say that
it is a view shared by the rest of Africa, it was an
error of judgement on the part of Governor Soames to
extend the state of emergency for another period of
six months at a time when his preoccupation should
have been the restoration of peace, tranquillity, trust
and civil rule. Once the cease-fire came into being,
the level of violence was bound to decrease progressively. In any case, he did not require a state
of emergency
and martial law to make suitable
arrangements for polling stations or to provide reception centres for refugees. Nigeria has some notable
experience in resettling refugees after a civil war and
in organizing elections. We are therefore not talking
through our hats.
26. The obstacles put in the way of the return of the
Patriotic
Front leaders, particularly
Mr. Robert
Mugabe, were both unnecessary and provocative.
That both Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe returned
to Zimbabwe to unprecedented tumultuous welcomes,
the biggest crowds Rhodesia has ever seen, should
settle once and for all the attempts to embarrass
them. It should also settle the issue of who are the
true leaders of the Zimbabwean people.
27. The humanitarian
nature of the question of
refugees is too wrenching to tolerate bureaucratic
trickery. After years of homelessness, the refugees
want to return without let or hindrance. Furthermore,
as provided in paragraph 11 of the cease-fire arrangements,’ adequate provision must now be made to
permit the return of civilian personnel to Rhodesia
during the cease-fire in order to vote or to engage in
other peaceful political activity. In a press statement
issued on 25 January 1980, the Office of the President
of the Republic of Botswana called attention to some
mamnuvres that are making it difficult, if not impossible, for Zimbabwean refugees in neighbouring countries to return to their country to participate in the
forthcoming
elections. Good sense demands that the
British authorities address this issue forthrightly and
urgently.
28. It is a measure of the continued commitment Of
Africa to the ideals of the United Nations and to
peace, freedom and independence in southern Africa
that my colleagues and I have been given a mandate
by the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) to bring
the question of Southern Rhodesia to the Security
Council,
barely five weeks after the Council had
considered
it at the instance of the administering
Power and the African States. We called then, as we
do again today, only for even-handedness and fair play
on the part of the Government of the United Kingdom.
We call upon it to honour the letter and spirit of the
Lancaster House Agreement, of which it was a major
architect.

29. The Patriotic Front leaders, who sacrificed their
lives and wherewithal through 10 years of relentless
warfare, who through their victories made the Agreement possible and who love their country and the
independence for which they have been fighting,
want to implement
faithfully the Lancaster House
Agreement. The African countries, particularly
the
front-line States, which have invested too much energy
and too many resources in the struggle, do not want to
see the fruits of that struggle being stolen through
trickery and deceit. They therefore demand full
respect for the Agreement. The international
community deserves the grateful thanks of Africa for the
sacrifices it made as a result of the sanctions decreed
by the Security Council and for the moral, political
and material support which it always gave to the freedom fighters. It must therefore remain vigilant to
ensure that the cause of freedom and independence
in Rhodesia, which it has always supported, is not
subverted when its goal is so close to being reached.
It must insist on full implementation
of the Agreement. The Commonwealth of Nations, which all along
was most soIicitous in its concern for peace and independence in Rhodesia, and which at its last Meeting
of Heads of Government, held at Lusaka from 1 to
7 August 1979, persuaded the United Kingdom
Government to abandon the lost cause of Smith and
Muzorewa, must feel very disappointed at the present
turn of events. It must therefore be anxious to see to
it that the letter and spirit of the Lancaster House
Agreement are honoured scrupulously.

33. Tunisia
has been following
with particular
interest the situation obtaining in southern Africa,
in particular as a result of the conclusion of the
Lancaster House Agreement’
on the establishment
of a free and independent Zimbabwe.
34. My delegation had hoped that Africa, at the
beginning of this year 1980, would have a period of
peace that would promote the solution of one of the
thorniest problems still facing the southern part of that
continent. To our regret, the recent developments
in the situation in Southern Rhodesia have dampened
our enthusiasm and dashed our hopes.
35. To our mind, the implementation
of the Lancaster
House Agreement and strict compliance with all the
clauses contained in it were inevitably to lead Zimbabwe to independence,
with a genuine majority
Government. Because it was convinced that the Agreement would lead to free and fair elections in Southern
Rhodesia, and anxious to show its good will, the
African community associated itself with the Security
Council’s decision to dissolve the Committee the Council had created to monitor the application of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia.
36. The administering
Power is entrusted
with
ensuring the strict and complete implementation
of the
various provisions of the Agreement, in accordance
with the recommendation
contained in paragraph 6
of Security Council resolution 460 (1979). But the way
in which the first phase of the electoral process has
been taking place is a clear indication of the disquieting
turn of events in that part of southern Africa.

30. We live in troubled times, Crisis keeps piling on
crisis. When the solution of one crisis is at hand, it
would be an unforgivable folly to allow that crisis to
blow up in our face, Nigeria is commited to supporting
and honouring the Lancaster House Agreement. We
pledge to recognize and honour the Government
of
an independent Zimbabwe chosen under it, provided
of course that the elections leading to the formation
of such a Government are free and fair.
31,

37. In saying that, my delegation certainly does not
intend to minimize the importance of the Lancaster
House Agreement, the conclusion of which aroused
great hopes throughout the world, and particularly
in Africa, For its part, Tunisia, faithful to its philosophy of decolonization,
has always advocated-alongside the armed struggle for freedom and independence-negotiation
and dialogue with the colonizing
Power every time the latter agreed to it. Hence, at the
appropriate
time we voiced our satisfaction at the
laudable efforts made by the British Government
to
secure at the Lancaster House Conference an agreement acceptable to all the parties, thereby offering a
framework for a peaceful solution of the Rhodesian
problem and re-establishing
the United Kingdom’s
primary responsibility
in the decolonization
of Zimbabwe. We should like to take this opportunity to pay
a tribute to the Patriotic Front for its courageous and
important contribution
to the success of that Conference and for the great maturity and spirit of conciliation it demonstrated.

Mr.

ESSAAFI
(Tunisia) (interpretation
)‘0/?7
Mr. President, I should like first of all to
offer you my heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. The German Democratic Republic and Tunisia
have always enjoyed close relations of friendship and
fruitful co-operation.
Although you are new to this
body, you are well known to everyone. Aware as
l am of your thorough experience of the United
Nations, 1 am convinced that you will direct our work
with great competence.

Fre~rch):

32. I should like also to congratulate my colleague,
Mr. Leprette, on the remarkable efforts he made and
the exemplary way in which he conducted the work of
the Council in a very difficult period during which
we had to consider various and delicate events. My
delegation pays a tribute to him for his exceptional
qualities of competence, wisdom and diplomacy.

38. While we welcome the implementation
of the
process of the return to legality in Rhodesia, following
the United Kingdom’s formal agreement to assume its
historic responsibilities
in respect of the people of
Zimbabwe, we have been deeply concerned about the
5

numerous
Lancaster
,committed.

,Mr. .Leprette,
whose presidency of the Security
Council ended less than 24,hours ago, for the splendid
way in which he steered the business of the Council
during a month of crisis.
I 1 I”.
‘,,.(.‘i 1
44.. Today the issue before us is one of deco.lonization
and the rights of a troubled people to full independence
and .sovereignty and to determine for themselives their
form of government and their future. Those:are!principles which are enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and to which we are fully committed.
It is
regrettable that, long after the colonial era has ended
in other parts of the world, there is still an important
area where the process of decolonization
is not yet
complete. We cannot and should not remain indifferent
until all the last vestiges of colonization have been
erased everywhere.

violations of the letter and spirit of the
House Agreement that have recently been

39. The presence of South African .troops in Rhodesia contradicts the assurances given by the administering Power that no South African troops would
remain in Rhodesia during the electoral campaign
period. The presence of these trpops, which the
Africans view with legitimate conde,mnation and deep
suspicion, not only stands in the way of the normal
implementation
of the various phases of the electora
process, but also constitutes a threat to peace and
security in the region. It is therefore urgent, indeed
imperative,
to withdraw them from Rhodesia. In that
regard, the announcement made by the representative
of the United Kingdom
that South African troops
would be withdrawn from Beit Bridge is a step in the
right direction. We hope that it will be followed by
others, so that the provisions of the Lancaster House
Agreement
can be strictly and completely
implemented.

45. The Philippines belongs to a group of countries
which achieved their independence in the first wave
of the decolonization process. Our salutary experience
in that process obliges us to abide by a policy of
commitment,
which we have consistently and unwaveringly maintained, to uphold the inalienable rights
of colonized peoples to their independence and sovereignty in the United Nations, which provides the best
opportunity to pursue that end by peaceful means.’ In
this connection, we believe that the United Nations
has largely lived up to the role envisaged for it by
its founders of accelerating the peaceful decolonization
of all subject peoples. The adoption of resolution 1514
(XV) in 1960, which contains the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, has served as the principal impetus towards
that end.

40. By contributing
to the preparations for general,
,free, just and democratic elections, the United Kingdom would be fully and honourably discharging the
mission entrusted to it under the Agreement. It would
be faithful to itself by ensuring that these elections
were free and impartial and capable of gaining the
confidence of the electorate. To that end, it is necessary to facilitate and organize, in conditions of complete security, the return of refugees and exiled persons, to proceed to the liberation of all the political
prisoners, and to put an end to the deployment of
Rhodesian forces, confining them to their bases. It is
only in those conditions that the Agreement will be
.crowned with success.

46. Once again the Council is seized of the question
of the situation in Southern Rhodesia where the process
of decolonization
has been slowed down, if not
arrested. It may be recalled that on 11 November
1965, the Philippines and 21 other countries brought
to the Security Council’s attention what we considered
to be “the grave situation in Rhodesia arising out of
the unilateral declaration of independence by the white
minority Government”
[S/6903], in our belief that the
collective action of the international community
was
needed to avert what could become a grave threat to
international
peace and security.

41. In conclusion,
my delegation voices the hope
that the British Government
will show wisdom,
moderation and its traditional sense of fair play in the
implementation
of the Lancaster House Agreement
and ,that it will assume its historic responsibility
to
the last-that
is, until the birth of a truly independent
nation of Zimbabwe,
led by a genuine majority
Government.
42. We express the hope also that the struggle waged
by the people of Zimbabwe, under the heroic and
perspicacious
leadership of the Patriotic Front, will
result in the concrete fulfilment
of the legitimate
aspirations of the African peoples to freedom and
dignity.

47. It was an initiative that my country did not take
in isolation, for we had also taken similar initiatives
with respect to that region of Africa, in recognition
of the fact that the problem of Rhodesia was part of
a larger problem in the whole of southern Africa which
included that of Namibia and of rrpcrrrheid in South
Africa.

43. Mr. YANG0
(Philippines):
To begin with,
,I should like to congratulate the representative of the
German Democratic Republic, Mr. Peter Florin, as
he assumes the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February and to offer him our wholehearted co-operation in the tasks that lie ahead. I should
also Iike to use this occasion to express my delegation’s
deep appreciation
to the representative
of France,

48. My delegation is keenly disappointed
that the
threat to international peace and security that made
us join in the initiative in 1965 has not as yet been
averted; regrettably, we are still faced with the same
question. This does not mean that nothing has been
6

accomplished
since 1965 when the Council adopted
resolution
216 c1965), condemning
the unilateral
declaration
of independence
made by the racist
minority in Southern Rhodesia. Indeed, there have
been many attempts to reach a solution by all the
parties .concerned and by the international
community::In
this connection, we should like to pay a
tribute to the initiatives taken by representatives of
the United States of America, of the United Kingdom
and of the black peoples themselves-those
of the
front-line States of Angola, Mozambique, Zambia, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Botswana, for
example-and,
more particularly,
by the representatives of the Patriotic Front to bring this problem off
the battlefields and to the conference table. This was
clearly evident in various international conferences of
recent years, such as those held at Lagos, Dakar,
Havana, Lusaka, Oslo and, most recently, London.

from returning to their homes. Plainly, if all that is
true, the conditions for free and fair elections, which
are required by the Lancaster House Agreement, do
not yet exist.
51. It would indeed be a pity if the Lancaster ‘House
Agreement, the result of so much painful effort after
so many years of suffering on the part of all the peoples
in that region, were to come to nought. For the sake
of those peoples, we must ourselves exert all efforts
to see to it that the Agreement signed in London on
21 December 1979, which all concerned considered a
workable instrument,
becomes in fact a working
arrangement that will produce genuine majority rule
in Zimbabwe. It can be made to work only if all the
parties without exception are made to abide by Its
provisions.
52. In the view of my delegation, the situation in
Zimbabwe with respect to the Lancaster House Agreement is not a simple return to colonial rule. We believe.
that the administering Power’s mandate is to administer the Agreement. By that, it has been invited to
supervise a peaceful transition to independence and
genuine majority rule by means of an election process
in which all the people of Zimbabwe can freely and
fully participate. Clearly, the act of transition and,
therefore, the success of the Agreement, are premised
on the recognition of the people themselves that they
have achieved their aim through unhindered participation. Thus the success of the whole exercise rests,
as my delegation sees it, on the perceptions of the
people themselves that the necessary conditions exist
for free and fair elections according to the stipulations
of the Agreement. It is therefore in the interest of all
concerned that the people of Zimbabwe should feel
convinced that this exercise will be conducted in an
equitable manner, for it is they alone who will inherit
the fruits of either failure or success.
53. We are compelled to say this because sometimes
there exists a wide gulf between the thoughts and
perceptions of ruling authorities and those of the people they presume to rule, and large differences between
what authorities recognize to be their responsibilities
and what they are obliged to do and what the people
themselves believe is happening
to them. Under
normal circumstances, it should not be too difficult to
bridge such gaps by regular consultations,
but in the
hostile atmosphere of war, it is most difficult to dispel
all suspicion about the intentions of the other parties.
Where the administering Power is deemed traditionally
to be associated with one of the parties, it is not easy
to avoid doubts as to its impartiality.
Hence, like
Caesar’s wife, it must be above suspicion. There have
been too many instances in history when the best of
intentions have become frustrated in resolving disputes, because the judge or referee becomes a party
to the dispute and impartiality
is thrown ‘into doubt.
My country is not a stranger to this travesty of human
rights in our long subjugation under colonial rule. We
have no wish for the Zimbabwean people to suffer the
same fate when independence and national sovereignty
are so near at hand.

49. All the parties concerned are to be congratulated
on their success in working out the Lancaster House
Agre,ement,l which is undoubtedly an achievement of
the Meeting of Commonwealth
Heads of Government
held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August 1979, and of the
British Government.
It should also be considered a
personal triumph for Lord Carrington that should be
traced to his persistence and firmness of conviction.
At the same time, the Lancaster House Agreement
indicates a clear manifestation of the willingness of
the Patriotic
Front to resolve peacefully difficult
questions of many years’ standing and to abide by an
agreement that would be mutually satisfactory to all
the parties, at a time when they were still locked in
mortal combat. To my country, the Agreement is a
clear sign that all the parties have at last found a way
out of what had seemed for a long time a hopeless
impasse. We firmly believe that, properly implemented, the Agreement can be a landmark in the
history of the decolonization process. At this critical
period there is only one more requirement-the
willingness of all the parties to abide by and fully respect
the original spirit of good will and accommodation
that brought all the parties together in the first place.
50. But it seems that there are’ still a number of
obstacles standing in the way of full implementation
of the Agreement, We have heard in this chamber
many charges and imputations, which have also been
reported in the world press, against some of the parties
involved, including the Administering
Authority.
In
turn, we have heard denials and counter-charges.
What brought all of us to this series of meetings of the
Security Council are charges that South African troops
continue to operate within the borders of Zimbabwe:
that the forces of the rebel Government of Ian Smith
and Muzorewa continue to exist as an aggressive
force and operate against the forces of the Patriotic
Front; that, as a result, the state of emergency and
war continues; that political prisoners continue to be
detained; that the Patriotic Front continues to be
maltreated or discriminated against; and that refugees
coming from the front-line States are being prevented
7

54. In the view of my delegation, there is therefore
no alternative to strict compliance with Security Council resolution 460 (1979), which, i/?tej. Olin,

the decisions taken thus far by the administering
Power do not guarantee the development of a genuine
democratic process.

“Crrlls for strict adherence to the agreements
reached and for their full and faithful implementation by the administering Power and all the parties
concerned;”
and also

59. It is clear that we are dealing with two differing
assessments of one and the same situation: one
expressing optimism and satisfaction, the other keen
disappointment
and a feeling that not enough has been
done. However, at the basis of the arguments put
forward, there are two different logics at work, two
interpretations with respect to the very meaning of the
Lancaster House Agreement and the political commitment it entails.

“Culls upon the administering
Power to ensure
that no South African or other external forces,
will remain in or enter
regular or mercenary,
Southern Rhodesia, except those forces provided
for under the Lancaster House Agreement.”
Anything

60. What is essential in the eyes of the administering
Power seems to be the maintenance of order and the
prompt arrival at an institutional
solution. What is
essential for the States that have denounced the Agreement is that a genuine path be opened towards the
process of national liberation. Hence every event and
every incident has a different significance according
to the point of view from which it is seen. Whether
it is a matter of the presence of South African troops,
of the limits with regard to the return of the political
refugees, of the role of the so-called auxiliary forces,
of the coercion to which the natioualist movements
are being subjected or any other relevant aspect-we
are faced with two divergent attitudes: that of those
who hold that those are passing incidents that can be
corrected and those who believe that behind those
incidents is concealed a deliberate design of partiality
and the intention to hold on to remaining privileges.

less than that may lead to disastrous results.

55. Mr. MUNOZ
LED0 (Mexico) (interpretutim
$YX~ Spcrrzish): I should like first of all in the most
cordial terms possible to congratulate
the outgoing
President of the Security Council, the representative
of France, for the exceptional ability he showed in
conducting
the business of the Council during the
month of January. He enhanced the prestige which he
already enjoyed among us all and increased OUI
admiration and appreciation of him. We wish to extend
to our new President, the representative of the German
Democratic Republic, our very best wishes for success
in the task before him and to express our conviction
that he will display the same even temper and skill
of which he has already given proof.
56. The Security Council is once again meeting to
contribute by timely decisions to the self-determination
and independence
of the people of Zimbabwe. The
African States have condemned specific acts and
events and political symptoms which they consider to
be serious and which, in their view, run counter to
the Lancaster House Agreement’ and the aims sought
by the United Nations with regard to the total liberation of colonial countries and peoples.

61. None the less, something of the highest political
significance emerges from this debate, namely, the
unanimity
of the African States, regardless of their
ideology or geographical position, in considering that
the present application of the Lancaster House Agreement runs counter to the process of liberation
in
which, for several decades, not only the people of
Zimbabwe but the whole of Africa has been involved.

57. After innumerable difficulties, the Agreement in
question has come to represent the instrument which
at this stage can guarantee the accession of Zimbabwe
to independence
by peaceful means. In the first
instance, it derives from a compromise between the
administering
Power and the political forces that
have struggled to liberate Zimbabwe. It reflects a
consensus achieved between the front-line States,
which have a prime interest in a satisfactory solution
to the problem, and, furthermore, it has been welcomed
by the international
community.

62. Certainly the case of Zimbabwe is unique and to
a great extent extreme, as are apartheid and the
lamentable climate that fosters it, which is likely to
be the case in the immediate vicinity of any centre
that diffuses the most reprehensible forms of racial,
cultural and political domination. Hence, the symbolic
value and historical importance which the countries
of the third world attach to the process of liberation
in Zimbabwe. The difficulties and pitfalls which it has
had to confront are a synthesis of those dealt with by
many countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America
throughout
approximately
150 years on their road
to independence and effective self-determination,

58. Nevertheless,
the debate in the Council leads
one to think that the real situation does not correspond
to the hopes placed in the Agreement and the machinery provided for the transition stage. We have
heard here two differing interpretations
of what has
happened in Zimbabwe in the past few weeks. According to one of them, a great deal has been achieved
in little time to restore peace. According to the other,

63. Mexico fully supports the struggle of the people
of Zimbabwe. A long and painful experience has taught
us that in matters of sovereignty, half a victory may
easily become a defeat when fundamental principles
and balances, on which national identity and the
viability
of independent existence depend, are at
stake.
8

71. At this time, the Security Council is confronting
a great many responsibilities
and tasks. In various
regions there are serious signs of threatening conflict,
clear transgressions of international
law and attempts
to redefine spheres of influence. We must not add
further tension to a world which is already fraught
with danger, nor can we allow the present state of
polarization
to be used as an excuse to violate the
rights or belittle the interests of the countries of the
third world. The price of peace cannot in any way
involve a lessening of the sovereignty of the weaker
countries or the emergence of new obstacles to the
liberation process. It must remain, in the days ahead,
a fundamental concern of the United Nations.

64. ,We are aware of the efforts made by the United
Kingdom in order to bring about a peaceful solution
to the problem. What seems hard to understand is
that the Lancaster House Agreement could be interpreted in. such a way as to work against those very
forces of.liberation in Zimbabwe that made it possible.
It is not conceivable that it could be used to weaken
the drive towards independence and the expression of
the political will of the national majority.
65. What has taken place in Zimbabwe is the outcome
of a heroic struggle; transition should not mean retrogression; the presence of an administering
Power
should not result in the retreat of those sectors that
seek full sovereignty for their country nor the obtaining
of unjustifiable
advantages for minorities bound to
the colonial past.

72. The PRESIDENT
(intr,prctcrtkm
jl~x77
Rzrssiarz):
The next speaker is the representative
of Ghana.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

66. The Lancaster House Agreement was established
specifically as a channel for the independent process,
and not as a means of delaying or bypassing it. It
represents a peaceful means only insofar as it is geared
to the achievement of the purpose that justifies its
existence. Otherwise,
instead of eliminating
the
conflict, it would end by again fanning the flames,
with unforeseeable results for international peace and
security.

73. Mr. SEKYI (Ghana): Mr. President, we of the
delegation of Ghana consider it particularly fortunate
that the Security Council is considering the present
item under your presidency, as you are the representative of a country whose commitment
to the cause of
decolonization
has never been in doubt. Furthermore,
I happen now to be speaking for a country that
enjoys the most cordial relations with yours, and in
this, too, we have an additional
cause to rejoice.
Finally, but not least, we have every confidence that
your experience and skill in the affairs of the United
Nations will guide the Council in its deliberations
most successfully throughout the present month, and
particularly in its consideration of the item before us.

67. It is right and proper that the Security Council
has been vigilant and is ready to use its authority in
an issue as delicate as this one. We should adopt a
clear position which would unambiguously
establish
the direction that should be taken at this stage of
transition so that the fundamental principle involved
will be observed, namely, the self-determination
of the
people of Zimbabwe.

74. You have picked up the mantle from a predecessor, Mr. Jacques Leprette of France, who, by
universal consensus, guided the work of the Council
with most outstanding ability during that most difficult
month of January. To him, too, go our warmest
congratulations
on a magnificent job.

68. The political process which concerns us is fraught
with risks. Struggles for independence do not take place
in a historical vacuum, Quite the contrary, the heritage
of the past sometimes coalesc& into a real power
system which must be beaten down every day. No one
had hoped, nor could anyone reasonably hope, that
in the future the emergence of a genuinely independent
national State of Zimbabwe would be free of problems.

75. Mr. President, I should like to thank you and your
colleagues of the Council for giving me the opportunity to state the position of my Government
on
the present situation in Rhodesia with regard to the
implementation
of the Lancaster House Agreement,’
particularly
on the pre-election
arrangements,
My
country’s disappointment
at the handling of certain
aspects of the Rhodesian cease-fire agreement has
already been publicly expressed in recent official
statements. Since then fresh evidence available to my
Government has strengthened our conviction that there
have been serious breaches of the Agreement such
that the preconditions for free and fair elections may
already be said to have been destroyed at least for
a part of the time when they should have been in
force, We believe that immediate
rectification
is
required, and the convening of the Security Council
is therefore timely.
The Ghana delegation
hopes
that, under your able leadership, the Council, having
addressed itself seriously to the issues, will take

69. What is required is the conciliation of political
wills to ensure the best circumstances for the process
to develop viably. In the present circumstances, the
most constructive solution would be for the administering Power to agree to the requirements set forth in
the draft resolution [s/13777] and an unambiguous
renewal of the commitment
it previously undertook.
70. The flexibility shown by the African States and
the non-aligned States in the search for a text that
would not be objectionable
to any member of the
Council is unquestionable proof of our readiness to
find negotiated solutions to problems, and indicates
the just and effective course that should be followed
in this case.
9

prompt remedial measures to arrest the situation lest
the elections should be clearly nullified in advance
and lest the situation then explode into a crisis of
unmanageable
proportions
with dangerous implications for international
peace and security.

presence. It was our view, as we put it then, that mere
substitution of a British Governor for the Parliament of
the internal settlement,
the mere addition to the
existing Smith-Walls
apparatus of a British administrator with no independently
enforceable ,authority,
would scarcely change the basic situation in’lihodesia
beyond shedding a semblance of quasi-legality over
the inevitable electioneering roguery.

76. As previous speakers have indicated, there is
a transnational
conspiracy aimed at promoting the
Muzorewa-Smith
political alliance at the expense of
rival political groups in the Territory, particularly the
Patriotic Front. Information
reaching my Government
indicates that, in their anxiety to see what they consider to be stability in that part of Africa, certain
influential
cliques in places outside the Territory,
including, of course, South Africa, regard the prospect of a Zimbabwean
Government
dominated by
the Patriotic Front with the deepest concern. Together
with the racist Pretoria regime, these cliques favour
what they call a moderate Zimbabwean Government
which would maintain close ties with Pretoria. As far
as they are concerned, that moderate Government
can be assured only by the election of the MuzorewaSmith clique to office. It is, therefore, the MuzorewaSmith,group
that they wish to see win the elections
planned for February in Rhodesia.

79. That is precisely what seems to be happening in
Rhodesia today. And we are not inclined to reject
the assessment according to which, in his departures
from the letter and spirit of the Lancaster House
Agreement, the Governor is bending to local pressures
rather than acting on the direct instructions of the
administering
Power. But this alternative interpretation-that
he is acting on the instructions of the
administering
Power-is
certainly a possible one. It
is the more correct, indeed, in a certain formal sense,
for it is a presumption
that we, as Members of the
United Nations, are entitled to make in laying responsibility for these breaches at the door of the administering Power. And that is a much more serious matter,
80. What are some of these violations? According
to reports reaching us, they include the deployment of
the former Southern Rhodesian forces, which, we
are told, now assist the police in maintaining
“law
and order”. They include the continued deployment
in the country of a large number of South African
combat troops. They include the deployment,
particularly in the rural areas, of auxiliaries of the United
African National Council (UANC) which are given a
free hand and liberty to roam the countryside intimidating civilian populations.
In addition, there have
been serious delays in the repatriation of refugees and
political exiles and in the release of detainees. Martial
law and the state of emergency have been extended
for the entire m-e-election period and beyond.

77. However, the spontaneous and massive support
demonstrated
by the Zimbabwean
people for the
Patriotic Front leaders Joshua Nkomo and Robert
Mugabe on their return to Southern Rhodesia recently,
and, above all, the will and determination
of their
followers in spite of obvious initial political disadvantages clearly show that the Muzorewa-Smith
group cannot win the forthcoming
elections. There
are the strongest indications that the British Governor, Lord Soames, caught between pressure from the
racist regime of Pretoria and from the white minority
in Rhodesia, has been compelled to “bend the rules”
of the Lancaster House Agreement, with a view to
achieving results similar to those of the sham April
elections or at least preventing the emergence of a
strong Patriotic Front government, This, then, is the
strategy behind the numerous and increasingly serious
breaches of the cease-fire agreement which have
prompted the leaders of OAU and of Africa to raise
the complaintsnow
before the Council. This reading
of the situation may to some seem unduly harsh and
cynical. I pause to observe that it is in fact the more
charitable of the possible readings.

81. These, in the view of Ghana, constitute
the
most serious breaches of the Lancaster House Agreement and have inevitably given rise to conditions
that make the holding of free elections impossible. We
in Ghana are frankly disappointed that they should
have been allowed to occur, for, taken all together,
they seem to present us with a style of operation
scarcely distinguishable
from that of the internal
settlement
regime. The expectations
were totally
different at the Meeting of Commonwealth
Heads of
Government,
held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August 1979,
and even at Lancaster House.

78. ‘During the thirty-fourth
session of the Genera1
Assembly, we declared our opinion that the Lancaster
House proposals had at least one serious defect: the
Patriotic Front was being asked to stake everything
upon the outcome of elections held under an authority
which could not be exercised in Rhodesia in&pendently of forces loyal only to the Front’s election
opponents. We were of course referring then to the
Smith-Walls
establishment,
which had continued to
control the real levers of power during the Parliament
of blacksmiths and would continue to do so in reality
after that Parliament was replaced by a limited British

82. Admittedly,
the situation is a difficult
one.
Various explanations
of these breaches have been
heard. The auxiliaries are said to be merely helping
a return to civilian life. The South Africari forces
were merely protecting a vital route or lifeline. The
exiles’ return is delayed merely because they cannot
yet be reabsorbed into the land of their birth-and
SO
on and so forth. Since the explanations seem to be
totally unconnected with the politics and policies of
‘10

the rivali parties, one would normally expect the
depa@ur& from the Lancaster House Agreement to
favour no$w one side and now the other, or both
equally ; .qr, bneither equall,y ; but they practically all
seem.preju&ial
to the political interests of one side
and one,$cle only-the
Patriotic Front. This seems a
strange c&incidence.

86. The most disturbing aspect of these breaches,
in our View, is the .fact that Her Majesty’s Government involved Pretoria in the implementation
of the
Agreement. It is a matter of deep regret also that the,
“SenSitiVitieS” of African Governments do not seem
to have been seriously taken into account. In our view,
if there was any need at all for a small number of
troops to protect a vital lifeline, forces other than
those ofapc/rtlzcitl could have been employed out of the
many that had been offered.

83. There may be perfectly good reasons why the
auxiliaries of Muzorewa and the regulars of Walls
should be deployed, while the forces of the Zimbabwe African National Liberation
Army (ZANLA)
and the Zimbabwe People’s Revolutionary
Army
(ZIPRA) are confined. But this could hardly be prejudicial to Muzorewa’s chances for election. There
may be perfectly respectable reasons why South
African forces should have been deployed inside
Rhodesia at the Beit Bridge, if not elsewhere. But
this could hardly have lessened the chances of the
Muzorewa-Smith
clique. There may be all sorts of
perfectly statesmanlike
reasons why martial law
should continue and why exiles and refugees should
not all return yet. But such things have never worked
against the Bishop’s interests, nor are they now likely
to. On the other hand, they all work against the
interests of the Patriotic Front. It all seems quite
strange really. In fact, there could not be a stranger
set of coincidences, all pointing in one and the same
direction, were the hand at the local helm of affairs
the masterly old hand of Ian Smith himself. Indeed,
as we have seen, there are practised observers of
the local scene who seem to detect that very hand
somewhere in it all.

87. But the Beit Bridge affair is by no means the
whole affair. The claim that the South African detachment there has been withdrawn and that the dispute
is therefore behind us ignores the seriousness of South
African troop involvement in Rhodesian affairs. The
fact is that South African troops are involved on a
much wider scale and, indeed, in far greater concentrations than has been yet admitted. Reliable
sources have it that South African troops and airmen
have been in Rhodesia in significant numbers for
quite some time now and that these troops have been
engaged actively in operations in Zimbabwe over the
years. They are combat troops estimated at around
6,000 or 7,000 men. In short, Pretoria, according to
our information, has about five infantry battalions;
one parachute battalion, two artillery regiments and
six armoured squadrons, not to mention air contingents. The picture that emerges is that of a massive
South African military presence in Zimbabwe. Not
only does this troop presence cast an ominous shadow
over the planned February elections, but it also makes
the Patriotic Front nationalists at the assembly points
“sitting ducks” for a possible combined attack by
forces of Southern Rhodesia and Pretoria. Furthermore, Pretoria is reported to have massed troops
estimated at brigade strength at Messina, just across
the Beit Bridge. This force, we are told, has been
put in combat readiness for intervention in Southern
Rhodesia, should Pretoria decide that its interests
are threatened and that it therefore requires more
direct and open action. It is sobering to reflect that
the force protecting the lifeline could then have served
as the advance guard.
88. The removal of this South African menace,
reinforced as it has been by Pretoria’s open threats
of intervention, presents the most serious challenge
now to the Security Council; and the application, if
necessary, of sanctions for this purpose certainly,
in our view, deserves to be given serious consideration. For the time being the responsibility lies heavily
on the administering Power to eliminate that threat
we]] before the elections are due. Incumbent also on
the administering Power is scrupulous observance in
all respects of the provisions of the Lancaster House
Agreement, as called for, Olrer alia, by the General
Assembly at.its thirty-fourth session; and in the present
state of things, this involves particularly the immediate confjnement to base of Rhodesian security and
auxiliary forces, the release of all political prisoners
and the safe and speedy return of al] refugees and
political exiles.

84, However that may be, we remain deeply disturbed by the series of breaches reported. First, the
deployment
of Smith’s regulars and Muzorewa’s
auxiliaries to help the police to contain breaches of
the cease-fire. Cease-fires, as we are given to understand, are invariably negotiated so that neither belligerent derives, or may derive, a military advantage
of any kind-a basic principle without which there can
be no cease-fire.
85. The Patriotic Front could not conceivably have
envisaged that the cease-fire upon ‘which they had
staked so much in the Lancaster House talks should
become the one exception to this invariable rule, and
to their own detriment.
It is hard to see how the
provisions of the cease-fire agreement could be made
to yield any meaning according to which the Patriotic
Front could be confined, while their antagonists were
deployed all around them, with South African reinforcements, overt or covert. In the meantime their
political leaders would have to contest an election
also .policed by their antagonists’ forces, so that, if
they lost, they would have to accept the results Or
find their own forces instantly mopped up, whilst, if
they won, the same thing could still happen-and
probably would happen. This surely is a travesty of
the expectations at the Lusaka meeting and the undertakings at Lancaster House.
11

his speech two days ago [2192& meeting], since
I have not had enough time to get to know him well.
I should like to assure him, however, of my desire to
work with him and of my immense goodwill towards
him. However, I have to state that in his remarks
he objected to the insistence of the African delegations on the holding of this meeting of the Security
Council to criticize-as
he put it-his Government’s
performance
in Southern Rhodesia. He could not
have been unaware of the breaches of assurances
given by his Government, breaches which have greatly
embarrassed our African Governments
and ail the
Governments
and peoples of the world opposed to
the policies of apartheid.
As representatives
are
aware, my country is one of the few countries which
provides military personnel for the cease-fire monitoring forces in Southern Rhodesia. Kenya’s modest
contribution
to that effort was made in the context
of the Lancaster House Agreement and as a followup to the efforts made by the Meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government at Lusaka, to find a
peaceful solution to the problem of Southern Rhodesia.
The British Government could not expect the Kenyan
Government
to acquiesce in or to be a party to the
breaches of the Lancaster House Agreement. The
situation was so bad that my President, Mr. Daniel
Arap Moi, was obliged to make a public statement on
14 January 1980. As this statement is short, I shall
read it in full. The President said:

89. Those are the indispensable prerequisites of free
and fair elections and such elections are, in their turn,
the indispensable prerequisites of peace and stability
in an internationally
recognized Zimbabwe. The only
alternative to that is a long, bitter and bloody struggle
in which, with sanctions now lifted, men, money, arms
and materials will be poured out in support of the
racists by those who need them as their defensive
buffer, and by those who believe, however misguidedly, that their material interests are thus better
served. But those who fight for liberty will not lack
powerful friends and supporters either. One of the
most dangerous brush fires our century has seen
would thus be lit on the southern part of our continent. We ask and expect that the Security Council
will now take the first steps, with the co-operation
of the administering Power, to avert such acatastrophe.
90. The PRESIDENT
(interpr’etution ji-om Russicrn):
The next speaker is the representative
of Kenya.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
91. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): I wish first of all to express
the gratitude of the delegation of Kenya to you,
Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council for allowing us to participate in this debate. My
delegation wishes to congratulate you warmly on your
accession to the presidency for this month. Knowing
as we do of your long experience and thorough knowledge of the work of the United Nations and your
outstanding qualities as a diplomat,
we have every
confidence that you will guide this debate to a fruitful
conclusion.

“At the London Conference on Rhodesia assurantes were given to the effect that South African
troops would leave Rhodesia soon after the arrivat
in Salisbury of the British Governor. The presence
of the South African troops in Rhodesia, as publicly
admitted to by the Governor, is clearly contrary to
those assurances.

92. May I also pay a tribute to the outgoing President of the Council, Mr. Leprette, for convening this
series of meetings of the Security Council at our
request. We are particularly grateful to him because
we know that his task was not easy. He stood firm
in the discharge of his duties, thus making it possible
for us to meet. His was an unusually busy and difficult
month, but he has conducted the affairs of the Council
with the singular distinction that we have learned to
expect from our dealings with him.

“The British Governor has said that South African
troops are in Rhodesia to guard the Beit Bridge. AS
a member of the contingent in Rhodesia for the
monitoring
of the cease-fire, Kenya considers it
essential that the assurances given in London be
honoured. In fact, I do not see how I can allow
Kenyan troops to share Rhodesian soil with South
African troops. The guarding of the Beit Bridge
should be entrusted to the Rhodesian police force
which, under the London Agreement, is to maintain
law and order during the interim Administration
in
Rhodesia. If that is not considered adequate, the
British
Government
should be invited to send
additional troops to carry out that task.

93. The decision to request this urgent meeting of
the Security Council was not taken lightly. Everyone
was conscious of the need to create a calm atmosphere
in Southern Rhodesia to facilitate the implementation
of the Lancaster House Agreement.’
However, violations of the letter and spirit of that Agreement had
reached the point at which silence would have betrayed
not only the freedom fighters who have taken the
greatest risks in order to make the Lancaster House
Agreement
work but all the dead and living Zimbabweans who have sacrificed so much to rid their
country of colonialism and racism.

“Once again I want to express the hope that the
letter and the spirit of the London Agreement will
be strictly observed by all the parties concerned,
so as to ensure a smooth transition from the disastrous war of the past to genuine majority rule on the
basis of a free and fair election. This is particularly
important as we see no viable alternative to arrangements already agreed. The consequences of 21
collapse of the Agreement are too grave to contemplate.

94. I take no pleasure in having to respond to and
disagree so strongly with some remarks made by the
new British representative,
Sir Anthony Parsons, in
13

“I take this opportunity to reiterate t.hat Kenya
cherishes peace and stability, and that it is necessary for the people of Zimbabwe to be able to
conduct their own affairs under the direction of a
government of their own choice. That is the only
sound basis on which they can embark on the
development of their country for the good of all.”

of the Security Council. Your knowledge and experience and your diplomatic skills are the best assurance
that our work during the present month will be
conducted in the most effective manner, I should also
like to express our gratitude and warm appreciation
lo your predecessor, Mr. Leprette of France, whose
well-known competence and dedication and whose
endeavours towards the fulfilment
of our common
goals we all deeply admired during his particularly
difficult, indeed arduous, term of office.

95. Although the breach of the Lancaster House
Agreement that has been the subject of the most
discussion is the presence of South African forces in
Southern Rhodesia, there are other breaches which,
unless corrected now, will ruin all the good work done
so far. I shall refer to only a few of these. The use of
the rebel military forces of Southern Rhodesia alone by
the Governor, without a balancing use of the freedom
fighter forces, will in the end create the wrong impressions and produce wrong responses from the parties.
This point nearly broke up the Lancaster House Conference. However difficult it may be, the Governor
has to be, and appear publicly to be, even-handed in
dealing with the military forces.

100. Portugal has followed closely the evolution of
events in Southern Rhodesia in the past years, not
only out of our deep anxiety over the future of that
beleaguered country, but also because of the consequences of those events for the neighbouring countries with which we have always had close ties of
friendship.
101. After the Commonwealth
Meeting at Lusaka,
the conversations at Lancaster House started to instil
in the world community the hope that there could be
a peaceful solution to the seemingly insuperable
problems assailing Zimbabwe. Against what looked
like insurmountable
odds, and always on the verge of
went on and
breaking
up, those conversations
eventually produced an agreement that, only a few
weeks before, not even the more optimistic would have
expected.

96. The existence of the so-called auxiliaries in the
countryside, loose and armed, is bound to create
problems that will mar the good job which the Governor is trying to do. These auxiliaries, as has been
said-and as I can say from personal experience-are
worse than the military or police forces because they
are ill trained and poorly disciplined individuals most
susceptible to all the human frailties. If they have to
move about in the countryside
away from their
camps-if they have any-then
it is absolutely essential that they should not carry any firearms. In any
case, it is none of their job to do police work. They
are highly motivated politically, and it would be most
unwise to leave them loose and armed-and
I emphasize “loose and armed” -during
the campaign period.

102. The world community has recognized and paid
a tribute to the patience, goodwill and spirit of cooperation of all those involved: the British Government, which called and chaired the Conference; the
parties in the conflict, which made important concessions for the benefit of a peaceful solution; and the
front-line States, whose leaders once again showed
their statesmanship in defending the long-term
interests of their area. However, no one could expect
that in a few weeks the profound divisions that have
scarred Southern Rhodesia for the past 15 years could
be healed, and that trust and mutual confidence could
immediately
replace all the tensions and deep suspicions inherent in the warlike conditions that had
prevailed in the Territory for so long a period.

97. I would not end my remarks without referring to
press reports of loose talk emanating from highly
placed military leaders about the intentions of South
Africa if the people of Zimbabwe elect certain leaders.
This kind of talk could undermine the good faith
which everyone should be trying to create. We trust
that the fears I these reports are generating
are
unfounded. We would of course be happier if they
could be denied publicly and assurances given to
abide by the will of the people of Zimbabwe freely
expressed through free and fair elections.

103. The Portuguese delegation has listened with
the greatest attention to the statements made before
the Council on the difficulties which have occurred in
the implementation
of the Lancaster House Agreement and on certain aspects of the internal evolution
of Rhodesia since the United Kingdom reassumed the
administration
of the Territory.
The Portuguese
delegation understands and shares the natural apprehension with which this is viewed by all those who are
engaged in this process, and by those who are anxious
to see it brought to a close through free and fair
elections, allowing Zimbabwe to attain independence
and occupy its rightful place within the community
of nations.

98. We wish to place on record our admiration of
all the parties to the Lancaster House Agreement for
negotiating it and for the practical’steps they have taken
to implement it so far. We wish to encourage them
to complete the process they have started, so that
Zimbabwe may have a Government freely chosen by
a majority of its gallant people.
99. Mr. FUTSCHER
PEREIRA
(Portugal): Allow
me, at the outset, warmly to congratulate
you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency

104. But, while recognizing that these aspects and
difficulties
have been serious and, in certain cases,
13

outgoing President of the Council, Mr. Leprette of
France, for the efficient manner in which he conducted
the Council’s deliberations during a difficutt:month,
I
110. My Government,
through a statement by the
Foreign Minister, Mr. Otema Allimadi, made before
the Liberation
Committee
of the Organization
of
African Unity at its thirty-fourth session held at Dar
es Salaam from 21 to 25 January 1980, stated that the
Government
of Uganda demanded that the United
Kingdom
immediately
recall Lord Soames to avert
the resumption of armed struggle in Zimbabwe, The
Foreign Minister proposed that Lord Soames should
be replaced by an appointed trustee who would
command the confidence and trust of all the parties,
including the Patriotic Front.

have even constituted a threat to the peaceful continuation of this process, the Portuguese delegation
cannot fail to note everything that the British Administration in Rhodesia and all the other parties concerned
have already achieved. There have been violations
of the cease-fire, but the cease-fire is sticking. There
was the intolerable presence of South African military
forces on Beit Bridge, but these forces have now been
withdrawn. There were, and may still be, grave obstacles to the return of thousands of refugees to Rhodesia,
but refugees have been returning. There were difficulties and delays in the concentration of the forces
of the Patriotic Front, as well as in the return of their
leaders to Rhodesia, but these difficulties and delays
were overcome, and the leaders of the Patriotic Front
are already in Zimbabwe, pursuing their political
objectives in full liberty, with the help of their many
supporters. Above all, the war is over.

111 I That was a strong statement, which came soon
after the meeting of the front-line States and after my
Government had received strong representations from
the Patriotic Front and other sources regarding violations of the Lancaster House Agreement.’
Those
accusations, although denied by the United Kingdom,
have been amplified by all delegations which have
spoken at these meetings.

105. There can be no doubt that the present situation
in Zimbabwe is fraught with dangers, and we are
certainly aware of its fragility. But, on the other hand,
to call the present situation in Zimbabwe a still more
serious threat to international peace and security than
the one which prevailed two months ago seems
unrealistic to us.

112. Some fears have been expressed in the corridors
that perhaps calling for this series of Security Council
meetings could amount to castigating the United
Kingdom
and thus could jeopardize the Lancaster
House Agreement. We do not have any reason to
believe that this was the intention. An assurance was
given at Lancaster House by the United Kingdom
that all South African troops and foreign mercenaries
would be removed from Rhodesia. In Sir Anthony
Parsons’ statement [ihid.] on this particular issue of
troops, we were informed that the South African
troops who were guarding the Beit Bridge had been
withdrawn.
Sir Anthony did not elaborate on the
related problem of other South African troops, some
of whom are reported to use Rhodesian uniforms or
are mercenaries in the employ of the Rhodesian
authorities. There is also ample evidence to indicate
that the contingency of South African troops numbers
up to 6,000 men.

106. We have no doubt that all the parties concerned
entered into the agreements in good faith and are
willing to exert their utmost efforts to carry them out
to the end. My Government is therefore of the opinion
that it is incumbent upon the international community
to avoid any action that, by underlining the negative
instead of the positive aspects already achieved,
might stress the divisions and suspicions and render
the situation on the ground more dangerous.
107. The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked the Security Council to trust his Government,
even though we might not approve of all the decisions
that the authorities in Salisbury have taken during
this difficult period. The Portuguese delegation, for
its part, is prepared to extend that trust, convinced
as it is that the British Government deserves it and
will not fail to take into account the concerns and
apprehensions voiced during this debate.
The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fionr Russicru): The next speaker is the representative
of
Uganda. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

113. Among the demands made is a call on the United
Kingdom, through its representative in Rhodesia, to
confine all the Rhodesian forces and the auxiliary
forces of Bishop Muzorewa to bases similar to those
set up for receiving Patriotic Front freedom fighters.

109. Mr. WAPENYI
(Uganda): I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption today of
the duties of the important role of presiding over these
meetings of the Security Council-meetings
that are’
very crucial to Africa. May I also, through you, thank
the other members of the Council for allowing my
delegation to participate in the deliberations initiated
by the African Group on the issues at stake which
are of great importance to my Government.
Before
proceeding, I should also like to pay a tribute to the

114. In the statement made yesterday by Mr. Kangai
[2193rc1 meeting] in the Council, he listed more than
10 points in respect of which the Lancaster House
Agreement has been breached. We shall not go into
detail, but we have been further informed that Lord
Soames, the administering
Governor in Salisbury,
had even refused entry to more than 200 vehicles
from Mozambique
intended for use in the election
campaign by the Patriotic Front. We are also informed
that the same Governor had refused the distribution

108.

14

of Patriotic Front campaign literature; and my delegation wasvery surprised to learn that the same Governor had hindered or delayed the provision of telephone
services to the Patriotic Front offices in Salisbury.

who has been invited by the Council to participate in
the debate under rule 39 of the provisional- rules of
procedure of the Council. I invite him to take a place
at the Council ‘table and to make his statement.

115. ’ Although some of those actions may appear
minor; they could lead and have led us to pose the
question:, How fair could Lord Soames claim to be
if he ‘denied such essential communication
services
to one ‘party? Or was his intention and that of his
Government to make the Patriotic Front fail in its
campaign? If that was the reason why the British
Government
acted in such a way as to frustrate
African efforts, then we cannot believe the statement of
its representative here that everywhere in Rhodesia
there is mounting evidence of a return to normal
life and that the British Governor is according equal
treatment to all the parties engaged in the election
campaign. We have learned that refugees wishing to
return from various front-line States have either been
stopped or deiayed at the borders because of the
British or the Governor’s fears that many of those
refugees would support and vote for the Patriotic
Front,

119. Mr. NDLOVU:
Mr. President, I should like
first of all to say that it is a great pleasure for me to
appear before the Council under your presidency.
Your country’s contribution
to the struggle for Zimbabwe is unsurpassed and your commitment
to the
liberation of the people of Zimbabwe is demonstrated
through the expression of solidarity that the German
Democratic Republic has made by providing material
and moral support to the struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the representative of France, for having
presided over the debate. We have seen how ably that
debate was conducted under his leadership and have
heard the contributions that have been made pointing
positively to the fact that the Lancaster House Agreement’ is being violated by the administering
Power.
120. Mr. President and members of the Security
Council, we wish to thank you for convening these’
meetings to consider the grave situation in our country,
This grave situation is the result of the inability or”
the unwillingness
of the British Administration
in
Salisbury to provide a decisive and effective leadership whose authority is clearly spelled out in the
Lancaster House Agreement on Southern Rhodesia.

116. Another point of contention is expressed in the
question bound to be asked by anybody familiar with
the Lancaster House Agreement: If the United Kingdom wanted a free and fair election for Southern
Rhodesia, as planned, one wonders why the state of
emergency was declared and is going to be maintained for a further six months, long after the elections.
How could the United Kingdom, after the elections
had been held and concluded by the end of this
month, envisage such a state of emergency as continuing in effect for six months, long after an elected
Government had been installed in Salisbury? Surely
the decision to declare, maintain or end a state of
emergency should be taken by the Government that
will be formed or by the party or parties that win that
election. They would be the rightful authorities to
determine the question of how Rhodesia is going to be
governed.

121. Before we make our submission to this body,
we wish to pay a tribute to the United Nations’ for,
its continued interest in the future of the people of
Zimbabwe; to the Organization of African Unity and
the front-line States of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia
for their selfless commitment
to the liberation
of
Zimbabwe; and to the non-aligned group of nations
and the socialist countries for their unwavering suyjport of the struggle for human rights in Zimbabwe., (
The entire people of Zimbabwe is extremely grateful
to the international
community
for its immense contribution to the just struggle for self-determination
in’
Zimbabwe.

117. In conclusion, we can only reiterate what others
have already stated here: the demands to have South
African troops in any form or uniform withdrawn
from Rhodesia, to have Rhodesian soldiers and
auxiliaries confined to the bases set up for that purpose, to have the state of emergency in Rhodesia
revoked so as to allow for a free atmosphere for the
election and to have all political prisoners released. If
it becomes necessary, the role that is being played
by the Commonwealth
Observers Force should be
strengthened so as to ensure fulfilment of the purpose
for which it was appointed and to monitor andeliminate all the violations that have been brought to
light in the course of this debate.

122. Mr. President, you are presiding over one of
the most historic series of meetings of the Security
Council. The outcome of the debate in these meetings
will determine whether peace or war will prevail in
southern Africa. The Council has already heard
brilliant presentations on the subject of British violations of important aspects of the Lancaster House
Agreement made by previous speakers, including my
colleague, Mr. Tirivafi Kangai, of the Patriotic Front
[ihid.].
My presentation will be supplementary
to the”
list of violations put before this body by Mr. Tirivafi
Kangai. The Council has also heard the British representative arguing that his Government’s
transitional
Administration
in Salisbury has been an unqualified
success; For our part we appear before this body
having come straight from Salisbury. We have come to

118, The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion
j?om
Russio~r): The next speaker is Mr. Callistus Ndlovu,
representative of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe,
15

this arrangment to take over positions previously held
by Patriotic Front forces that have gone to assembly
places. This permanent deployment of the Rhodesian
forces, which gives undisciplined
auxiliaries
the
opportunity to move about in the country intimidating
opponents of Abel Muzorewa, cannot be whitewashed
by a list of cosmetic accomplishments
cited by the
British representative in this debate.

participate,in
this debate in the spirit of the Lancaster
House Agreement, whose provisions we have done our
best to observe. We shall therefore present to the
Council a first-hand assessment of the situation, which
any reasonable person familiar with the post-Lancaster
House developments
in Zimbabwe
will find dispassionate and objective.
123. Members of the Council will recall that at the
Lancaster
House Conference
on Zimbabwe,
the
Patriotic Front, the British Government
and representatives of the Rhodesian rkgime agreed on an independence Constitution,
transitional arrangements to
implement
that Constitution
and cease-fire arrangements which would create suitable conditions for free
and fair elections. According
to the transitional
arrangements proposed by the British themselves, and
reluctantly accepted by the Patriotic Front, there was
to be a Governor vested with both executive and
legislative authority. In the terms of the cease-fire
arrangements
of the Lancaster House Agreement,
both the Patriotic Front and the Rhodesian regime
undertook
to end all military
actions against one
another. Their forces were accorded equal status
under the law and were to assemble in designated
places-that
is, 16 assembly places for the Patriotic
Front forces and 40 bases for the Rhodesian forcesand observe the cease-fire. For their part, the British
undertook to set up an Administration
which would
be solely responsible for the maintenance of law and
order in order to ensure freedom for all political parties
to participate in the election campaign. During the
transitional
period, the British Administration
in
Salisbury would make sure that all foreign elements
in the Rhodesian army were removed from the country.

126. During the negotiations for the cease-fire at
the Lancaster House Conference, which were complicated and protracted, we warned the British delegation of the impracticability
of timing the cease-fire to
enter into force within seven days. We told the British
delegation that it was not a practical proposition to
demand that our forces should be at their designated
assembly places in seven days, when, in order to create
confidence in people that had been torn apart by a war
bitterly fought for 14 years, one needed time to explain
carefully to one’s forces the terms of the cease-fire,
and the terms of their movement to rendezvous and
assembly places. Despite our detailed representation
on this matter, the British would not be persuaded to
modify their seven-day cease-fire deadline. In fact,
in talking to the British delegation to the Lancaster
House Conference, we got the distinct impression
that they were not as concerned with effecting a
workable cease-fire as they were interested in holding
“elections”
in any circumstances. Here lay the difference between the approach of the Patriotic Front
and the Anglo-Rhodesian
approach to the peace talks.
While the Patriotic Front wanted a cease-fire arrangement which placed the two rival armies on equal terms
and whose capacity, content and direction set specific
and precise sanctions against those who violated the
terms of the cease-fire-no matter who they were-the
British appeared to be interested in an open-ended
arrangement that left the implementation
of the ceasefire subject to arbitrary determination
by whomever
the Governor chose to authorize to supervise the
cease-fire. Hence, in anticipation of the problems that
have emerged since Governor Soames came to
Salisbury, the Patriotic Front had proposed an international peace-keeping force-preferably
a United
Nations
force-instead
of a powerless peacemonitoring force proposed and imposed by the British.
In justifying such an arrangement for the cease-fire,
the British argued that, vested with both executive
and legislative authority during the interim period,
the Governor had adequate authority to deal with
breaches of the cease-fire and take complete authority
over the entire administration
of the country.

1.24. The British representative,
speaking in this
debate [2/92,ld rnrefirzg], said that his Government
did not recognize that the situation in Zimbabwe had
deteriorated in the post-Lancaster
House period. He
went on to list what he called positive gains made as
a result of the Lancaster House Agreement and the
setting up of a British Administration
in, the country.
He cited, among other things, the scaling down of the
war, the return of refugees and political exiles, the
release of all political detainees, evidence of a return
to normal life everywhere, the opening of rail and road
links between the country and its neighbours and so on.
125. To be sure, there has been some scaling down
of the fighting. But that is because our forces have
responded to the cease-fire directives of their commanders and have assembled in their designated
assembly places. But to say that there has been a
scaling down of the war is not to say that both sides
have behaved according to the prescriptions of the
cease-fire agreement. The Governor, Lord Soames,
has left Rhodesian forces in a state of permanent
mobilization.
The so-called military auxiliaries-the
private army of Abel Muzorewa-which
are theoretically a unit within the Rhodesian army, but in
practice a political army, have taken advantage of

127. In one of their attempts to allay fears expressed
by the Patriotic Front about the unsatisfactory nature
of the powers given to the interim Administration,
the British, through Sir Ian Gilmour, who was Deputy
Chairman of the Lancaster House Conference-said
of the Governor’s role: “The Governor will hold the
Government
in trust on behalf of the people while
the election campaign is fought.” Since he came to
Salisbury, has the Governor been able to show all
16

parties contesting the elections that he is holding “the
Government in trust on behalf of the people while the
election campaign is fought”?
And is there any
evidence that the Governor exercises the authority
prescribld in the Lancaster House Agreement?
128. Those of us who have been doing everything
within our power to live up to the letter and spirit
of the Agreement
are dismayed by the macabre
manner in which the Governor appears to be cooperating with forces determined
to reimpose the
de filcto authority of the previous Administration.
As things stand at present, it can be said that in
reality the Governor-whether
he knows or not-is
holding the Government
“in trust” for Bishop
Muzorewa. What is the evidence to support such a
charge?
129. In justifying the institution of an all-powerful
governorship, the British had argued that it was in the
interest of the country that the administration
of the
country be in the hands of an impartial authority,
So that no party could have an advantage over others.
But is this what is happening in the country? First,
Bishop Muzorewa is still referred to as the Prime
Minister by the Rhodesian Broadcasting Corporation (RBC) and the country’s mass media. He and
his former ministers still enjoy all the privileges of
their former ministerial
rank. Secondly, the flag of
“Zimbabwe-Rhodesia”
still flies side by side iyith
the British flag, thus making a mockery of the claim
that the country has been returned to legality as a
result of the Lancaster House Agreement. Thirdly,
Muzorewa’s private army now operating under the
official title of auxiliaries of the Rhodesian security
forces moves freely around the country carrying arms.
Despite widespread reports of political intimidation
by
elements of this army who roam the country electioneering on behalf of UANC, no investigation of the
activities of these auxiliaries, let alone action against
these elements, has been taken by the interim Administration. Practically all the parties contesting the elections have, in one way or another, made representations to the Governor about the intolerable behaviour
of these forces to unarmed civilians in the rural areas.
And yet nothing has been done to correct the situation;
there has not even been an investigation. The Council
heard the British representative justifying this lack of
action on the grounds that all charges made against
the auxiliaries so far have been of a general nature.
This is absolutely incredible coming from a representative of a Government that is the legal administering Power of the colony of Southern Rhodesia.
130. The Patriotic Front has compiled a list of comPlaints made by people harassed by auxiliary forces
in various parts of the country. Most of these comPlaints involve people who have been attacked by
auxiliary forces either for being members of the
Patriotic Front or for attending a Patriotic Front
meeting. If the British authorities in Salisbury were
interested in getting facts about this problem, they

could get all the information they need. Talking about
these forces in the positive language used by the
British representative,
when every evidence shows
them to be terrorists and political partisans, is an
insult to the African population that these forces have
brutalized.
131. The Patriotic Front demands that all auxiliary
forces be confined to barracks and assembly places.
The fact that those forces remain in a state of deployment, free to roam the countryside campaigning
at
gunpoint on behalf of Abel Muzorewa’s UNAC, is a
blatant violation of the Lancaster House Agreement.
The Patriotic Front cannot accept Lord Soames as
an impartial authority in the country when his Administration appears to condone the lawless activities of a
political army.
132. The Patriotic Front recognizes the authority of
the Governor, as provided in the Lancaster House
Agreement, to call upon any forces at his disposal to
deal with breaches of the cease-fire. But such discretion on the part of the Governor should be exercised
within the framework of the principle of equal treatment of the respective forces in the cease-fire. There
cannot be equal treatment of the respective forces
when one army is required to remain in the assembly
places while the other remains in a state of permanent
deployment.
It takes two to effect or to observe a
cease-fire. The fact that Rhodesian security forces
appear to be free to move about or to roam the country
carrying their arms and at times engaging in political
campaigning poses a very serious threat to the whole
Lancaster House Agreement.
133. Most of our people welcomed the Lancaster
House Agreement in the hope that it would end all
hostilities and create a spirit of reconciliation
among
all the people of Zimbabwe. The fact that, despite the
signing of the Agreement, certain leaders have sought
to heighten tensions rather than to promote the spirit
of reconciliation
comes as a terrible disappointment
to the majority of our people. It is obvious that those
whose support is either dwindling or uncertain want
the country to enter the elections of 27, 28 and
29 February 1980 in a state of tension and communal
violence, in order to cause confusion so that all of us
will be losers in the elections. What are the British
authorities doing about this dangerous trend, which
threatens to destroy the country? In the face of such
evidence that the authorities in Salisbury are doing
nothing to contain a potentially
explosive situation,
one is persuaded to conclude that either the British
Administration
in Salisbury is utterly incompetent
and lackadaisical or that the British Government
is
involved in a tragic international
confidence trick on
Southern Rhodesia. Otherwise,
how on earth can
anyone explain to us how such widespread intimidation can be tolerated, particularly
considering the
fact that most of it is conducted by what are called
lawful forces?

What will prevent the South African soldiers Stationed
or fighting in the country from unseating an elected
government of Zimbabwe after the British Administration has pulled out?
..
! :,
137,. .’ The presence of South African troops,oh’Zimbabwean soil constitutes a serious threat to, international peace, and as such it is a challenge to,. the
Security Council. The Security Council must, therefore
demand that South Africa withdraw its troops from
Zimbabwe. The presence of those troops at, this time
makes a mockery of the British claim that they are the
sole and legitimate authority in Southern Rhodesia
between now and the day of independence. We demand
that all foreign troops operating outside the Cdmmonwealth Cease-fire Monitoring Group leave the country
immediately.

134.). If. the British cannot cope with, the situation,
let them hand, over the responsibility
to the United
Hations and ,@low ‘the Security council to take up
the matter. As President Joshua Nkomo said on
13 January 1980, addressing a welcome-back-home
rally in Salisbury, the Patriotic ,Front will do everything in its power to make the Lancaster House Agreement work. Hence, in pursuit of th.at policy, President
Nkomo has instructed members of tbe party throughgut the country to co-operate with le&imate authority
to cieate conditions
conducive to .a free election
campaign. Our members have been instructed not to
engage in any political intimidation
of members of
other parties. Unfortunately,
in certain quarters our
call upon our members to treat their opponents as their
brothers and sisters jn the spirit of reconciliation,
peace and tranquillity
is being mistaken for weakness. Our members have been subjected to intolerable
acts of intimidation
and unprovoked violence. In the
last two weeks some of our people have been
killed or maimed, I personally witnessed an incident
in which a young man wearing a Patriotic Front T-shirt
was dragged from the street and killed. He was killed
by, supporters of Muzorewa. We obviously cannot
allow this to go on unchecked. It is entirely up to the
British authorities in Salisbury whether they will take
immediate and effective measures to correct the situation or whether the Patriotic Front will be forced to
make a commensurate
response in defence of its
members,

138. South Africa’s involvement
in the internal
affairs of Zimbabwe is a serious violation of the
Lancaster House Agreement. The Rhodesian Broadcasting Corporation (RBC) still relays news from the
South African Broadcasting Corporation. Normally,
the RBC should have been taken over by the British
Broadcasting Corporation when the colony of Southern
Rhodesia returned to legality as per the Lancaster
House Agreement. The fact that it was not done shows
how incomplete the whole process of returning Rhodesia to legality has been. News relays of the Suuth
African Broadcasting Corporation should cease forthwith. We do not want South Africa to influence the
internal politics of our country through local radio
facilities. Radio South Africa’s broadcasts are openly
anti-Patriotic Front, and they could influence the voters
of our country in the forthcoming election.

135. The presence of South African troops on Zimbabwean soil is another blatant violation
of the
Lancaster House Agreement. Recently, in an attempt
to anticipate revelations that South African forces
were, still operating in Zimbabwe,
Lord Soames
admitted that a contingent of South African soldiers
was guarding the Beit Bridge with his permission. This
is reminiscent
of the stationing of South African
troops on the borders of Angola ostensibly to guard the
vital installations of the Cunene Dam.

139. It is important that the British authorities treal
our complaints with the greatest sense of urgency and
seriousness, because the success of the Lancaster
House Agreement depends upon our co-operation. It
is of no use dismissing these complaints in the simplistic and arbitrary manner that was displayed in the
analysis of the situation made by the British representative in this debate. Defending the actions of
auxiliaries whose treatment of the civilian population
has been generally criticized by a wide political spectrum of people does not place British authority in
Southern Rhodesia above partisan politics.

136. At the Lancaster House Conference the Patriotic Front demanded the withdrawal of all South
African troops from Zimbabwe as a condition for its
acceptance of the British cease-fire proposals. The
British assured the Front that by the time the British
flag was hoisted in Salisbury, there would be no South
African troops on Zimbabwean soil. Lord Soames and
‘the British may talk of a limited South African military
presence to guard the Beit Bridge, but the people of
Zimbabwe know that South African troops operate in
full force within the Rhodesian army. Hence the withdrawal of the token South African force supposedly
guarding the Beit Bridge does not solve the problem
posed by the direct intervention
of South Africa in
the internal affairs of Zimbabwe. Unless all South
African troops are withdrawn, the British Administration in Salisbury will remain guilty of violating
the Lancaster House Agreement,
South Africa’s
involvement
in the training of military personnel for
certain groups contesting the elections is well known.

140. Any person familiar with the Rhodesian army
knows that there is a difference between Rhodesian
regular troops and auxiliaries. By insisting that in Fact
there is no such difference, the British run the risk
of making the critics of auxiliary forces. lump the
whole Rhodesian army together with the politically
motivated auxiliary forces. This is what the British
want to see. This is not in the interest of those among,
the Rhodesian forces who want to make a career of
military service. We therefore strongly advise the
Governor to confine all auxiliary forces to assembly
places or barracks. If our advice is not heeded, the
work of Lord Soames will be made increasinnlv diF,
18

ficult by the growing conflict
armies.’

between rival political

attacks can only stretch the web of tension ever tighter
at ‘this ultra-sensitive moment in the’ history of Rhodesia. They are hardly calculated to improve the
relationship between the administering
Power and tlie
Chairman of the front-line States at a time when
constructive dialogue is of fundamental
importance;
and I would once’again emphasize that our collaboration with the front-line States, from the Lusaka
meeting through the Lancaster House Conference,
has been a major factor in all that has been achieved
so far, I very much hope that this collaboration
over
the Rhodesian problem can continue.

141. The Security Council should call upon the
British authorities to confine all Rhodesian forces to
their-bases or barracks. The auxiliary forces should
be’ withdrawn from the rural areas in the name of
peace. There cannot be an effective cease-fire as long
as political armies are free to roam the countryside
intimidating people and making them vote for certain
parties. If this state of affairs continues unabated, the
Council can expect a serious confrontation that can
jeopardize the whole election process. We sincerely
hope that such a development
will be averted by
decisive and effective action before it is too late.
142. Long live the Patriotic

147. I now address myself to some of the other
allegations contained in Mr. Mkapa’s statement and
paralleled in those of other speakers. First, it has
been charged that the deployment by the Governor of
the Rhodesian forces is “contrary to the letter of the
[Lancaster House] Agreement”
and that they should
be confined to the “40 designated bases”. This was
part of more general criticism about the use of the
Rhodesian forces to deal with breaches of the ceasefire. I must refer the Council to what the Lancaster
House Agreement actually says. I quote from paragraph 11 of the cease-fire agreement, which says the
following:

Front.

143. The PRESIDENT
(inf~~pretation
@/?I Russin/z): The representative of the United Kmgdom has
asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of his
right of reply, and I now call on him.
144. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, at the outset I congratulate you most
sincerely on my own behalf and on behalf of my
delegation on your assumption today of the presidency
of the Security Council, and I think we can confidently
anticipate a busy month for you and for your delegation. I should like also to express my warmest appreciation and that of my whole delegation to my good
friend, Mr. Leprette of France, and to the whole
French delegation for the skill, competence, efficiency
and goodwill with which they conducted us through
a number of complex and difficult negotiations during
the month of January. These were the exact qualities
which we would have expected from the delegation
of France.

“The primary responsibility
for dealing with
breaches of the cease-fire will rest with the Commanders of the forces through the mechanism of the
Cease-fire Commission and with the assistance of
liaison officers of the monitoring force. The Commanders will ensure, with the assistance of the
monitoring
force, that breaches of the cease-fire
are contained and dealt with. In the event of more
general or sustained breaches of the cease-fire the
Governor will decide what action to take to deal with
them with the forces which have accepted his
authority .”

145. A large number of allegations have, in the course
of this debate, been made against my Government
and against Lord Soames, the Governor of Rhodesia. Many of these allegations have been of a general
nature on such subjects as South African interference,
the deployment
of Rhodesian forces and auxiliary
forces, the continuation of emergency legislation and
martial law and alleged bias against the Patriotic
Front parties. I dealt with these matters in my opening
statement [ibis/.] and will not go over all this ground
again. But there are certain further allegations of a
very specific nature to which I now reply.

The appendix

to the cease-fire agreement

says:

“The disposition of the Rhodesian forces, under
the Governor’s authority, will be as set out in~the
Chairman’s statement to the Conference on 11 December.”
Paragraph 25 of that statement says:
‘L . . * If, however, all Patriotic Front forces inside
Rhodesia assemble with their arms and there is no
further movement
by externally-based
Patriotic
Front forces into Rhodesia, there would be no need
in those circumstances for the Governor to ask the
Rhodesian forces to deploy from their company
bases.”

146. I refer first to the major statement made by the
Foreign Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania
[ihid.]. I naturally respect the depth of his concern,
but I cannot leave the tone and substance of some of
his remarks unanswered. I was, I confess, deeply
shocked by some of the things he said about my
Government and about the Governor. For one distinguished political figure to describe another, Lord
Soames, as “arrogant” and as a purveyor of lies and
“vicious propaganda” is astonishing. Such personal

It is clear that, when the police find themselves unable
to deal with the security situation, the Governor must
take measures to maintain security in the country
and that he acts entirely within the terms of the
Lancaster House Agreement in doing so. The Rhodesian forces are, of course, fully monitored.
19

148. Security has, as I said in my original statement,
been seriously threatened by the thousands of soldiers
of ZANLA that have not assembled but have remained
at large in the country, including very many who
illegally crossed the border after the cease-fire date.
The Patriotic Front guerrilla units outside the assembly
areas at the present stage are unlawful. It is because
of their presence that the deployment
of the Rhodesian forces has been necessary. It is not true, as
was alleged yesterday, that the Governor never uses
the Patriotic Front to deal with breaches. Some joint
patrols by the Patriotic Front and the police in the
vicinity of the assembly areas have taken place and
this will continue.

152. Minister Mkapa referred also to the killing of
Patriotic Front forces on their way to assembly points.
I dealt with this in detail in my opening statement,
but the Minister took exception to the fact that the
Patriotic Front forces in the instances he quoted had
been required to surrender their arms. He said that this
was not provided for in the Lancaster House Agreement. The point here is that the incidents took place
after the date agreed on at Lancaster House for the
assembly of all Patriotic Front forces in the appointed
places. The forces concerned were therefore unlawful
under the terms agreed to at Lancaster House and
contained in paragraph 10 of the cease-fire agreement.
The Governor, however, was flexible in dealing with
all those Patriotic Front forces who had missed the
deadline. He enabled them to assemble at the designated points without measures being taken against
them, provided that they laid down their arms. This
proviso, I must stress, applied only to those who had
rendered themselves unlawful under the terms.of the
Lancaster
House Agreement.
It was specifically
agreed-I
must stress this point-by
the Patriotic
Front commanders that such men should be required
to lay down their arms. I say again that the Governor
and the British Government have stated their sincere
regret that killings occurred, But surely we should all
be relieved that there were not far more numerous
incidents during that very difficult stage of the ceasefire arrangements.

149. Patriotic
Front officers have frequently been
deployed, and with great success, to bring in units
which were outside the assembly areas and generally
to defuse difficult situations. But in cases where the
Patriotic Front officers have been unable to persuade
armed groups of their forces to proceed to assembly
areas, the Governor has had no alternative but to use
the Rhodesian forces to deal with the problem and to
maintain law and order. For if he does not maintain
law and order, it will not be possible to hold free and
fair elections in Rhodesia. I would also again remind
members of the Council that any breaches of the
cease-fire are reported to and fully considered by the
Cease-fire Commission
on which all parties-and
I repeat, all parties-are
represented. Surely this is
the best and, indeed, the only way of dealing with
these problems.

153. Many speakers have developed charges about
the disposition of the auxiliary forces. I must once
again stress that those auxiliaries were part of the
Rhodesian forces as declared at Lancaster House. This
was specified at the time. I underline that they are
monitored in their bases. I asked if there were specific
allegations, not just blanket allegations, against the
auxiliaries. The representative of Zambia made certain
specific allegations. I telegraphed these, verbatim, to
the office of the Governor in Salisbury and I have
discussed them privately with Mr. Lusaka. The
information
which I have received is that most of
these cases have not been drawn to the attention of
the authorities or the Cease-fire Commission. I should
again stress that the machinery is there to consider
such complaints. It is working. It is the Cease-fire
Commission,
not the Security Council, which should
hear such complaints.

150. Foreign Minister Mkapa complained that the
Governor of Rhodesia has not given additional sites to
the Patriotic Front forces. I again refer to the words of
the Lancaster House Agreement. I quote from paragraph 3 of Lord Carrington’s statement of 15 December 1979, attached to the cease-fire agreement and also
an official document of the Conference:
“I can assure the Patriotic Front . . . that if the
Patriotic
Front forces at present in Rhodesia
assemble with their arms and equipment in numbers
greater than can be dealt with at the assembly
places designated in the cease-fire agreement, the
Governor will assess the need for additional sites in
relation to the successful accomplishment
of the
assembly process by the Patriotic Front forces and
in relation to the dispositions of their forces.”

154. At this point, I should say that I listened with
very close attention to the statement just delivered by
Mr. Ndlovu. 1 clearly recognize the deep sincerity
and concern with which he spoke. I assure him that
what he said will be transmitted faithfully to London
and to Salisbury. I also assure him, in lhe context of
what 1 have just stated, that I will aIso-if
he so
wishes-transmit
immediately
to London
and to
Salisbury the supporting evidence to which he referred.

151. The fact is that none of the Patriotic Front
leaders has suggested to the Governor that there is any
need for additional sites. Indeed the contrary is the
case. Some weeks ago it was decided, with the full
agreement of the Patriotic Front, to reduce the number
of assembly points by two, since so few Patriotic
Front forces had assembled at those two points. So
there are now 14 assembly points and no one in
Rhodesia is suggesting or has suggested that this is too
few *

155. We would always have been ready to go over
these or any other contentious points with the Foreign
Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania or his
20

officials or with any other African Government concerned, at any time and at any place. I deeply regret
that we have had to air these differences in public
when I believe that many arose from misunderstandings which could have been cleared up.
156. President Nyerere and his Government have of
course made far-reaching contributions
to the whole
of rhe Lancaster House process, and the relationship
between my country and the United Republic
of
Tanzania is deep and abiding. The same is true of the
relationship between my country and all the frontline States. We know that there is no one more
genuinely committed to a just and honourable settlement in Rhodesia than President Nyerere. We urge
the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
to believe that we share this commitment
and to continue to play its invaluable, constructive role.

160. The representative of the Soviet Union [2192nd
lneeting] saw fit, when I entered a reservation about
the decision to allow Mr. Kangai to speak, to make
a confused interjection.
It is not surprising that he
seemed to fail to understand the point that I was
making-which
is that when a free and fair election
is taking place, the United Nations should not decide
to give a hearing to one group from among a number
of contesting parties without being willing similarly
to hear all others. The reason it is not surprising is,
of course, that the Soviet Union has no experience of
free and fair elections, no knowledge of the concept
of political choice. But in answer to a point I think
I understood him to make, my delegation has never
supported resolutions referring to the Patriotic Front
as the “sole authentic representative of the people of
Neither do we support the wholly parZimbabwe”.
tisan calumnies directed against other parties participating in the forthcoming Rhodesian election.

157. I now turn to the accusations made by several
speakers about the deployment
of South African
troops in Rhodesia. Many speakers chose to ignore
the fact that the South African detachment at the
Rhodesian side of Beit Bridge was withdrawn the day
before yesterday. There were various further allegations which we must strongly deny about the presence of thousands of South African troops in Rhodesia. These allegations were made at the 2192nd meeting
by the Foreign Minister of Liberia, by the representative of Malawi, in considerable detail, and by many
others, There is no foundation for these charges. The
references to South African divisions, combat battalions and armour are equally unfounded. There are
South Africans, probably some hundreds, in the
Rhodesian forces; but there are other nationalities
as well. I have to say that there are still some hundreds
of soldiers of the Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO)
with the forces of ZANLA, which
have not assembled as they were required to do by
the cease-fire agreement. We always made it clear
at Lancaster House and thereafter that we could not
be expected to conduct any sort of purge of the
Rhodesian forces and the Patriotic Front forces. We
took them as we found them.

161. I have covered, either in this statement or in
my opening statement, several of the charges made
by Mr. Kangai. I now deal with two of his detailed
points.
162. The problem concerning the 200 cars being
imported from Mozambique will, we very much hope,
be settled very shortly when permission for the import
will be given. The authorities
in Rhodesia made
special arrangements some weeks ago so that political
parties could import vehicles under a specially simplified procedure. Some parties have taken advantage
of this, but in the case of the Zimbabwe African
National Union (ZANU), it has not yet been possible
to complete the importation formalities. As I say, after
reference to Salisbury, we do hope this problem will
go away in the very near future.
163. Mr. Kangai has also been quoted as having
referred to the seiiure of ZANU election literature.
Some such literature has been confiscated, but only
when it has contained blatant incitement to violence,
such as slogans calling for “death to the British
language.
colonial troops”, or similar inflammatory
164. Now a word or two about the statement by the
representative of the Soviet Union [2194th nleetingj.
His statement was predictably offensive and hostile.
I flatly deny the allegations that my Government
is
attempting to preserve what the Soviet representative
described, in his awful jargon, as a “neo-colonialist
puppet rtgime” or that we are involved in any of the
other grotesqueries enunciated by the Soviet representative, As I had occasion to say once or twice
during debates in the General Assembly,
Soviet
hostility to the whole Lancaster House process seems
to me to prove only that they are somewhat displeased
by the prospect of a final, peaceful settlement to the
problem of Rhodesia. This basic hostility to Lancaster
House, shared only, it seems, by the Soviet Union
and its few close allies, was again undisguised in the
statement we heard yesterday. Some of my Soviet

158. I now address myself to the statement made by
Mr. Kangai [219.?ad nzeeting], representative
of the
Patriotic Front. Before I do so, I shall enlarge on the
brief statement that I made at the beginning of this
debate about the question of Mr, Kangai’s participation-and
we have now heard Mr. Ndlovu too.
159. First of all, in saying what I have to say, I mean
no personal disrespect to Mr. Kangai or to Mr. Ndlovu.
If they do not mind my saying so, I and members of
my staff have had very good personal and working
relations with them and with other members of the
Patriotic Front in New York. But what I could not
let pass was any implication that the Patriotic Front,
together or severally, has special status over and
above others to address bodies in the United Nations.
21

I

colleague’s remarks were so bizarre that I wrote them
down. If the interpretation
into English was correct,
he’said, in the context of the election, that anything
could be done with money. That may well be true in
the Soviet Union, but it seemed to me rather insulting
to the electorate of Zimbabwe. He described the forthcoming elections as a comedy and a farce. I do not
think that the political leaders in Zimbabwe would
subscribe to this contemptuous
judgement.
But,
fortunately, no one is likely to take the Soviet Union
seriously as a judge of democratic processes. I seem
to recall, in this context, the Soviet Union referring
recently
to the “election”
of Mr. Karma1 in
Afghanistan.

6,500 have already been repatriated and that the aim is
to continue at a rate of 750 per day. This would mean
that all refugees currently in Botswana will be repatriated before the election. I also take the opportunity
of informing the Council that it has been announced
in London that Britain is to provide f 1.15 million to
assist the repatriation
of refugees to Rhodesia in
response to an appeal by the United Nations High
Commissioner
for Refugees.
167. The PRESIDENT
(interpr-etatim
jkm
Russintz): The representative of the Soviet Union has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply. I now
call on him.

165. I finish by giving the Council the latest report
on progress in repatriating the refugees. There have,
during the debate, been various ill-founded criticisms
of the Governor’s
Administration
on this problem.
As I said in my first statement, there have been
problems of a practical nature delaying the return
of the refugees, but we are now beginning to make
real progress. I must remind delegations that paragraph 19 of the pre-independence
arrangements agreed
at Lancaster House reads as follows:

168. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(interpretation
fiotn Russian):
Before
responding to the statement of the representative of
the United Kingdom, I should like to say a few words
not related to the question that the Council is now
considering.
169. Mr. President, allow me first of all to congratulate you, the representative of a fraternal socialist
country, the German Democratic Republic, on your
assumption of the responsible duties of the presidency
of the Security Council. I wish you all success in
carrying out your important tasks as the Council considers very important questions affecting the maintenance of international peace and security. A guarantee for us is to be found in the peace-loving foreign
policy of the German Democratic Republic, which
through its consistent struggle against imperialism,
colonialism
and all forms of exploitation
and racial
oppression, and for the freedom and independence of
peoples, has gained the esteem of the entire world.
We are convinced that your outstanding diplomatic
qualities and your great experience in the development of international
co-operation will contribute to
the success of your work as President of the Council.
I should also like to express our gratitude to the
representative
of France, Mr. Leprette, for the spirit
of co-operation
and diplomatic tact and the deftness
he showed in carrying out the responsible tasks he
faced as President of the Security Council for the
month of January 1980.

“Many
thousands of Rhodesian citizens are at
present living outside the country. Most of them
wish to return and it will be desirable that as many
as possible should do so in order to vote in the
election. The return of all refugees will be a task
requiring careful organization. But a start should be
made in enabling the refugees to return to their
homes as soon as possible; and the British Government will be ready to assist with the process. The
task of effecting the return of all refugees will need
to be completed by the independence Government
in co-operation
with the Governments
of the
neighbouring
countries.”
That paragraph makes clear that the magnitude of the
task of returning hundreds of thousands of refugees
to Rhodesia was fully appreciated at Lancaster House
and that it was recognized that the programme could
not be completed before independence.
166. I must repeat that it would be very unwise
to try to bring refugees back before it has been possible to set up adequate reception arrangements. But
as a result of strenuous efforts made by the Administration, I can now confirm that the repatriation
of
refugees from Zambia and Mozambique
will begin on
4 February. It has been informally
agreed with the
Zambian authorities that 600 to 700 refugees per day
will be received. It has been informally agreed with
the Mozambican
authorities that the initial rate will
be 500 per day, moving gradually, we hope, to 1,000
per day. But continued progress here will depend to
a great extent on the security situation in the eastern
regions of Rhodesia-a
situation which is still, as
I have said, giving considerable cause for concern.
The latest news of refugees in Botswana is that

170. While reserving my right to speak on this issue
once again, I shall speak on the substance of what
was just said by the representative of the United
Kingdom.
171. Once, British diplomacy was distinguished
by
the fact that many even vulgar things could be said
politely, but that would seem to be a thing of the past,
as shown by the statement made today by Mr. Parsons.
He has mixed everything into this question, incIuding
extraneous things. At first I was ready to believe what
he tried to convince us of today. But after his statement, I have even more doubts than before my
initial statement. Perhaps he did not he,ar what was
said today by representatives of the, African coun22

tries; he replied to statements made yesterday. What
was said today to the British representative? I shall
read it. One representative stated that he did not agree
with Mr. Parsons’ statement. Another African representative-1 shall not say who; that will be seen in
the verbatim records-stated:
“We cannot believe the
assurances of the representative of the United Kingdom concerning Southern Rhodesia.” I could read out
some other things that are similar and Mr. Parsons
could reply to them. They are questions that are
primarily African in nature, they are not our issues.
But 1 support the stand taken by the Patriotic Front
and African countries.

occupied by the Patriotic Front. Is that preparation
for just and free elections? No. It is preparation for
elections in conditions of tension, as was rightly
pointed out by African representatives
here today.
It is preparation for elections that will not lead to the
results that the people of Zimbabwe want to see-the
results of free and fair elections.
176. Another minor point on money. We have heard
dispatches from Johannesburg, South Africa on the
radio here-not every day, but we do get them. I have
been surprised that I could hear Africa here. But we
have heard the representative of the Patriotic Front
talking about radio broadcasts from South Africa to
Zimbabwe that are flagrantly hostile to the Patriotic
Front forces, to the people of Zimbabwe and would
promote only the restoration of those who have been
in power since April, that is the Muzorewa-Smith
clan and their forces.

172, And now on two things the representative of
the United Kingdom said in his statement. He said
that he doubted whether we have any experience with
elections. His country should have the election experience that we have and his people the right to choose
as we have and then it would be a happy country-if
they ever had these things-although,
of course, we
have differences in this regard.

177. Mr. Parsons was not at today’s meeting. That is
a shame, because one African minister said that it
was Smith’s hand that was managing affairs in Rhodesia, and another said that the rebel Smith should have
been hanged in the Tower of London. Those were not
my words. I am simply repeating what has been
previously stated here. It would have been good if
Mr. Parsons had been present to hear that for himself.

173. He said that we did not understand what he
meant about another party. We understood
him
perfectly well. He wanted to bring into the Security
Council puppets, racists who serve his side, and we
are against that. We have the Patriotic Front here and
its representatives have spoken. We have heard them.
They were asked by African countries to be present.
The British representative did not even dare to say
who should speak from another side, because he knew
that he would hardly find any support here. That is our
reply to one of his comments.

178. The PRESIDENT
tin!crp,*efafio/? f,wn RLISsinn): The representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

174. There is another minor point about money, and
here is our reply to that as well. Perhaps the British
representative could reply to my question: what did
Muzorewa distribute at the Umtali stadium after the
initial elections of the puppet government, paper or
money? Who paid money for Muzorewa? Did he give
out $10 bills to all, throwing them away? Who gave
that money to him? If the British do not know about
that fact they should look into it. We will come back
to Muzorewa later.

179. Mr. KATEKA
(United Republic of Tanzania):
First of all, I wish to express my delegation’s pleasure
at seeing you, Mr. President, in the Chair and to pay a
tribute to the role that your country has played in
Zimbabwe’s liberation.
180. On instructions from the Foreign Minister of my
country, Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, who had to leave
New York for unavoidable reasons and because of
urgent commitments,
I am authorized to state the
following, in reply to the statement just made by the
representative of the United Kingdom.

17.5. The British representative referred to auxiliary
forces. We venture not to believe his explanation.
What do the representatives of Africa call those subsidiary forces? What did the Nigerian Minister call
them? He said they were “bands of bandits”.
But
how does the British representative describe them?
And those “bands of bandits” are helping to prepare
free and just elections? Permit me not to believe the
British representative.
I really cannot believe him.
He said the Lancaster House Agreement was being
complied with in so far as the gathering at assembly
points was concerned. The Patriotic Front has laid
down its arms and has sent its armies to the various
assembly points. But what are those bands of bandits
doing meanwhile? They have taken over the positions
formerly held by the Patriotic Front and areas formerly

181. I shall start by expressing disappointment.
One
would have expected the United Kingdom representative, instead of being on the defensive, to listen carefully to the various valid charges that could help the
British in implementing
the Lancaster House Agreement.’ Unfortunately,
Sir Anthony Parsons has chosen
to try to refute the irrefutable.
182. Worse still, Sir Anthony seems to have misjudged the mood and the determination
of Africa on
the issue of Rhodesia. Frantic efforts were made to
try to stop the holding of this debate on Rhodesia on
the pretext that such a debate would complicate the
implementation
of the Lancaster House Agreement.
23

Muzorewa forces contrary to the spirit of Lancaster
House as well as to the statement of 11 December
1979 made by the Chairman of the Lancaster House
Conference, the Secretary of State of the British
Government.
But, interestingly
enough, the representative of the United Kingdom did not refer to the
machinery
established in respect of this matter,
namely, the Cease-fire Commission, when he quoted
that paragraph.

In other words, the British wanted us to let them go on
violating that Agreement with impunity. Africa refused
to be hoodwinked by that lame excuse.
183. Furthermore,
Sir Anthony does not seem to
understand what is going on. For example, when the
African members sponsored [2192nd meeting] the
appearance of the Patriotic
Front representatives
before the Council, Sir Anthony said-and
he has
repeated it-that
a request for other parties from
Rhodesia to appear before the Council should be
considered and that they should be allowed to do so.
We would have been very interested to know who
those parties were, as the representative of the Soviet
Union has just said. We would have been intrigued to
see the United Kingdom sponsor the appearance of
Smith and Muzorewa before this body, because it
would have been the height of irony to see the rebels
that have compelled the Council to remain seized of
the Rhodesian question for 15 years appearing before
this body to put I know not what case. What an
affirmation
this sponsoring of the rebels would have
been of the case we have been trying to make!

187. A second point was the question of the Patriotic
Front forces and the killing of Patriotic Front forces.
In our statement we referred to the question of equality
of treatment. Contrary to what Sir Anthony says on
equal treatment, the Council must have noted that
while Smith-Muzorewa
forces have been deployed
by the Governor to kill Patriotic Front forces, the
latter have not even been deployed for simple peacekeeping. And luckily for the Governor, Patriotic Front
forces have exercised much restraint.
188. Another charge which the representative of the
United Kingdom tried to deny was the question of
additional sites for the Patriotic Front. Interestingly
enough, he said that the Patriotic Front has not asked
for more sites. What an interesting remark. According
to the understanding in the Lancaster House Agreement and the official records and assurances, it should
have been automatic for the Governor to give additional sites to the Patriotic Front once those assembled
exceeded 16,000 soldiers, which would have been
assembled in 16 places. But, instead, he says that
there has been a request to cut the number of those
assembly sites from 16 to 14. Naturally, when the
forces are to assemble in remote areas-and that was
one of the reasons that almost broke up the Lancaster
House Conference-what
else can one expect, especially if those places do not have the necessary
facilities?

184. In another display of ignorance, Her Majesty’s
representative referred to the war of Iiberation which
raged in Rhodesia for many years as a “civil war”.
At first we thought that it was a slip of the tongue.
But when the representative of the United Kingdom
repeated these words “civil war”, he confirmed the
fear we have felt that Britain does not seem to understand Africa. How a war of national liberation can be
called a “civil war” defies the imagination.
I do not
know how Sir Anthony would react if I were to refer
to the Second World War involving the Allies against
nazism and fascism as a European civil war. I am sure
he would not be amused. So much for the ftrux pns
of Sir Anthony.
185. I should like now to try to respond to some of
the attempted denials by Her Majesty’s representative
in his statement a few moments ago--which I have not
had time to study carefully-of
what was said by the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs of my country. He
referred to ‘&a large number of allegations”
made
against the United Kingdom and Governor Soames.
He said that they were of a “general nature” and then
referred to some specific statements and what he
called a major statement of the United Republic of
Tanzania.

189. Another attempt to deny the killing of Patriotic
Front forces by the Governor has been made this
afternoon by Sir Anthony. Interestingly
enough, he
referred to that killing as merely a “most unhappy
incident” to be regretted. This evening he said further
that it took place because the Patriotic Front forces
were going to camps after the time had elapsed for
assembling in the designated places and, hence, when
they were unlawful. And it may be that, by the natural
extension of the same logic, they deserved to be
killed, because that seems to have been implied by
Governor
Soames when he said that the SmithMuzorewa forces were in order when they took the
action they did.

186. We in Tanzania take the question of Rhodesia,
as Sir Anthony rightly said, very seriously. That is why
we have taken the trouble to appear before the Council, and the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country was carefully considered, But
Sir Anthony has tried to deny some of the charges
we made in our statement. He quoted from paragraph 11 of the cease-fire agreement on the question
of deployment of Rhodesian troops. Then he said that
the Governor would decide how to deal with unlawful
acts by any party, and that is why he deployed Smith-

190. Another reference was made to the auxiliary
forces, which, in his statement this evening, the representative of the United Kingdom
said were being
monitored.
But the Council will have noted that in
his statement of the day before yesterday {ihid.], the
representative of the United Kingdom admitted--and
it is on record-that
the Rhodesian forces, with these
24

so-called auxiliaries, had been deployed. That is what
we contend is contrary to the Lancaster House
Agreement.

If the United Kingdom had stuck to the Lancaster
House Agreement, we would not be here. We are not
interested
in coming here just for the sake of
appearing before the Council. The United Kingdom
should know better. Let the United Kingdom stick
to the Agreement and there will be no further problems.

191. On the question of South African troops, the
representative of the United Kingdom has just said:
“Many speakers chose to ignore the fact that the
South African detachment at the Rhodesian side of
Beit Bridge was withdrawn the day before yesterday.”
What the representative of the United Kingdom failed
to say is that the detachment should not have been
there after the entry into force of the Lancaster House
Agreement. We quoted from the official records the
understanding between Mr. Mugabe and the British
Secretary of State. Sir Anthony chose to ignore that
because it did not suit his case. So much for some of
the specific charges which the British representative
tried to deny.

193. In conclusion, my delegation appeals to the
Security Council to finish the deliberations
on this
issue. We hope that the Council will be able to act
before the weekend is over, because this is a matter
of great urgency. We have seen the Council act on
other matters over the weekend, matters which have
been dear to some Powers. Some of our heads of State
have been awakened in the middle of the night by
appeals for support. We hope that the Rhodesian
question will be given equal treatment. We hope that a
correct draft resolution will be adopted calling on the
United Kingdom Government to stick to the Lancaster
House Agreement. We hope that when the draft resolution [S/13777] is being voted upon, the United
Kingdom will stand up and be counted on the right
side, that is, the side of justice.

192. But let me say once again that it is very strange
to say that we should not air our grievances in public.
We have tried all possible channels, and I understand
that the British representative knows that. My President, to whom he referred, has had innumerable communications with the British Government about the
Lancaster House Agreement and its proper implementation.
Also, other members of the front-line
States and the Chairman of OAU have had similar
contacts. Some members have even made trips to the
British capital on the question of Rhodesia. Therefore,
when all these efforts failed, there was no alternative
but to come out into the open before the Security
Council, which has been seized of the Rhodesian
question for the past 15 years, and ask the Council
to take the necessary corrective measures because
the administering Power has been derelict in its duty.

Norms
’ See
fmI1cP,

Swuthc17~

Rlzodesitr:

Lancrlsrer

Ho1rsc,

Repour
LNII~~I,

of

/he

Co~utitt~/if~~~ml

Septo}lhe~-Decetlrbe~

Cm1979,

Cmnd. 7802 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery
Office, 1980).
* T. H. Bingham and S. M. Ciray, Rqx~t O/I flze Supp/.~ qf
Peftdew~
NIX/ Per,nle~m
P,nd~t.~
IO Rlzodesh,
London, Her
Majesty’s Stationery Office for the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, 1978.

25

HOW

TO OBTAIN

USlTED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section. New York or Cenovn.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIOSS

PUBLICATIOSS

may br obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIOSS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dens
les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc enticr. Informez-\-ous
sup++ de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
P : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New ‘L’ork ou CenBve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidss
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
ConsuIte
Unidas,
Seccidn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

it1 United

Nations.

New

York

00400

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

8%61462-December

1985~-2,415
