S/PV.8724

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8724th meeting

Friday, 14 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Michon
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Ankourao
Mr. Repkin
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Clay
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dinh

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and
the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2020/105)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03982 (E)
*2003982*

S/PV.8724

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

Domingos Simóes Pereira, filed a legal challenge
with the Supreme Court of Justice claiming electoral
irregularities and fraud.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2020/105)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Guinea-Bissau
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosine SoriCoulibaly, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau, and His Excellency Mr. Ronaldo Costa Filho,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/105, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sori-Coulibaly.
Ms. Sori-Coulibaly: Since my previous briefing
to the Security Council, in a closed meeting on
31 October 2019, Guinea-Bissau has witnessed renewed
tensions among political stakeholders, hampering
stabilization and the Government’s ability to focus
on the country’s economic performance and improve
the living conditions of the population. Following the
peaceful holding of the presidential election and the
announcement by the National Electoral Commission
(CNE) that Umaro Sissoco Embaló, the candidate
from the Movement for Democratic Change, had won
the election, the candidate of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC),
2/18

14/02/2020

Subsequently, on 24 January the Court requested
the CNE to repeat the national tabulation of the data
from the regional electoral commissions, in accordance
with the electoral law. A period of uncertainty
ensued following the Court’s orders and the CNE’s
compliance. However, following high-level mediation
led by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) on 4 February, the CNE completed
the verification exercise under the aegis of ECOWAS
and in the presence of the representatives of the
two presidential candidates, the outcome of which
reconfirmed the provisional results.
However, the PAIGC filed another complaint
concerning the verification process, seeking the
annulment of the second-round election results. On
9 February, ECOWAS held an extraordinary session
of its Authority of Heads of State and Government,
in Addis Ababa, on the margins of the African
Union Summit. They welcomed the conclusion of the
verification process by the CNE, invited the Supreme
Court to play its role fully in accordance with the
constitutional provisions and electoral law and finalize
its work by 15 February. The Supreme Court has since
initiated the examination of the complaint in order to
issue a decision.
As a result, the legal process involving the electoral
outcome has yet to be resolved in order to allow for the
first-ever peaceful transfer of power to a democratically
elected Head of State in the country. However, given
the deep mistrust between the two political camps,
divisions in the executive branch and shifting political
alliances in the Parliament, the swearing in of the
future President will unlikely bring about stability.
Therefore, the continued engagement of the Security
Council and the broader international community will
be essential. Likewise, the continued engagement and
active participation of civil society to advocate and
monitor the implementation of the Stability Pact and
the Conakry Agreement will be paramount for the sake
of stability.
Despite the challenges facing the outcome of
the presidential election, Guinea-Bissau should be
commended for completing its electoral cycle. Other
areas that registered progress include the fight against
drug trafficking and organized crime, with regard to
20-03982

14/02/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

which the Bissau Regional Court is currently hearing
a landmark case involving the seizure of 1.8 tons of
cocaine in September 2019.
The judiciary police has also concluded key
investigations, leading to the 10-to-15-year prison
sentence of three suspects. In addition, a national action
plan on drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime is now in place and will serve as a road map
for justice, security and judicial institutions in their
efforts to combat drug trafficking. State institutions in
Guinea-Bissau have also shown resilience and should
be commended for resorting to legal means to resolve
political disputes in connection with the presidential
election results. Moreover, the country has witnessed
no interference by the military in the political arena;
the media have been enjoying freedom of speech; and
there have been no major human rights violations.
The upcoming post-electoral period could present a
window of opportunity for sustainable peace, stability,
national cohesion and reconciliation, should there be
political will and commitment by national stakeholders.
Within the framework of Guinea-Bissau’s Stability
Pact, there is an urgent need for a far-reaching reform
agenda that includes the constitutional review, the
electoral law and the political parties’ law reforms, as
well as the reform of the defence and security sector
and the judiciary.
National authorities should renew efforts to build a
culture of accountability at all levels of the State. Progress
in human rights and gender mainstreaming represents
key peacebuilding components. Accordingly, political
stakeholders and a free and respected media should set
the tone to curb all forms of discrimination and hate
speech. Most important, as history has taught us, ethnic
and religious discourse must not find its way into the
political arena. The establishment of an independent
national human rights institution compliant with the
Paris Principles remains a fundamental pillar for the
promotion and protection of human rights following
the withdrawal of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
Furthermore, the implementation of the national action
plan on drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime will be key for the country’s long-term stability.
Consolidating recent gains made in drug seizures and
the prosecution of cases requires political will at the
highest level, but also reinforced collaboration among
national, regional and international players.

S/PV. 8724

In line with resolution 2458 (2019), which endorsed
a three-phase transition and drawdown of UNIOGBIS,
I would like to assure the Council that the mission is
working towards its exit by 31 December. In that regard,
the closure of the four regional offices was completed in
2019. Meanwhile, I have been working to ensure solid
transition planning with the United Nations country
team, as well as through close engagement with the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), which will assume the role of good offices
in Guinea-Bissau following the mission’s departure.
I have also been engaging with national authorities
and regional partners to ensure that the transition
is fully supported by all stakeholders. A set of
benchmarks has been developed and reflected in an
integrated United Nations transition calendar that will
enable the gradual drawdown and transfer of residual
tasks to the United Nations country team, ECOWAS,
UNOWAS and other partners in preparation of the
mission’s closure. However, diligent engagement with
national counterparts is critical at this stage, and I call
upon Bissau-Guinean national stakeholders to enhance
their involvement with the transition process.
As part of the transition efforts, a comprehensive
assessment of the United Nations country team’s
capacities against the national peacebuilding priorities
will also be undertaken to identify gaps in its capacity.
Those peacebuilding priorities will be anchored in the
United Nations country team’s long-term programmatic
interventions, encapsulated in the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for
the period 2021 to 2025. In that regard, I intend to hold
a joint UNIOGBIS-United Nations country team retreat
in March to help streamline ongoing transition efforts
and the development of the Cooperation Framework.
However, to allow the United Nations country team
to take on critical peacebuilding activities — including
political dialogue, national reconciliation and the
implementation of urgent reforms, as well as combating
drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime — after the departure of UNIOGBIS, funding will
be essential. I appeal to the international community to
lend generous support to the Cooperation Framework
in Guinea-Bissau.
With the conclusion of the electoral cycle, the
mission has shifted its efforts towards supporting
the reform agenda, as envisioned in the Conakry
Agreement and the Stability Pact. However, the lack

20-039823/18

S/PV.8724

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

of constructive dialogue among national political
stakeholders, including in Parliament, poses a serious
threat to the implementation of reforms, particularly the
constitutional review, which is recognized as being at
the heart of the country’s recurrent instability. During
the critical post-electoral period, all political forces
and civil society organizations should be encouraged to
commit to political dialogue and consensus-building on
important national priorities to consolidate peace and
stability. Regional and international stakeholders must
also remain engaged.
In that regard, UNIOGBIS continues to support
preparations for the holding of a national conference
on peace, reconciliation and development, with
financial assistance from the Peacebuilding Fund.
That commendable initiative should be supported by
the international community. I encourage the Security
Council to call upon the relevant actors to firmly move
forward with that agenda, which would also contribute
to ensuring political and institutional stability.
It is also important for the international
community — and ECOWAS in particular — to remain
committed to Guinea-Bissau in support of political
dialogue and confidence-building, while encouraging
a culture of democracy, inclusivity and national unity.
In that connection, I intend to establish a high-level
platform that brings together international partners and
national authorities to regularly discuss, promote and
accompany the country in its reform agenda, as well as
inform on the United Nations transition. That platform
would continue under the chairmanship of the Resident
Coordinator following the closure of UNIOGBIS.
I take this opportunity to commend the other
members of the group of five — the African Union,
ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and the European Union — whose joint and
tireless efforts ensured that Guinea-Bissau complied
with the electoral calendar.
Before I conclude, allow me to recall that, during
the past 20 years, the United Nations has invested
considerably in Guinea-Bissau. Now, ahead of the
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in
the country, we have a collective responsibility to
safeguard the democratic and peacebuilding dividends.
It is imperative that Guinea-Bissau be kept high on the
agenda of the regional and international community,
including the Peacebuilding Commission.
4/18

14/02/2020

We must collectively step up our efforts aimed
at inclusive and sustainable development for all,
within the context of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework and beyond.
Focusing on the most vulnerable, particularly women
and youth, is paramount, considering that about 60 per
cent of Guinea-Bissau’s population is under 25-years
old and most young people are unemployed. Without
opportunities, they could become spoilers, rather than
peace agents.
Finally, following the legacy of Amílcar Cabral, I
encourage Bissau-Guinean political leaders to engage
in constructive dialogue to overcome their differences
and respect their national institutions — the very basis
of the State — in order to rebuild their country for the
next generation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. SoriCoulibaly for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Costa Filho.
Mr. Costa Filho: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council in my new capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). I take this opportunity to recognize my
predecessor and former Chair of the configuration,
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, for his dedication and
commitment to Guinea-Bissau. I also wish to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, for her comprehensive
briefing today and her work at the helm of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS).
The PBC congratulates Guinea-Bissau on the
successful conduct of legislative and presidential
elections in 2019 and thanks regional and international
partners for providing the necessary financial and
logistical support for the polls. However, the holding
of elections was only the first step towards political
stability. The country’s institutions are now dealing
with the legal challenge of the electoral results pending
before the Supreme Court of the Justice. We expect
that any issues will be addressed in accordance with
the Constitution, in a peaceful and transparent manner.
A peaceful transition of power will allow all of us to
build on the positive momentum of the elections to
consolidate democracy and focus on the implementation
of the country’s peacebuilding priorities.
20-03982

14/02/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

For Guinea-Bissau, 2020 will be a landmark year.
Once the legal proceedings on the electoral results are
settled, the country will witness, for the first time in
its history, an elected President handing over office to
another democratically elected President.
UNIOGBIS will continue its drawdown and transfer
of tasks to an empowered Resident Coordinator’s
Office and to the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, as mandated by the Security Council.
Let us recall, however, that this transition should not
be a United Nations-centred process. Instead, the role
of the United Nations will be to ensure a coherent
and coordinated approach in support of nationally led
efforts to take forward policies and programmes that
address the root causes of instability and promote
peace and development. The Commission remains
committed to supporting UNIOGBIS central role in
contributing to those efforts. It will be important for
the international community to continue to help the
Government to strengthen democratic and inclusive
institutions to assist in internal reforms, support the
engagement of women and youth in peacebuilding
and promote and protect human rights. In addition,
in the light of the current political situation, it will be
essential that UNIOGBIS continue to exercise good
offices and facilitate inclusive political dialogue. As
the situation in Guinea-Bissau is still volatile, it is of
the utmost importance that we ensure an appropriate
political monitoring of developments in the country.
I recently met with Special Representative SoriCoulibaly to discuss how the PBC’s convening, bridging
and advisory role could serve to enhance coherence
among stakeholders during this critical year and ensure
sustained international attention to Guinea-Bissau’s
long-term needs. The Peacebuilding Commission is
prepared to assist UNIOGBIS and the Government of
Guinea-Bissau by providing a platform for coherence
and coordination among stakeholders, as well as for
the promotion of shared analysis and understanding of
the multidimensional peacebuilding challenges in the
country. Our efforts, of course, will be anchored in the
dialogue with the Government. We will try our best to
work with them to identify peacebuilding priorities and
promote the internal reforms that the country needs to
accomplish long-term stability. The Commission is also
committed to addressing the challenge of the financial
cliff often experienced by transitioning countries.
In that case, we must work to mobilize international
and regional support for the country’s peacebuilding

S/PV. 8724

priorities, particularly for national development
plans and for the future United Nations Sustainable
Development Framework, which will guide United
Nations development activities at country level.
Lastly, the PBC will continue to champion the
effective participation and representation of women
and youth in political processes and peacebuilding.
For those and other activities to happen, the role of the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) will continue to be pivotal.
The PBF projects have been instrumental in furthering
political inclusion in Guinea-Bissau, and we hope that
they will continue to play that role during and after
the transition.
The Peacebuilding Commission has been engaged
in Guinea-Bissau since it entered the formal agenda in
2007. Since then, the Commission has witnessed both
progress in, and challenges to, the PBC’s support to the
country’s peacebuilding priorities. I believe that the
2020 United Nations peacebuilding architecture review
will offer us a valuable opportunity to take stock and
reflect on the remaining challenges. I reiterate the
readiness of the PBC to support the reconfiguration
exercise and to provide timely and specific advice to the
Security Council in that regard. We must work together
to ensure that Guinea-Bissau will continue to receive
adequate cooperation from its international partners,
ensuring that the peacebuilding priorities supported by
UNIOGBIS will not be left unattended.
Once again, I thank you, Sir, for giving me this
opportunity to brief the Security Council. I look
forward to our cooperation in support of peacebuilding
in Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Costa
Filho for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation, African Integration and Nigeriens Abroad
of the Niger.
Mr. Ankourao (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), for her excellent briefing on the situation
on the ground. I wish to reiterate that the Niger, as
current Chair of the Economic Community of West

20-039825/18

S/PV.8724

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

African States (ECOWAS), stands more ready than ever
before to contribute to international and regional efforts
for the peaceful resolution of the Bissau-Guinean crisis.
The joint actions of international partners, in
particular the group of five international organizations
comprised of the African Union, ECOWAS, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
the European Union and the United Nations, have
contributed to the significant advances recorded in
recent years in Guinea-Bissau. That progress made it
possible to hold legislative elections on 10 March 2019,
followed by the first round of presidential elections
on 24 November and the second on 29 December,
under conditions deemed just and fair by the entire
international community. The Niger commends the
holding of those elections, congratulates the people of
Guinea-Bissau and thanks the international community
for providing the necessary funding.
However, while we celebrate the end of the electoral
cycle — proof that the protracted political crisis in
Guinea-Bissau has been resolved — the political
stalemate that emerged after the recent presidential
elections is increasingly a cause for concern. Currently,
a potentially catastrophic scenario cannot be ruled out
completely. Having led ECOWAS support missions to
Guinea-Bissau several times, I recall that, in order to
better appreciate the current crisis, it is necessary to
pay greater attention to the following elements.
First, the Bissau-Guinean crisis today has taken
on an institutional form, rather than a violent one. The
Constitution and electoral laws in force are sown with
the seeds of chronic misunderstandings and are therefore
fertile ground for all kinds of partisan interpretations.
Secondly, the current President of the Republic
concluded his legal mandate on 25 July. He has
been kept in office by the will of ECOWAS through
a resolution adopted at the July summit in order to
prevent an institutional vacuum.
Thirdly, the current Government emerged from
the 2019 legislative elections. Established on 3 June, it
is led by the largest party, the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, which does
not, however, hold an absolute majority, rendering
it unstable.
Fourthly, and finally, drug trafficking activities in
the country is regularly indicated as one of the major
destabilizing factors for institutions.
6/18

14/02/2020

In order to avoid a new political crisis in the
country, the Niger reiterates ECOWAS call to the
various bodies and institutions involved in the electoral
process in Guinea-Bissau to contribute to its political
and institutional normalization by finalizing their
work no later than 15 February — that is, tomorrow. In
that regard, Guinea-Bissau’s bilateral and multilateral
partners must remain determined and vigilant in
order to implement the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS road map. They must also work to maintain
the sanctions regime in order to ensure that offenders
comply with it.
With the upcoming closure of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, on
31 December, as Ms. Sori-Coulibaly just mentioned,
the extension of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau will be necessary to help the country
reform its security sector and those fundamental texts.
To that end, the Niger reiterates the African Union’s
call for a collective mobilization of the international
community, particularly the United Nations and the
European Union, to provide greater financial support
for the Mission in order to enable it to continue its
operations until the national defence and security forces
are able to ensure the country’s security. The West
African region, hard-hit by the increasingly intense
and expanding terrorist attacks, cannot afford further
instability in Guinea-Bissau, which is already seeing an
in increase in crimes related to drug trafficking.
In conclusion, I make an urgent appeal to the
Council to work together to ensure that Guinea-Bissau
does not relapse into instability and become a home
base for terrorists in the Sahel.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I once again would like to welcome
the Foreign Minister of the Niger. In addition, we would
like to thank Ms. Sori-Coulibaly and Ambassador
Ronaldo Costa Filho for their briefings.
We would like to begin by congratulating the
Government of Guinea-Bissau on having successfully
carried out its legislative and presidential elections in
2019. The results have been described by international
and civil society observers as transparent, fair and
credible. The recent political developments have a
direct positive impact on the long-term stability of the
country. We therefore welcome the relatively secure and
stable environment maintained during this period. We
are awaiting a ruling of the Supreme Court of Justice
20-03982

14/02/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

on the request for a nationwide vote recount. For the
credibility of the electoral process, the investigation
must conclude and its results must be implemented
without delay.
We urge the Government to maintain the impartiality
it has shown so far, and congratulate the military forces
on their commendable work in maintaining peace by
instructing the security forces to refrain from any act
that violates the constitutional order.
However, we are concerned about the reported
increase in provocative rhetoric, which contributes to
elevated tensions and fragmentation throughout the
territory, including ethnic and religious divisions. In
that regard, we urge the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
to continue initiatives such as supporting the National
Council for Social Communication in its development of
the code of conduct for media coverage during elections.
We also urge the Government to redouble efforts
to address past human rights violations and establish a
national human rights institution that is aligned with the
Paris Principles. The use of force by security agencies
against demonstrators is unacceptable. Their rights to
free expression and association must be protected.
We recognize the training work carried out by
UNIOGBIS to promote the integration of women and
young people, who are crucial to building a fairer, more
inclusive society. We highlight in particular the inclusion
of the new gender policy, which will be integrated into
all the work of the National Electoral Commission.
We note that, after the conclusion of the electoral
processes, it is vital to refocus the country’s priorities
on the economic situation. The deterioration of public
finances and the increase in public spending have
heightened State fragility, directly affecting the most
vulnerable populations. In that regard, food security
and chronic malnutrition remain one of the greatest
challenges for the people of Guinea-Bissau.
As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Dominican Republic welcomes the Commission’s
commendable work on the ground, especially with
regard to mobilizing funds, prioritizing peacebuilding
objectives, bolstering the participation and inclusion of
women and young people in the political process and
promoting the internal reforms that the country needs
to achieve lasting stability.

S/PV. 8724

We applaud the Government’s progress in countering
drug trafficking and organized crime — both criminal
activities that threaten efforts to stabilize and develop
robust political and social institutions. Collaboration
among the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
UNIOGBIS and INTERPOL has resulted in increased
technical training, improved detection equipment and
the seizure of the largest amount of cocaine in history.
In conclusion, we commend the efforts and good
offices of Guinea-Bissau’s regional and international
partners, especially the Economic Community of West
African States for its crucial support and mediation
during the electoral processes held in 2019.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau. I
also wish to thank Mr. Ronaldo Costa Filho, Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations. I once
again welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of the Niger.
Since the Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8656)
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau last November and
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/13,
which emphasized the importance of making headway
on the political track and conducting the presidential
elections according to their scheduled dates, the
situation on the whole has been stable. Tunisia therefore
hopes to see the situation in Guinea-Bissau moving
towards détente and an easing of current tensions, in
particular following the presidential elections, which
were conducted according to their scheduled dates, amid
good circumstances and in a peaceful and transparent
manner, as asserted by all observers.
Tunisia takes this opportunity to express its
appreciation for the efforts of the various parties
concerned, in particular the authorities in GuineaBissau. We commend the commitment of the military
forces to neutrality and to provide adequate conditions
conducive to holding the elections. We appreciate
the efforts of the National Electoral Commission and
the group of five international partners in GuineaBissau — the Economic Community of West African
States, the United Nations, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union — to ensure the holding of those

20-039827/18

S/PV.8724

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

important elections in Guinea-Bissau on 24 November
and 29 December 2019.
Despite the lack of clarity that prevailed following
the announcement of the electoral results and the
political crisis in its wake, which, if it continues, would
jeopardize security and stability in the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau, Tunisia commends the efforts of all the
parties concerned in seeking to surmount the crisis. We
also value the approach being taken by the two parties
in the presidential elections in opting for legal and
judicial means to determine the electoral results.
Given that the continued lack of trust among political
actors in Guinea-Bissau poses a challenge, Tunisia calls
upon all the parties concerned to prioritize the greater
national interest and maintain calm and security, while
refraining from taking any actions that could lead to
escalation or jeopardizing peace and security. In that
context, we commend the effective and constructive
mediation role played by the Economic Community of
West African States — a role it continues to play with
the various actors in the Republic of Guinea-Bissau — to
resolve the political crisis and ensure the best possible
conditions for establishing an environment of peace
and stability in this brotherly African country.
Tunisia also appreciates the efforts made both
to implement the road map and to fulfil the various
commitments undertaken in the Conakry Agreement,
including on the holding of elections, the constitutional
review and security sector reform. Those efforts will
enable the authorities in Guinea-Bissau to strengthen
national reconciliation, promote democratic governance
and prompt further reforms in various areas, including
fostering gender equality, enhancing the participation
of young people, upholding human rights, spreading a
culture of accountability and fostering economic and
social development.
Despite the great progress achieved on the political,
economic and social levels — with support from the
international partners represented in Guinea-Bissau
and from regional and international organizations — the
country will remain under threat if we fail to effectively
address the issue of drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, which continues to pose a serious
threat to stability, security and development in GuineaBissau. In that regard, Tunisia welcomes the efforts of
the authorities, with support from the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), to strengthen monitoring along land, sea
8/18

14/02/2020

and air borders so as to ward off those threats. We call for
increased support and follow-up in the implementation
of the national action plan on drug trafficking, and we
promote bilateral cooperation with the United Nations
and other partners to fight against this scourge.
My delegation stresses that a lack of political
stability in Guinea-Bissau endangers the country and
is likely to lead to further deterioration in the security
situation and increased backsliding on the political track
despite the progress seen in the holding of presidential
and legislative elections. Lapses in this progress are
likely to have serious repercussions throughout the
entire region, especially with terrorists and criminal
groups poised to take advantage of the situation, bolster
their presence and extend their activities; lapses will
also enable transnational organized crime in all its
forms. As for the reconfiguration of the United Nations
presence in Guinea-Bissau, in line with resolution
2458 (2019), Tunisia reiterates that it is following
this issue in parallel with the improvements in the
country’s situation.
In conclusion, I would like to note that under
Tunisia’s chairmanship of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048
(2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, we commend
the role played by the Committee’s former Chair,
His Excellency Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba,
Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea.
We intend to build upon the progress achieved by
the Committee thus far and stand ready to further
the work of the Committee. We will also continue to
consult and coordinate with UNIOGBIS, the members
of the Committee and other actors concerned as we
monitor developments in the situation and follow the
progress achieved on the path towards political stability
and reform.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, for sharing her
valuable insights with us in her briefing this morning.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Brazil, His Excellency Mr. Ronaldo Costa Filho, for
his briefing and his efforts in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We find it important to further
strengthen the link between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission, all the more so given
the necessity of an even more prominent role for the
PBC. We extend a special welcome to the Minister
20-03982

14/02/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

for Foreign Affairs of the Niger, His Excellency
Mr. Kalla Ankourao.
We commend the peaceful holding of both rounds
of the presidential elections, despite the political
tensions that preceded the polling. The voter turnout
of more than 70 per cent is very encouraging. It is
now of paramount importance that all stakeholders
act responsibly and ensure a peaceful transition of
power to a new president. As a first step, that requires
the determination of the final results of the elections
according to constitutional and democratic principles
and respect for the results by all parties. We very much
welcome efforts by the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) aimed at fostering dialogue, mediating
between political adversaries and supporting efforts to
find a way to overcome the political tensions, both in
the run-up to the elections and now.
After the conclusion of the electoral cycle, it is key
for all political actors to put their country and their
people’s interests first and to work in a collaborative
manner to enact critical reforms envisioned in the
Conakry Agreement and laid out in the Stability Pact.
We particularly commend the inclusion of gender
perspectives and the support for women’s engagement
in the democratic process. In that context, we also
welcome the support for efforts to end impunity for
gender-based crimes and human rights violations.
We remain concerned about the threats to stability
posed by transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking. We therefore express our support for the
important work of United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and UNIOGBIS in that regard. It remains
important to empower national law enforcement
authorities to effectively prosecute organized crime.
We are glad to hear that the transition process is
well-structured and planned. Any vacuum following
the end of UNIOGBIS must be avoided. Therefore,
Guinea-Bissau’s close cooperation with other United
Nations entities on the ground, and of regional
organizations, especially ECOWAS, as well as their
active involvement in the country, is crucial to avoid
destabilization. In that regard, we highlight the
continued importance of the cooperation of the group
of five international partners. We also commend the
role of the PBC country-specific configuration as well
as the support provided by the Peacebuilding Fund. The

S/PV. 8724

mandate renewal of UNIOGBIS this month needs to
take into account the realities on the ground and should
once more send a signal of our continued support for
Guinea-Bissau and our commitment to efforts aimed at
development and peacebuilding.
Before concluding, let me say that we also agree
with the Secretary-General’s recommendation to work
very closely with the Government of Guinea-Bissau in
order to ensure national ownership.
Mr. Michon (spoke in French) (France): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, and Ambassador Costa
Filho, who chairs the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings. I
would also like to welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Niger, which is currently
chairing the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).
First of all, I would like to welcome the holding of
the presidential elections last November and December.
After a period of great uncertainty, the conduct of the
polls in peaceful conditions was a major step forward. I
would like to commend the responsible attitude of all of
Guinea-Bissau’s civilian and military actors who made
it possible to reach that stage.
These positive developments also owe much to the
support of the international community in its various
components, and I would like to pay tribute in particular
to the States of ECOWAS, whose unfailing political,
economic and military commitment has borne fruit
and which, as we have heard, continues to remain very
committed to supporting their regional partner. I also
wish to commend the positive role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, under the leadership of Ambassador
Vieira, and now Ambassador Costa Filho, and the role
of the Peacebuilding Fund projects in contributing to
the current results.
The developments I mentioned serve to show that
all the tools we have collectively deployed to respond
to this crisis, including the sanctions that have been
decided by the Council, have been effective. But despite
the progress, the situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
fragile. We are still awaiting confirmation of the
results of the presidential elections by Guinea-Bissau’s
Supreme Court, and we hope that the electoral process
will be completed as soon as possible and in accordance
with the rule of law. The current situation illustrates the
extent to which the process in Guinea-Bissau remains

20-039829/18

S/PV.8724

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

to be consolidated. Beyond the elections, as others have
said, the restoration of lasting peace and stability also
requires significant progress in other areas, including
the set of political reforms provided for in the Conakry
Agreement of 2016, in particular the revision of the
Constitution, which must now be implemented as soon
as possible by the new authorities.
In that context, France supports the implementation
of the transition plan for the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau that we decided
in the Security Council, with a view to the Office’s
closure at the end of the year. However, as the transfer
of the Office’s various activities begins to take place,
we call for the mission in support of security sector
reform — which is particularly crucial for the long-term
stability of the country — to be effectively taken over.
Finally, continued progress, as noted by several
speakers, in the fight against organized crime, in
particular drug trafficking, will require a strong
and sustained commitment from the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, as well as continued support from the
international community. We are therefore at a critical
juncture, and the coming weeks should allow us to
confirm that Guinea-Bissau is truly committed to the
path of sustainable stabilization. The supporting role
of the region and, more broadly, of the international
community and the Council, will continue to be
important in the period ahead, and the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau can count on France’s support for all
those efforts.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, on behalf
of my delegation, let me once again warmly welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Niger to the Security Council. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rosine Sori-Coulibaly and Ambassador Ronaldo Costa
Filho for their comprehensive briefings.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2020/105), the completion of the electoral cycle in
Guinea-Bissau is indeed a critical benchmark. Indonesia
welcomes the conduct of the presidential elections, as
they took place in a generally peaceful way. We would
like to congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau and
express our sincere hope that the process will pave
the way towards lasting stability and prosperity in
the country. In that regard, I would like to highlight
three points.
10/18

14/02/2020

First, it is necessary to resolve the post-election
stalemate. We urge all parties to put aside their
differences and enable the peaceful transfer of power.
We hope that the electoral dispute can swiftly be
resolved through peaceful means so as to prevent
the country from lapsing into a major political crisis.
In a country that has experienced political turmoil
since independence, instability has for too long hurt
the economy of Guinea-Bissau and has created an
environment conducive for organized crime, including
drug trafficking. It is high time for all BissauGuineans to move away from political uncertainty, so
that they can focus their energies on addressing more
pressing issues, including constitutional reform and
economic development.
That leads me to my second point, which is the
implementation of multisectoral reform. Once the
transfer of power is be completed in a peaceful way,
Bissau-Guinean stakeholders will have to overcome
immediate challenges, ensuring political stability, the
functioning of State institutions and improving the
lives of the population. Poverty reduction is one of
the areas that needs to be focused on, considering that
more than half of the population lives below the poverty
line. Another area is combating drug trafficking and
organized crime, which continue to threaten the
stability of Guinea-Bissau.
We are heartened by the progress achieved thus
far, including the development of a national action
plan on drug trafficking and organized crime, the
strengthening of law enforcement capacity and the
increased participation by women in the political
process. The progress must be sustained and will lay
a solid foundation for the future of Guinea-Bissau. We
commend the work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and other
international partners in that regard.
Thirdly, on the drawdown of UNIOGBIS, which we
are gradually embarking upon, with the closure of the
mission planned for the end of this year, it is important
to keep in mind that the country is at a critical on its
path forward. Continuous engagement and support from
the international community is of crucial importance
for the subsequent peacebuilding and reform efforts.
We welcome the development of a road map to ensure
the seamless transition of the United Nations presence
in Guinea-Bissau and commend the PBC for the
mobilization of funds to support the United Nations
20-03982

14/02/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV. 8724

country team. I concur with the Secretary General and
the Chair of the PBC country-specific configuration
that the transition should not be a United Nationscentred process and that national ownership is key.

them by their constituents. Parliament members will be
required to put aside differences and work more closely
with each other through a non-partisan approach in
order to realize reforms in the country.

Lastly, we would like to commend the ongoing
efforts of, and sustained support by, regional
and international actors, including the Economic
Community of West African States, the group of five
international partners and the PBC, with a view to
restoring peace and stability and ensuring sustainable
development in the country. Moving ahead, we must
ensure that the many hard-won gains will not be lost
and that the international community will continue to
support peacebuilding and development in GuineaBissau, even after the closure of UNIOGBIS.

In addition to those reforms, it would be remiss of
me not to mention the socioeconomic improvements
required in the country. The current situation in West
Africa has shown that underdeveloped communities
plagued by lack of economic opportunities and poor
availability of social services are those most likely
to be targeted by criminal and radical elements. We
have observed in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/105) that transnational organized crime, mainly
drug trafficking, exists in Guinea-Bissau. We welcome
the strategic national action plan on drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime, developed by the
country with the assistance of United Nations agencies,
particularly the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime. We also call on the international community to
continue its support for Guinea-Bissau as the country
continues to work on peacebuilding and sustainable
development. We further call on the Peacebuilding
Commission to continue to serve as a platform to
mobilize such support.

Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We also wish to recognize and welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Niger and to express our
gratitude to Special Representative of the Secretary
General, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, and His Excellency
Ambassador Costa Filho for their briefings.
While gradually improving, the situation in
Guinea-Bissau still presents some challenges, which,
if not properly addressed, may very well lead to a
regression in the gains we have seen in the country over
the past few years. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
congratulates former President José Mário Vaz for
completing a full term in office and Guinea-Bissau
for the conclusion of relatively peaceful presidential
elections. Commendations are also due to members of
the international community, including the group of
five international partners, in particular the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and
civil society organizations, which provided valuable
support during the electoral process.
As noted by Special Representative Sori-Coulibaly,
the result was contested. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines conveys its support for the internal legal
process currently ongoing in Guinea-Bissau in relation
to the election dispute and calls on the relevant parties
to respect the process and act accordingly.
We further encourage Guinea-Bissau to work, as
a matter of urgency, towards the critical reforms and
strategic foci outlined in the ECOWAS road map, the
Conakry Agreement and the Stability Pact. We urge the
political actors in Guinea-Bissau to keep their focus on
the noble tasks involved in leading the country towards
progress and stability, which have been entrusted to

Finally, we wish to thank the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) for its commendable service in
Guinea-Bissau during the period under review. As
the Office approaches the mandated timeline for its
closure, as stipulated in resolution 2458 (2019), it has
made tremendous strides towards the three-phase
drawdown. We welcome the $4 million mobilized by
the Peacebuilding Fund to facilitate the United Nations
transition and the seamless transfer of UNIOGBIS’s
residual mandated tasks to other United Nations agencies
and partners. We were also particularly encouraged by
the outreach efforts undertaken by UNIOGBIS to bring
greater attention of the drawdown to States and entities
in the region, which we also see as having an important
role in filling the void that will be left by UNIOGBIS.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the Foreign Minister of the Niger to
today’s meeting.
We listened carefully to the briefings by Special
Representative Sori-Coulibaly and Ambassador
Costa Filho.
We have noted the Secretary-General’s report on
the developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities

20-0398211/18

S/PV.8724

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) (S/2020/105). The
National Assembly of Guinea-Bissau adopted the
Government’s policy programme last October, and two
rounds of presidential elections were held smoothly at
the end of last year and early this year. Political stability
in the country was maintained during that period,
which China was pleased to see. We highly commend
the positive role by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and countries of the region.
We have also noted that there remains controversy
at the domestic level regarding the election results.
We hope that all parties in the country will act in the
interest of the country’s peace and stability, strengthen
dialogue and coordination and resolve the differences
appropriately in order to ensure the smooth completion
of the election process and maintain security and
stability in the country.
China stands for African solutions to African
problems. We hope that all parties in the country
will consolidate the hard-won positive momentum,
continue to implement the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS six-point road map and vigorously advance
reforms with a view to improving people’s livelihoods
and promoting the country’s development and stability.
We call upon the international community to lend
tangible support to Guinea-Bissau in combating drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. China
supports the people of Guinea-Bissau in exploring a
development path that fits their national conditions.
A development perspective must be incorporated
into conflict prevention efforts. The international
community must assist the country in its capacitybuilding, while giving priority to such issues as poverty
eradication, education, health care and infrastructure
with a view to achieving sustainable development
and lasting peace and stability. UNIOGBIS and the
Peacebuilding Commission can play a greater role in
that regard.
China supports the African Union, ECOWAS
and other regional and subregional organizations and
countries in the region in continuing their constructive
role. We call on UNIOGBIS to strengthen coordination
with ECOWAS, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and other United Nations agencies,
to respect the national sovereignty and aspirations of the
country and, on that basis, to lend tailored support and
assistance to the country in its efforts towards peace and
development. China will continue to support the work
12/18

14/02/2020

of UNIOGBIS, including its phased restructuring and
transfer of responsibilities as mandated by resolution
2458 (2019). We hope that UNIOGBIS will enhance its
cooperation with the national Government and fully
heed the Government’s opinions to ensure a seamless
transfer of responsibilities and maximize the benefits
of its work for the people of Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting, one year
after the Security Council visited Guinea-Bissau,
where it had an opportunity to interact with Ms. SoriCoulibaly. We join others in welcoming the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African Integration
and Nigeriens Abroad and are mindful that the Niger
is the current Chair of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). We thank Ms. SoriCoulibaly for her presence and her update on the
developments of the past 12 months. We further welcome
His Excellency Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho and
appreciate the work of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I would like to focus my observations on three
issues, namely, political developments, transnational
organized crime and the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
First, with regard to political developments, my
delegation would like to join other Council members
in congratulating the people of Guinea-Bissau on the
presidential elections, which were carried out in a free,
fair and credible manner. That is a positive milestone,
especially the fulfilment of the electoral cycle. South
Africa is confident that this will put the country on a
trajectory towards stability and prosperity. We also call
on all the parties in Guinea-Bissau to exercise calm and
restraint in response to the recent tensions around the
election results and to allow the legal process to take its
course as the current impasse is overcome.
Inclusivity is paramount as the country moves
forward. The participation of women and gender
equality remain critical issues that should be
addressed. Similarly, the engagement of youth in the
political sphere should be prioritized. The demographic
dividend should be harnessed to its full potential in
order for the country to attain sustainable peace and
development. Similarly, South Africa commends the
strong leadership of ECOWAS, under the Foreign
Minister of the Niger, and its support of the mediation
20-03982

14/02/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

efforts to further the aspirations of the citizens of
Guinea-Bissau. We urge the leaders of Guinea-Bissau
to pursue the spirit of cooperation with ECOWAS by
fully implementing the reform agenda as stipulated
in the Conakry Agreement. That road map highlights
the need for constitutional reforms, inclusive political
dialogue and national reconciliation processes to be
implemented. Furthermore, the role of the international
community has been critical in supporting GuineaBissau in the electoral and peace processes. We urge the
international community to continue its strong support
so that Guinea-Bissau may achieve socioeconomic
development and build an inclusive society.
Secondly, our delegation remains concerned about
the threat that transnational organized crime poses
for Guinea-Bissau and the region. We support the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report, which states that
“[t]he strengthening of land, maritime and air
border control is critical in confronting this threat.”
(S/2020/105, para. 89)
In that regard, we commend the efforts being
undertaken, in partnership with UNIOGBIS, to
provide strategic and technical advice and to support
the Government of Guinea-Bissau in combating drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, in close
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. It is important that the requisite support be
provided in order to avoid fuelling terroristic activity
in the region.
Thirdly, and lastly, South Africa supports a
responsible drawdown, with due consideration for the
situation on the ground, so as to avoid the reversal
of the significant progress that has been registered
so far. We furthermore support the implementation
of the transition plan for the gradual drawdown and
transfer of tasks to the United Nations country team,
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and international partners with a view to a prospective
completion by 31 December.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank the
Special Representative for her briefing and her tireless
efforts to further peace and security in Guinea-Bissau.
We also extend our thanks and a warm welcome to
Ambassador Costa Filho as he takes up his new role
here in New York.

S/PV. 8724

The United States commends Guinea-Bissau for
having held peaceful first-round and run-off elections
in December, with the help of the international
community. Free, fair and transparent elections are
the cornerstone of democracy, and we are encouraged
by how far Guinea-Bissau has come in empowering
its citizens to choose their own leaders. No matter the
outcome of the Supreme Court ruling, the United States
will continue to support democratic institutions and
the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau. As a friend and as
a partner, the United States looks forward to working
with the President-elect to help the country carry out
its reform agenda, advance peace and security, address
corruption and narcotics trafficking, strengthen
democratic governance, and spur economic growth and
development. We also look forward to continuing to
work with the Special Representative, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), the African Union, the European Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the Economic Community of West African States on
these shared priorities. Each has played a critical role in
moderating Guinea-Bissau’s electoral process.
The United States is also concerned by the drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime that
threaten stability in Guinea-Bissau and in the broader
region. We welcome the opportunity to work with
UNIOGBIS and with the people of Guinea-Bissau to
prevent the spread of these destructive operations.
We recognize that UNIOGBIS is facilitating valuable
programming in support of counter-trafficking efforts
in Guinea-Bissau, and we underscore the need for the
United Nations to continue this important work, even
as UNIOGBIS draws down and the United Nations
country team assumes additional responsibilities. We
continue to support the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral to conclude UNIOGBIS by the end of 2020
and are pleased to hear that the schedule for withdrawal
remains in place.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the briefers for
their insightful overviews of the latest developments in
Guinea-Bissau.
We were encouraged to see that the presidential
elections in Guinea-Bissau were held in a generally
peaceful atmosphere. However, we urge the parties
to refrain from using inflammatory rhetoric and
also using potential tensions in society for their own
political gains.

20-0398213/18

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV.8724

14/02/2020

It is important that the final confirmation of the
results of the 2019 presidential elections be announced
soon. There is a clear need to create conditions for trust
between the political actors and to move forward with
the necessary economic and social reforms.

African States (ECOWAS), the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) for their support and mediation efforts in
ensuring that the elections took place as scheduled.

We welcome the timely and decisive engagement of
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union at the end of last year to prevent the
deterioration of the political situation in Guinea-Bissau
and support their continued engagement in the matter.

Secondly, we took note of the recent political
developments in Guinea-Bissau. We look forward to the
completion of the electoral cycle and the confirmation
of the election results by the relevant organs in
Guinea-Bissau. It is important that the relevant parties
resolve their differences within the constitutional
and electoral-law framework and work together to
implement and ensure a peaceful implementation of the
election results once announced.

The participation of women and youth in reform
processes and peacebuilding activities is of crucial
importance. We are glad that a high level of participation
of women in the electoral process was achieved and urge
the Government of Guinea-Bissau to further integrate
and implement gender aspects in its policies.
Estonia supports the work of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly and the
planned activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
including the phased drawdown as set out in the
current mission’s mandate. It is very important that
while the mission is planning for the transfer of its
tasks to the United Nations country team, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and other
partners, a holistic approach to peacebuilding activities
be taken. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund can play an important supportive
role in this regard.
Mr. Dihn (Viet Nam): At the outset, on behalf
of my delegation, I would like to warmly welcome
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Niger to this meeting. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2020/105) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Rosine
Sori-Coulibaly, and His Excellency Ronaldo Costa
Filho, Permanent Representative of Brazil, for their
comprehensive statements.
My
delegation
following observations.

wishes

to

make

the

First, we commend the efforts made by national
stakeholders and welcome the generally peaceful
conduct of the presidential elections held in 2019
in Guinea-Bissau. We also commend the work
of international partners, the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
14/18

Thirdly, we call on the future President of GuineaBissau, members of Parliament and all concerned
parties to work in a collaborative manner to seize this
opportunity to move forward towards national unity and
to enact the critical reforms envisioned in the Conakry
Agreement, the Stability Pact and the ECOWAS road
map. We stress the importance of intensifying the
fight against drug trafficking and transnational crime
and of strengthening bilateral cooperation with the
United Nations and other partners in addressing those
challenges. We emphasize the need for the protection
of civilians and increased participation of women and
youth in the decision-making process and development
course of Guinea-Bissau.
Fourthly, we reiterate our position in support
of the implementation of resolution 2458 (2019), the
presidential statement issued on 11 February on the
situation in West Africa and the Sahel (S/PRST/2020/2),
and the final communiqué of the ECOWAS
Extraordinary Summit held on 8 November 2019.
Fifthly, we call on the United Nations, UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), ECOWAS and the future Government of
Guinea-Bissau to work closely together in implementing
and completing the subsequent phases, leading to
the transfer of UNIOGBIS’s residual peacebuilding
activities and its gradual drawdown and planned closure
by 31 December 2020.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms its commitment
to work closely with the United Nations, the African
Union, ECOWAS, the future Government of GuineaBissau and the relevant parties in sustaining peace,
security and sustainable development in Guinea-Bissau.
20-03982

14/02/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Sori-Coulibaly and Ambassador Filho for
their briefings, which set out clearly the achievements
that Guinea-Bissau has made, but also some of the
challenges that remain.
I would also like to welcome the Foreign Minister
of the Niger to the Council. As current Chairman of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Niger has a vital role to play in
supporting the democratic process in Guinea-Bissau.
The peaceful holding of legislative and presidential
elections in 2019 were significant steps forward in
Guinea-Bissau’s political transition. We commend
the Guinea-Bissau authorities and people on this
progress, and we welcome the ongoing neutrality of
Guinea-Bissau’s military and security forces in the
political process.
We are concerned, however, by the political
instability that we have seen following the election.
The uncertainty that this creates risks undermining the
democratic process and damaging public confidence
in the electoral system. We call on all political actors
to work together to resolve the situation as quickly as
possible so that a new Government can be inaugurated
and focus on the important work of consolidating
democracy and providing development and stability for
its people, as per the 2016 Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS road map.
The United Kingdom appreciates the supporting
role played in Guinea-Bissau by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), the Peacebuilding Commission, the
United Nations country team and other United Nations
bodies and offices, which have helped build a more
robust and inclusive political environment. We thank
Ms. Sori-Coulibaly for her work and will continue
to provide our full support to her in the discharge of
her mandate.
The United Kingdom also welcomes the key role
played by ECOWAS and the group of five international
partners in holding political stakeholders in GuineaBissau to account. We trust that they will remain as
engaged and vigilant throughout the full implementation
of the Conakry Agreement.
Given the recent progress, the United Kingdom
supports the drawdown of UNIOGBIS by December

S/PV. 8724

2020, and we are confident the steps are under way to
ensure a smooth transition. It is important that key tasks
be handed over to United Nations agencies or other
actors, such as the United Nations country team, with
respect to development, and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, with respect to drugs trafficking
and transnational crime, and that those agencies have
sufficient resources to take on the tasks.
As UNIOGBIS draws down, the good offices of
Mr. Chambas, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, will be increasingly important in
accompanying Guinea-Bissau on the path to greater
political stability. The Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund will also play a helpful role in
ensuring the continuity of support for peacebuilding
tasks. It is vital that political stakeholders in GuineaBissau continue to engage positively with the United
Nations good offices and sustain their commitment to
the reform agenda until the Conakry Agreement has
been fully implemented.
In conclusion, we hope that the political progress
achieved in recent years can be maintained to carry
Guinea-Bissau out of its past into a stronger, more
stable and more democratic future. The primary
responsibility for delivering that lies with the BissauGuinean Government. The United Kingdom, along with
the international community, will continue to monitor
the situation and work with the Government in support
of that objective.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Niger
at today’s briefing. We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Rosine
Sori-Coulibaly, and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Mr. Ronaldo Costa
Filho, for the information they have provided.
We are pleased at the fact that the elections in
Guinea-Bissau took place within the legally mandated
timeline in accordance with relevant standards of
democracy and transparency, for which it was highly
commended by regional and international observers.
We note the special role played by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) and the Economic Community of West
African States in the preparation of the elections.

20-0398215/18

S/PV.8724

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

As is rightly noted in the report of the Secretary
General (S/2020/105), the conclusion of the electoral
cycle could be a milestone in the modern history of
Guinea-Bissau. We trust that with those elections
the country will be able to turn the page on an era of
protracted political tumult, thereby creating conditions
that would enable the country to make a peaceful shift
towards socioeconomic development. Such path can be
followed only if national consensus is made a priority.
At this critical juncture, we call upon all social and
political forces to act responsibly, in line with national
interests, facilitating prompt resolution of disputes.
We believe that the time has come for addressing the
issue of lifting the Security Council sanctions against
Guinea-Bissau. The sanctions have long been obsolete
in nature. The current situation is a far cry from the
events of 2012. As the recent elections have again
shown, the armed forces are staying out of politics. We
can therefore observe that the sanctions achieved their
objective long ago. Maintaining the sanctions, in the
light of the drawdown of the United Nations presence
in the country, is all the more bewildering.
As was the case in the past, we believe that the
restructuring of UNIOGBIS is necessary and should
be carried out in a phased manner in line with the
timeline set out in resolution 2458 (2019). By the end
of 2020, when UNIOGBIS is to conclude its operations
in Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations country team
should have secured the relevant mechanisms and tools
not merely to facilitate development in Guinea-Bissau
but also to provide meaningful assistance to the country
in countering such challenges as drug trafficking
and corruption and in fine-tuning the institutions of
State governance.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Belgium.
Belgium welcomes the holding of the presidential
elections, which took place without major incident and
with a high level of participation. However, the political
arena continues to be characterized by tensions and a
climate of mistrust, which is worrisome. Let us not forget
that political stability is essential for socioeconomic
recovery and the fight against trafficking. The time
has come for national political actors to play a positive
and constructive role. As we await clarity on the final
result of the presidential elections, Belgium calls for
dialogue and restraint so as to avoid further tension
16/18

14/02/2020

in the situation. For that reason, the sanctions regime
remains relevant, although certain adjustments could
be envisaged in the near future.
With regard to the future of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), we support the phased transition plan
provided for in the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council. However, it is important that the transition
take place as calmly and as painlessly as possible for the
country: the departure of UNIOGBIS should not imply
any abandonment of Guinea-Bissau by the international
community. That is why Belgium welcomes the
increased engagement already undertaken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel.
Strengthening the country team and, in particular,
the capacity of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime is essential. I welcome the progress already made
in that direction and hope that it will continue. In the
immediate future, Belgium supports the coordinated
action of UNIOGBIS and the group of five international
partners on the ground.
The monitoring of the situation by the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the support of the Peacebuilding Fund are positive.
It will be important that that support be continued in
the new phase opening up in Guinea-Bissau.
I will conclude by expressing the full support of
Belgium for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sori-Coulibaly, and of
UNIOGBIS as a whole.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mrs. Pinto Lopes D’Alva (Guinea-Bissau): I thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting my delegation to the
Security Council and for giving me the floor.
First of all, I would like to congratulate Belgium
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February 2020. We wish the
Council success in its deliberations.
My delegation would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary General for GuineaBissau, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, for her briefing on
20-03982

14/02/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

the developments in the country, for the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and for all her dedication
since her arrival in Guinea-Bissau last September.
I would like also to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Ronaldo Costa Filho, Permanent Representative of
Brazil and Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing on the
developments in the situation in Guinea-Bissau. I would
also like to express my country’s sincere appreciation
for the personal engagement of his predecessor, former
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Mauro Vieira, whose strong advocacy in favour of
consolidating peace in Guinea-Bissau over the past few
years was crucial.
As we just heard in the very comprehensive
briefing just delivered by the Special Representative,
since the previous meeting of the Security Council on
Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.8656), a lot has happened
in the country, and many challenges remain for the
consolidation of peace. However, with the continued
work of the United Nations on the ground and the
fundamental role of the Peacebuilding Commission
in bringing together the efforts of the international
community in support and assistance to GuineaBissau, we cherish the hope that sustainable peace in
the country is achievable. We appreciate the important
role of the Peacebuilding Fund and its funded projects,
which allowed for the participation of women and
youth in major political processes, including in the
elections and all other relevant peacebuilding efforts in
the country.

S/PV. 8724

Despite all the political tensions and difficulties
in 2019, following the March legislative elections a
Government led by Prime Minister Aristides Gomes of
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cabo Verde, the party with the largest number of seats
in Parliament, was formed, and despite the Government
programme already adopted by the National People’s
Assembly, the country is still experiencing a series of
challenges that require special attention and a dedicated
presence by the United Nations.
As all present are aware, elections in Guinea-Bissau
always take place in a peaceful environment, and this
time was no different. As usual, the people went to the
polls in an orderly and peaceful manner. Although the
results of the second round have been challenged and
the process is still pending before the Supreme Court
of Justice, the population nevertheless has remained
calm and is patiently awaiting the final ruling of the
Court, an organ of national sovereignty. The people of
Guinea-Bissau deserve a clear and positive closure to
the process so that they can see the light of hope for the
future of their children.
In that regard, the Government of GuineaBissau welcomes the positions of the United Nations,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union on the need for a
pronouncement from the country’s competent judicial
office on the post-election crisis, because we believe
that only with free, fair and transparent elections will
we be able to strengthen the democratic rule of law in
our country so that the sovereign will of the people
can prevail.

After the general elections of 2014, when hopes
were high for Guinea-Bissau, the country entered into
another period of political and institutional instability
in 2015, with a consequent blockade of institutions
that has caused the normal functioning of the State
apparatus to deteriorate.

We are sure that by 15 February — the date
recommended by the ECOWAS extraordinary
conference on the political situation in GuineaBissau — the Supreme Court of Justice will issue its
final decision on the election in accordance with the
Constitution of the Republic, so that the country can
return to constitutional normality.

With the important and unique role played by
Guinea-Bissau’s civil society, including women
and youth, with the support of the international
community in the process, an understanding among
national political actors was finally reached and the
Government was formed, which allowed the legislative
elections to be held on 10 March 2019 and presidential
elections on 24 November, with the second round held
on 29 December 2019.

We are convinced that the international community
and our development partners will continue patiently
to monitor the political situation in our country. In
that connection, allow me to reiterate our thanks
to the members of the group of five international
partners in Guinea-Bissau, in particular the United
Nations and our subregional organization, ECOWAS,
which has provided unceasing support in the process
of consolidating peace and social and economic

20-0398217/18

S/PV.8724

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

development in Guinea-Bissau, including through the
presence of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau.
We thank the United Nations, the African Union,
ECOWAS, the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the International
Organization of la Francophonie and our bilateral and
multilateral partners and friends for their financial and
technical support for the realization of the elections.
Their engagement in the preparations for and the
holding of the elections is very much appreciated by
our Government. We ask that they remain attentive to
ensuring a peaceful conclusion of the process by the
relevant national organs of sovereignty.
We are aware of the structural changes, the
drawdown and the new configuration of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS), as well as the planned withdrawal.
However, we believe that the continued involvement of
the United Nations, through the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the Organization’s
agencies, funds and programmes, remains necessary
for the strengthening the institutions of the Republic,

18/18

14/02/2020

implementing the necessary reforms and promoting
sustainable development so as to assure the people
of Guinea-Bissau that the United Nations is there to
help us consolidate our democracy and strengthen our
State institutions.
Let us remain positive that after the electoral
process has finally been settled, there will be a new
beginning for Guinea-Bissau and that the United
Nations, with a new, reconfigured mandate, will have
a chance to focus more closely on helping us with the
development agenda. Only with sustainable peace and
strong institutions can we achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. Guinea-Bissau and its people
deserve a new beginning and a new chapter. We are
counting on the Council’s continued support and that of
the international community as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

20-03982
