TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 6 DECEMBER

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l608) , , . , . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .
Statement by the President ....................................

1

Adoption of the agenda ......................................

1

Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 2 December 1971 from the President of the United Arab Emirates
to the Secretary-General (S/10420) , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . , . . . . . . .
(a) Letter dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent Representatives of
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 10411);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/ 104 10 and Add. 1);
(cl Report of the Secretary-General on the situation along the cease-fire line in
Kashmir (S/10412 and Add.1) , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

1

2

S/PV. 1608

,/

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council? numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTH

Held in New York on Monday, 6 December
President:

Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

Adoption of the agenda

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l608)

2. The PRESIDENT: The provisional agenda for today’s
meeting comprises three items in accordance with the
decision taken yesterday. The first substantive item concerns the admission of a new Member to the United
Nations. It is expected that that item can be quickly dealt
with, as the Council will have to consider only the
procedural aspect of the admission. The next item is the
one discussed yesterday and the day before, which has been
included in the agenda in view of the extreme urgency of
the problem and the continuing serious and grave situation
between India and Pakistan.

of the agenda.

2. Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 2 December 1971 from the President of
the United Arab Emirates to the Secretary-General
(S/l 0420).
3. (a) Letter dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representatives of Argentina, Belgium, Burundi,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America to the United Nations
addresse,d to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 10411);
lb) Report of the Secretary-General (S/10410 and
Add.1);
(Cl Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
along the cease-fire line in Kashmir (S/10412 and
Add.1).

3. As the representative of Sierra Leone, I wish to say that
I am very distressed by the continuation of bloodshed on
the Indian subcontinent. Indeed it seems to me that in view
of the immense suffering of the population, which is
further aggravated by the continuation of hostilities, the
Council is in duty bound to take this matter up after we
have disposed of the procedural aspects of the first item.
4. The third item on the agenda is the question concerning
the situation in Southern Rhodesia, which has been
included in the agenda in accordance with the decision
taken at the 1605th meeting.

4. Question
concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10396);
Fourth report of the Committee established in
pursuance
of Security Council resolution
253 (1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2);
Interim report of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution
253 (1968) (S/10408).
jtatement

1971, at 3.30 p.m.

those invited to take part in the discussion, to make every
effort to employ moderate language so as to avoid in any
way exacerbating the situation or further inflaming passions. Likewise I would urge that in the interests of
accommodation and orderly procedure we all avoid bringing into our remarks any extraneous issues which might
better be raised in another forum.

(Sierra Leone).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

1. Adoption

MEETING

The agenda was adopted.

Admission of new Members
Letter dated 2 December 1971 from the President of the
United Arab Emirates to the Secretary-General (S/10420)
5. The PRESIDENT: Rule 59 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council provides that unless the
Council decides otherwise applications shall be referred by
the President to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members. Accordingly, unless I hear a proposal to the
contrary, I shall ask that Committee to study the application of the United Arab Emirates and to submit its report
thereon to the Security Council as soon as possible.

by the President

1. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is engagedin a
discussion of a very grave problem which is causinguntold
suffering on the subcontinent of South Asia. As President
of the Security Council I should therefore like to make a
strong appeal to all members of the Council, as Well as to

6. As no member of the Council has asked to speak at this
stage, I take it that my proposal is adopted.
1

7. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Now that the Council has
adopted a decision to submit the application of the United
Arab Emirates for admission to this Organization to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members, I should
like to urge that that Committee expedite its report so that
the Council can consider it at its next meeting. I understand
that that meeting is likely to take place tomorrow. In this
manner the way will be cleared for the question of the
admission of the new State to be taken up quickly by the
General Assembly.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia]
and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took places at the
Council table.

13. The PRESIDENT: As I stated yesterday before adjourning the meefing, the Council still has before it the
draft resolution submitted by the, People’s Republic of
China (S/10&?1/, and the six-Power draft resolution
[S/1042.5], to which the Council may wish to address itself
now, but we understand that consultations are still taking
place on the Chinese draft resolution which therefore may
not come up at this meeting.

8. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I should like to
support the proposal made by the representative of Somalia
to the effect that since the Committee on the Admission of
New Members has been scheduled to look into the matter
tomorrow its decision should be communicated to the
Security Council if possible at our meeting tomoxrow, so
that the final decision by the Council also may be taken
tomorrow-this in view of the fact that the application of
the United Arab Emirates for membership of the Arab
League has already been approved by that body.

14. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
IS. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, you mentioned
the six-Power draft resolution in document S/10425. One
of the sponsors is not a member of the Security Council. As
far as I am aware, it is not the practice in the Security
Council for a non-member of the Council to co-sponsor a
resolution. If a representative of a State which is not a
member of the Security Council is i&ted to participate in
the work of the Council, he is usually invited without the
right to vote and, if he submits a proposal, that proposal
should be submitted at his request by a member of the
Security Council. I should like to have an explanation on
this point.
(translated from Russian):

9. The PRESIDENT: In accordance’with the decision that
has been taken, the application of the United Arab
Emirates is referred to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members for examination and report. I would suggest
that a meeting of that Committee be tentatively scheduled
for tomorrow morhing at eleven, so that it will be in a
position to meet if the Security Council is not meeting.
10. That concludes our consideration of this item of our
agenda for this afternoon.

16. The PRESIDENT: The point of order raised probably
relates to rule 38 of the rules of procedure, which I will
read for the benefit of members before taking any decision:

(a) Letter dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent
. Representatives of Argentina, Belgium, Durnndi, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1041 1);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/10410 and Add.1);
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation along
the cease-fire line in Kashmir (S/10412 and Add.1)

“Any Member of the United Nations iavited in accordance with the preceding rule, or in application of
Article 32 of the Charter, to participate in the discussions
of the Security Council may submit proposals and draft
resolutions. These proposals and draft resolutions may be
put to a vote only at the request of a representative on
the Security Council .”
It is quite clear that the representative of Tunisia applied
for permission to participate and that that application was
granted, and in fact he did participate; so it is for members
of the Council now to decide.

I 11. The PRESIDENT: At its 1606th meeting the Council
decided to invite the representatives of India and Pakistan
to participate in the discussion of the item 09 its agenda
without the right to vote. In accordance with that decision,
and with the consent of the Council, I shall invite the
representatives of India and Pakistan to take places at the
Council table.

17. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): To ensure the
correct procedure of our meeting, I would state that the
question here is whether a Member of the United Nations
can or cannot co-sponsor a draft resolution before the
Council. Rule 38, states, in its last sentence:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S, Sen (India) and
Mr. A. S’hahi (Pakistan) took places at the Council table.

“These proposals and draft resolutions may be put to a
vote only at the request of a representative on the
Security Council.”

12. The PRESIDENT: At its meeting yesterday the
Council also decided to extend invitations to the representatives of Tunisia and Saudi Arabia to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council table, with the
understanding that they would be invited to take a seat at
the Council table when it was their turn to address the
Council. Accordingly, 1 shall, with the consent of the
Council, invite the representatives of Tunisia and Saudi
Arabia to take the seatsreserved for them at the side of the
CounciI table,

So the question here is, who is the member of the Security
Council who, in accordance with rule 38, is acting on behalf
of the representative of Tunisia in co-sponsoring the draft
resolution? That is my understanding of rule 38 in this
particular case.
18. Mr. VINCI (Italy): It is my understanding that if a
representative of a Member State takes part in the
2

Indo-Pakistan subcontinent.’ It is time to take measures. It
is time to decide on a cease-fife and the withdrawal of
forces from all the occupied territories.

discussion on a particular item and is entitled to introduce a
draft resolution on his own he can very easily be a
co-sponsor of a resolutioh introduced by members of the
cound
itself. I think that once he has the right to
participate he can do that; but the draft resolution cannot
be put to the vote unless that is requested by a representative on the Security Council. We have to wait until
that stage, It is bnly at that stage that the question can be
raised whether a Member State which is not a member of
the Council can be a co-sponsor of a draft resolution.

26. I launch this appeal on behalf of my country, my
Government and President Bourguiba.
27. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Tunisia for his willingness to compromise.
28. Mr, SEVILLA-SACASA (Nicaragua) fintepretafion
from Spanish): First I should like to congratulate you most

19.. Apart from that, I know there are severalprecedents
for Member States not members of the Council cosponsoring draft resolutions. I may be wrong, but I think
that on the question of Jimsalem there were co-sponsorsof
a draft resolution that were not members of the Council.
Perhaps the Secretariat could supply the information.

warmly Mr. President as you take over the Presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December. We are
confident you will be successful as you carry out your
mandate, because we are aware of your ability and
internati6nal experience. As I express my best wishes to
you, I am reminded of the outstanding performance of
Ambassador Kulaga in November which we appreciated and
applauded with personal satisfaction.

20. I repeat that in my view the question does not arise at
this stage. We have to reach the stage of voting, and at that
time any objection could be raised and we could consider
it; but we are not at that stage yet.

29. Yesterday the delegation of Nicaragua joined the
delegation of Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, Italy, Japan,
Sierra Leone and Somalia in submitting to the Security
Council for consideration draft resolution S/10423 which,
as we know, was not adopted by the Security Council.

21. The PRESIDENT: Perhaps I might quote from the
repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council, the
Supplement of 1964-1965. I read, for the benefit of
members of the Council:

30. Nicaragua, its people, its Government and, of course,
its delegation to the United Nations intensely regret what
has been happening in some of the frontier regions between
India and Pakistan, two neighbouring nations which geography and history joined so that they might march forward
together in the earnest search for greater progress for their
noble peoples.

“At the 1188th meeting on 30 December 1964, in
connexion with the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the President (Bolivia) called attention to
an amendment submitted by eighteen African States to
the joint draft resolution under consideration before the
C~uncii.
The President then explained that under rule 38
of the provisional rules of procedure, the amendment
could be put to the vote only at the request of a
representative of the Security Council.

31. Much blood of both peoples has been shed; much
more will flow if they fail seriously to ponder the
consequences of the armed conflict on which they have
embarked and if the United Nations, either here in the
Security Council or in the General Assembly, does not
adopt specific measures in accord with the requirements of
the gravity of the conflict.

“The representative of the USSR after commenting on
the draft resolution requested that the amendment of the
eighteen African States be put to the vote.”
22, The representative of Tunisia has asked to be allowed
to speak. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to address the Council.

32. My country-which has the smallest population among
all the countries now participating in the Security Council
but which has very pure ideals and a great sense of
responsibility in regard to the duties we assumed when we
signed the Charter at the San Francisco Conference-is
concerned over the tragedy which overwhelms these friends
of ours. We should like to make some contribution to
promote understanding between their national Governments and statesmen.

23. Mr. DRISS (Tunisia) (interpretation fvom French): I
thought that the item on the Council’s agenda was the
qudstion of the deterioration of the situation between India
and Pakistan, but since the Council started these meetings
there has been much talk about Tunisia. First, it was a
question whether Tunisia had a right to participate in the
debate, and now it is a question whether Tunisia has a right
to co-sponsor a draft resolution.

33. Since the Charter of the Organization was adopted,
many decisions have been taken in order to preserve peace
throughout the world. The leaders of peace-loving countries
have taken effective measures reflecting their firm determination to safeguard international order, to guarantee the
territorial integrity of States, as well as their political
independence, and to protect the rights and fundamental
freedoms of man. Let us recall in this connexion General
Assembly resolution 377 (V)-the “Uniting for peace”
resolution-which was adopted at a historic meeting during
the fifth session of the General Assembly, held at Lake

24. Tunisia is seeking to facilitate the work of the Council.
We do not wish to place obstacles in its path. Accordingly, I
wish to state that Tunisia withdraws as a co-sponsorof the
draft resolution, in order to facilitate the work of the
Council and so that the debate will not be prolonged on a
procedural question.
25. I appeal to the Council to consider the grave situation-and
I emphasize, grave situation-which ejcists on the
3

Success, on 3 November 1950, in conformity with the draft
resolution which was submitted by the then Secretary of
S&e Dean Acheson-of whom those of us who had the
honour to know him and work with him have very fond
memories. That resolution contains practical provisions of
incalculable value, instilling faith and confidence in all
those who, believing in our system of collective security,
were disheartened to observe the paralysis which had
occurred because of the inexorable provisions of Article 27
of the Charter. Under that resolution the General
Assembly, which without a doubt is the most representative
and democratic organ within the United Nations, assumes
what is only its proper function-to maintain peace and, as
the Charter states,
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to
mankind”.
34. If the Security Council finds itself paralysed because
of the continued use of the veto, then the General
Assembly can take action in a special session and adopt
such measures as it deems appropriate to impose order and
maintain international peace and security.

day, we have redoubled our efforts to achieve rapidly a
solution acceptable to,all members of the Council, or at
least a solution which would not precipitate any veto, The
basis of our refi’ort was the initial draft resolution of our
Belgian, Italian and Japanese friends. With our United
Kingdom friends we associated ourselves with them. It was
natural, after all, for the representatives of this old
continent of Europe, which is all too familiar with war and
which has been able to overcome its age-old hatreds, to
make an effort at peace.
43. We took into consideration not only the initial draft
resolution-the
eight-Power-draft
resolution-but, indeed,
all the views, without any exception, that have been
expressed here by those who have taken part in our
debates. It seemed to us in the present state of affairs that a
draft resolution largely based upon previous texts could win
the greatest support without arousing any unshakable
opposition. We have drawn up a text which I am going to
read out now because it is important for it to be set down
in the Council records. The Council, as a matter of fact, wiU
recognize passages which are not new. They are paragraphs
of previous draft resolutions. Our text reads as follows:
“i%e Security Council,

35. I well remember that the “Uniting for peace” resolution was unanimously endorsed by the Foreign Ministers of
the Republics of the Americas at their Fourth Consultative
Meeting. The American peoples once again expressed their
solidarity, thus confirming the prophetic words of President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt when he spoke about the faith
of the continent in the peace of the world and our ability
to offer that faith as a sound hope to our brothers overseas.

“Noting the reports of the Secretary-General of 3 and
4 December 1971,
“Having heard the statements of the representatives of
India and Pakistan,
“Gravely concerned that hostilities have broken out
between India and Pakistan which constitute an .immediate threat to international peace and security,

36. The Security Council must take action and take action
soon. If it does nothing, then the General Assembly must
act, for we cannot by any means accept the assumption
that it is only this organ-the Security Council-which
should concern itself with international peace and security,
Neither the Security Council nor the General Assembly can
remain idle while machine-guns take thousands of lives in a
region where understanding and a sense of brotherhood
should flourish.

“Recognizing the need to deal appropriately at a
subsequent stage, within the framework of the Charter,
with the issues which have given rise to the hostilities,
“Convinced that a rapid political solution will be
necessary for the restoration of conditions of normality
in the region of the conflict and for the return of refugees
to their homes,

37. That is all I wished to say at this hour of grave
responsibility. Mr. President, let us do something; let us do
something and do it soon.

“Conscious of the’ responsibility incumbent upon it
under the pertinent provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations,

38. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Nicaragua for the kind words he said about me.

“1. Calls upon the Governments concerned to order
forthwith, as a first step, an immediate cease-fire, the
cessation of all military activities and mutual disengagement;

39. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated porn Chinese):
First, I should like to know whether we have started to
discuss the draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua and Sierra Leone [5’/1@25/.

“2. *‘Urges that efforts be deployed to create the
necessary conditions for the voluntary return of refugees
from East Pakistan in accordance with the Charter;

40. The PRESIDENT: Not yet.
“3. Asks all States to co-operate fully with the
Secretary-General with a view to lending assistance to
these refugees and alleviating their plight;

41. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from Chinese):
Then I do not wish to speak now. However, when we do
start to discuss that draft resolution, I should like to speak.

“4. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Council promptly and regularly informed of the implementation of the present resolution;

42. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
from French): As th e French delegation indicated yester4

“5. Dscides to follow the situation closely and to meet
again as soon as necessary.”
44. This draft resolution will not be submitted becausethe
consultations that have been held have convinced us that it
would meet with objections. But we are not here in order
to measure each other’s strength, to count heads or to defy
each other; we are here to assume, under the Charter, our
responsibilities for international peace and security. The
only victory we wished to achieve was that of peace. It is,
unfortunately, peace which is today blocked and it is the
United Nations, perhaps because it has not got the material
forces to separate the combatants, which has again failed.
Arms will therefore settle a question which we have not
been able to solve, an4 that will add further victims to
those which have already aroused strong feelings and
indignation throughout the world.
45. We wish on behalf of the French delegation to say that
we shall not associate ourselves with, nor be resigned to,
this failure.
46. Mr.

MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(@anslated porn Russian): The Security Council has before

it a draft resolution by five member countries of the
Council (S/1042.5]. The Soviet delegation does not doubt
the good intentions and the sincere desires of the sponsors
of that draft resolution’ to gontribute to the solution of the
problem being discussed by the Council. However that
draft, like a number of others so far submitted for
consideration by the Security Council, suffers from the
same fundamental defect. It deals with only one side of the
serious problem that has arisen in East Pakistan, and its
international
repercussions which have complicated the
situation in the Indian subcontinent-the cessation of the
hostilities commenced by the Pakistan armed forcesagainst
neighbouring India.
47. After two days of tense and comprehensive discussion
and in view of the information and obvious facts which the
Security Council has now gleaned from the statements and
documents, there can be no doubt left in anybody’s mind
that the main cause of the military conflict that has broken
out in the Indian subcontinent is the well-known actions bY
the Pakistan Government to suppress the lawful demands
and aspirations of the East Pakistan population.
48. The military conflict in that region is the direct
consequence of the violence, terror and mass repression
using sophisticated weaponry conducted over a period of
many months to thwart the clearly expressedwill of the 75
million inhabitants of East Pakistan. The people of East
Pakistan were obliged to respond to this by armed
resistance and counteraction. The Government of Pakistan,
not being in a position to settle the acute political crisis in
East Pakistan by political means or to thwart the will of the
population
of thatb part of the country by repression,
undertook military action against a neighbouring countryan action which resulted in military
conflict and an
.*
aggravation of the situation.
49. The purpose of this is quite obvious to everyone. It
was to shift responsibility for the actions of the Pakistan
military
authorities on to a neighbouring country and to

attempt to justify the terror and violence used there, which
reached such vast proportions that they caused the death of
many thousands of peaceful inhabitants and the flight of
almost 10 million people to the territory of a neighbouring
country.
50. In his introductory remarks after the opening of
today’s meeting of the Security Council, the President of
the Council vividly reminded us all once more of the
sufferings of those many millions of people. As has already
been pointed out, if that is not taken into account, it will
be impossible to find the right solution to the problem that
has arisen or to find an approach towards settling it.
51. In the light of this reality, the{ approach proposed in
the five-Power draft resolution is inadequate and one-sided
and cannot contribute to the restoration of peace in the
area and the establishment of a state of stability. Without
decisive, rapid and effective elimination of the main cause
of the serious tension on the Indian subcontinent which has
resulted in a military conflict and has already acquired an
international dimension, the Security Council cannot adopt
a correct and effective decision.
52. Hence, it is absolutely essential that the question of a
cease-fire should be inseparably linked with a demand that
the Government of Pakistan should simultaneously take
effective action towards a political settlement in East
Pakistan, giving recognition to the will of the East Pakistan
population, as expressed, clearly and definitely, in the
elections of December 1970,
53. The Security Council cannot close its eyes to this
political reality which exists in that region and try to
resolve only one side of the conflict, one side of the
problem, leaving unattended the principal source of serious
tension, and the main cause and source of the conflict
which has developed into an armed clash in the Indian
subcontinent and become an international problem. If the
Security Council were to close its eyes to that reality and
adopt a one-sided course, it would merely create an illusion,
a semblance of action and not real action.
54. In questions of such importance and international
political significance, the Security Council cannot act
without taking into consideration the political reality
involved. This is called for by the Charter of the United
Nations and in particular the Articles mentiomd by the
Soviet delegation in its statement yesterday.
55. In the situation that has arisen the right course and the
one that the Council must follow can only be the adoption
of a decision in which both questions-that of a cease-fire,
and that of the recognition by Pakistan of the will of the
population of East Pakistan-are indissolubly and inseparably linked. In other words, both questions-the cease-fire
and the political settlement-must
be most closely and
inseparably linked. That is what the delegation of the
Soviet Union has been striving for, is striving for and will
continue to strive for throughout the discussion of this
question. We admit that such an approach may not be to
the liking of some people, but that is their business, We are
deeply and firmly convinced that our approach is right, just
and based on a consideration of the real situation that has
arisen on the Indian subcontinent.

56. The people of East Pakistan are free to decide,
through their elected representatives, the question of
renewing talks with the Pakistan Government and relations
with it. As we have already stated, the defect of the
five-Power draft resolution is precisely that it does not
correlate the question of the cease-fire with that of
attaining a political settlement in East Pakistan-one which
would take into account the will, the inalienable rights and
the lawful interests of the population of that part of the
country. The Soviet delegation cannot countenance such an
approach.

settlement in East Pakistan, giving immediate recognition
to the will of the East Pakistan population as expressedm
the elections of December 1970;
“ ‘3. Declares that the provisions of operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of this resolution constitute a single
whole;’
“3. Renumber the remaining
accordingly.” [S/10426/Rev.l. /

operative paragraphs

62. Those are the amendments which the Soviet delegation is introducing to the five-Power draft resolution, The
adoption of the flve9ower draft resolution with these
amendments could be a real and effective step by the
Security Council to put an end to the bloodshed and to
take measures for a political settlement of the complex
political problem that has arisen in East Pakistan,

57. Some representatives, while supporting an immediate
cease-fire, at the same time apparently do not notice, close
their eyes to or disregard the possibility of a continuation
of the bloodshed, reprisals, and killing of the population of
East Pakistan by the armed forces of the Pakistan Government, In other words, they are not pursuing a political
settlement.

63. In that case, the Soviet delegation would vote for that
draft with the amendments it has introduced, Without such
amendments, the Security Council resolution would not
achieve its purpose and would be unable to serve as an
effective instrument for settling the conflict in the Indian
subcontinent. Unless the amendments are adopted the
Soviet delegation cannot support the five-Power resolution.

58. The Soviet Union, like any other peace-loving country,
cannot remain indifferent to the events that have occurred
on the Indian subcontinent. As wasemphasized in a TASS
statement on 5 December of this year:
“ . . . the Soviet TJnion calls for a speedy end to the
bloodshed and.for a political settlement in East Pakistan
on the basis of respect for the lawful rights and interests
of its people.” [See S/10422.]

64. The PRESIDENT:
on a point of order.

I call on the representative of Italy

59. It is precisely with this in mind and with this realistic
approach that the Soviet delegation considers that the
Security Council must take the appropriate measures
swiftly, taking into account the real nature of the problem
under consideration in all its complexity, and considering
all its aspects,and principally the two main ones-a political
attlcment and a cessation of hostilities.

65. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I asked for the floor on a point oE
order because I thought there were other names on the
speaker’s list and that it would be best-before the whole
Council became involved in a long discussion on the draft
resolution introduced by Belgium, Italy, Japan, Nicaragua
and Sierra Leone-to make an announcement on behalf of
the sponsors.

60. The Council must be realistic. The Council must take
into account in its decision the organic link between the
two questions which constitute the problem under consideration, I repeat once again: the organic link between the
question of a cease-fire and the question of a political
settlement in East Pakistan, and an appeal to the Government of Pakistan simultaneously to take effective action
towards a political settlement, giving immediate recognition
to the will of the East Pakistan population.

66. We have decided to withdraw this draft resolution. I
shall now explain why. It was my understanding,
Mr. President, from your reply to the representative of
China, Mr. Huang, that we had not yet started the
discussion of this draft resolution. If I did not raise a point
of order at that time it was out of respect for the
representative of the Soviet Union, since I did not want to
prevent him from introducing his amendments and illustrating them.

61. In the light of this approach and taking into consideration the real situation in East Pakistan and on the
Indian subcontinent, the Soviet delegation is introducing
the following amendments to the five-Power draft resolution:

67. Before explaining why we came to this conclusion I
should lie to recall once again that the concept of a
political solution of which Ambassador Malik has spoken
had already been taken into consideration by four of the
sponsors of the draft resolution of which I am speaking,
who, together with four other delegations, had already,
sponsored and introduced the draft resolution contained in
document S/10423. Of course, the wording was different
from that of the amendments introduced by the Soviet
Union, but for the record I want to say that we took due
consideration of that concept and introduced it into the
draft resolution.

“1. In operative paragraph 1, replace the words ‘the
Governments concerned’ by the words ‘all parties con.
cerned’; at the end of the sameparagraph, add the words
‘and cessation of all hostilities’.
“2. Between operative paragraphs 1 and 2, insert the
following new operative paragraphs 2 and 3:

68. I now come to our reasons for deciding to withdraw
our short draft resolution’calling for a cease-fire. They are
very simple. We thought yesterday we still had the duty to r

“ ‘2. Calls uporz the Government of Pakistan simultaneously to take effective action towards a political
6

try to make a last attempt to stop the fighting, shooting
and bloodshed. I am not sure that the timing was good.
Unfortunately, we realized yesterday, as we realize today,
that that draft resolution could not command support and
be adopted. I want to say that unfortunately in the last 24
hours developments and events have been such that the
whole situation has radically changed, and in these circumstances I can even accept the judgement of Ambassador
Malik that the draft resolution we have placed before the
Security Council is inadequate. We have therefore concluded that since the draft resolution is no longer up to
date we should not press for a vote but should even
withdraw it. That will save the Council’s time and give it
the possibility of speeding up its work.
69. The PRESIDENT:
representative of India.

the will of the overwhelming majority of the people,
which no.t many Governments can claim to represent. In
Jefferson’s famous words to Governor Morris, ,the
Government of Bangla Desh is supported by ‘the will of
the nation substantially expressed’.”
“Applying this criterion, the military regime in
Pakistan,.whom some States are so anxious to butress, is
hardly representative of its people even waging war
against India. The normal hesitation on our part not to do
anything which could come in the way of a peaceful
solution or which,might be construed as an intervention
has lost significance. The people of Bangla Desh battling
for their very existence and the people of India fighting
to defeat aggression now find themselves partisans in the
same cause. I am glad to inform the House that in the
light of the existing situation and in response to the
repeated requests of the Government of Bangla Desh, the L!-JGovernment of India has, after most careful consideration, decided to grant recognition to the People’s Republic of Bangla Desh. It is our hope that with the
passage of time more nations will grant recognition and
that the People’s Republic of Bangla Desh will soon form
a part of the family of nations.

I now give the floor to the

70. Mr. SEN (India): I think I owe it to the Council to
report certain developments which have taken place since,
we adjourned last night. About an hour and a half after that
adjournment the Prime Minister of India, Mrs, Gandhi,
made a statement in our Parliament, in New Delhi, I think I
can do no better in discharging my duty than to read her
statement as she delivered it in the Indian Parliament. She
said:
v

“Our thoughts at this moment are with the father of
this new State, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. I am sure that
this House would wish me to convey to their Excellencies, the acting President of Bangla Desh and the Prime
Minister, and their colleagues, our greetings and warm
felicitations. I am placing on the table of the House
copies of communications which we have received from
the Government of Bangla Desh. The Honourable members will be glad to know that the Government of Bangla
Desh has proclaimed its basic principles of State policy to
be democracy, socialism, secularism and the establishment of an egalitarian society in which -there will be no
discrimination on the basis of race, religion, sex or creed.
With regard to foreign relations the Bangla Desh Government has expressed its determination to follow a policy
of non-alignment, peaceful coexistence and opposition to
colonialism, racialism and imperialism in all its manifestations. These are the ideals to which India also is
dedicated. The Bangla Desh Government has reiterated its
anxiety to organize the expeditious return of the citizens
who have found temporary refuge in our country. and to
restore their lands and belongings to them. We shall
naturally help in every way in these arrangements. I am
confident that in future the Governments and peoples of
India and Baugla De&, who share common ideals and
sacrifices, will forge a relationship based on the principles
of mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, non-interference in internal affairs,
equality and mutual benefits. Thus, working together for
freedom and democracy, we shall set an example of
good-neighbourliness which alone can ensure peace and
stability and progress in this region. Our good wishes to
Bangla De&t.”

“The valiant struggle of the people of Bangla Desh in
the .face of tremendous odds has opened a new chapter of
heroism in the history of freedom movements. Earlier
they had reported a democratic victory in their elections,
and even the President of Pakistan had conceded the right
of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to become the Prime Minister
of Pakistan. We shall never know what intervened to
transform this benevolent mood and realistic approach-if
it really was that-to destruction and a posture of open
hostilities and repression.
“We are told that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his
party, the Awami League, had planned a non-violent
movement of resistance to the Government of West
Pakistan but were caught unawares and overtaken by a
brutal military assault. They had no alternative’ but to
declare independence. The East Pakistan Rifles and the
East Bengal Regiment became Mukti Fauj and later Mukti
Bahini, which was joined by thousands of young East
Bengalis determined to sacrifice their lives for their
freedom and right to fashion their future. The unity,
determination and courage with which the entire population of Bangla Desh is fighting have been reported by the
world press. These events on our doorstep and the
resulting flood of refugees into our territory could not
but have far-reaching repercussions on our country. It was
natural that our sympathy should be with the people of
Bangla Desh in their just struggle, but we did not act
precipitately in the matter of recognition. Our decisions
were not guided inerely by emotion but by assessmentof
the prevailing and future realities. With the unanimous
revolt of the entire people of Bangla Desh and the success
of the struggle its has become increasingly apparent that
the so-called mother State of Pakistan is totally incapable
of bringing the people of Bangla Desh back under its
control. As for the legitimacy of the Government of
Bangla Desh, the whole world is now awarethat it reflects

71. I read this statement in full because I believe it is
important enough to be recorded in full and for people to
hear it in full. But more important than that, this
recognition of Bangla Desh has put the relationship of India
to Bangla Desh in a completely different legal, political and
7

constitutional context; and I would request the Council to
realize this new development before any decision is taken.
72. Since we have now recognized Bangla Desh, I think I
should take a few minutes of the Council’s time to go
back-not too much, but a little bit-into the history. It has
been said that the autonomy movement led by Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman soon became a movement for independence, and that this would have brought about the
disintegration of Pakistan. May I just read a very short
paragraph from Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s presentation of
the six-point programme which is the formula for autonomy? This is what he says:
“Sixthly, let me humbly remind my West Pakistani
brothers and sisters that when we demanded Bengali to be
made one of the two State languages of Pakistan you
condemned it as a move to undo Pakistan. When, again
we demanded a joint electorate, particularly in the
context of parity in the presentation demanded by you,
you condemned that demand as being inspired from
across the border. Both of these two demands have now
been accepted, but there has been no undoing of Pakistan
due to their acceptance. Does it not put you to shame
that every bit of reasonable demand of East Pakistan has
got to be secured from you at tremendous cost and after
bitter struggle, as if snatched from unwilling foreign rulers
as a reluctant concession? Does it do you any credit?
Please put a stop to such attitude once and for all. Please
be brothers instead of rulers.”
73. Now, after the military crackdown, as I pointed out
yesterday, independence wassuddenly declared, And this is
what the Prime Minister of the new State of Bangla Desh
has to say on that:
“Pakistan is now dead and buried under a mountain of
corpses. The hundreds and thousands of people murdered
by the army in Bangla Desh will act as an impenetrable
barrier between West Pakistan and the people of Bangla
Desh. By resorting to pre-planned genocide Yahya must
have known that he washimself digging Pakistan’s grave.
The subsequent massacres perpetrated by his orders, by
his licensed killers, of the people were not designed to
preserve the unity of the nation. They were acts of racial
hatred and sadism, devoid of even the elements of
humanity. Professional soldiers, on orders, violated their
code of military honour and were seen as beasts of prey
who indulged in an orgy of murder, rape, loot, arson,
destruction, unequalled in the annals of civilization.
These acts indicate that the concept of two countries is
already deeply rooted in the minds of Yahya and his
associates who would not dare commit such atrocities on
their own continent. Yshya’s genocide is thus without
political purpose. It servesonly as the last act in the tragic
history of Pakistan which Yahya has chosen to write with
the blood of the people of Bangla Desh. The objective is
genocide and scorched earth before his troops are either
driven out or perish. In this time he hopes to liquidate all
political leadership, intelligentsia, and a.dministration, to
destroy our industries and public amenities. And, as a
fiual act, he intends to raze our cities to the ground.
Already his occupation army has made substantial progress towards this objective. Bangla Desh will be set back

50 years as West Pakistan’s parting gift to a people they
have exploited for 23 years for their own benefit.” ,
This declaration was made on 17 April 1971. L.,,,
74. In this context I should like to read an article which
appeared in The New York Times today. Some of the
members may have read it, but perhaps the non-Englishspeaking members have not. In order to respect the wishes
expressed by the representative of the United States, I shall
leave out from this article all references to the Nixon
Administration, to the President, and so on. I hope,
however, he will indulge me if I do include in my reading
references to our own Government and to our own Prime
Minister, however critical they may be. This is what is said:
“Suppose that Britain, in the 193Os, had responded to
Hitler’s savagery by the early threat or use of military
force instead of appeasement , . .“.
“So one must think after the American statement over
the week-end blaming India for the hostilities with
Pakistan. Few things said in the name of the United
States lately have been quite so indecent. The anonymous
State Department official who made the comment
matched Uriah Heep”-I do not know this gentleman-“in
sheer oleaginous cynicism about the facts of the situation
and about our own moral position.”
“Consider first the immediate origins of this dispute,
They are exceptionally clear as international relations
go.”
75. May I make a diversion? For nine months now the
international community has received a large number of
reports written by most distinguished civil servants both of
this Organization and of its specialized agencies. If the
Council is not even prepared to listen to the Bangla Desh
representative because of procedural and other political
reasons, which I have not understood and against which I
have protested, surely these reports could have been made
available. But no, that will do harm to whatever interests
are being served by this debate. Now I continue the
quotation:
“The military junta that rules Pakistan under President
Yahya Khan held an election. The largest number of seats
was won, democratically, by a ,Beng$i party that favoured effective self-government for East Pakistan. Yahya
thereupon decided to wipe out the result of the election
by force.”
76. Now 1 should like to call the attention of those
gentlemen who still preach democracy to bear this point in
mind. I continue reading from l%e New York Times:
“Last March West Pakistan troops flew into the East in
large numbers and began a polcy of slaughter. They
murdered selected politicians, intellectuals and professionals, then indiscriminate masses. They burned villages.
They held public castrations.
“To compare Yahya I&n with Hitler is of course
inexact, Yahya is not a man with a racist mission but a

spokesman for xenophobic forces in West Pakistan. But in
terms of results-in terms of human beings killed,
brutalized or made refugees-Yahya’s record compares
quite favorably with Hitler’s early years.

the world following our notions of political freedom. In
position and population she is by far the most important
country of Asia apart from China. To alienate Indiaworse yet, to act so as to undermine her political
stability-is a policy that defies rational explanation.”

rrTile West Pakistanis have killed several hundred
thousand ‘civilians in the East, and an estimated ten
million have fled to India. The oppression has been
specifically on lines of race or religion. The victims are
Bengalis or Hindus, not Czechs or Poles or Jews, and
perhaps therefore less meaningful to us in the West. But
to the victims the crime is the same.

77. It is not my habif to give quotations either from
newspapers or anything else, but since we are coming to the
conclusion of the debate I thought I should depend on
some other and wiser people and not only on my own
statements and conclusions.
78. Here is Senator Church, who has just come back from
India. I shall not read the whole of his statement, which he
made only this morning, becavse -it would take rather too
much time, but I shall read the two .brief concluding
paragraphs:

“This record has been no secret to the world.”
That is why I refer to the reports which are already
available in the United Nations but which, for some reason,
have not seen the light of day. I continue to reap:

.

“I find it odd to undeistand why there is such a
pro-Pakistani bias in American policies: India’s position in
the war which has now broken out is not only consistent
with her professed ideals but is also the position which is
most likely to prevail. By showing such favoritism
towards West Pakistan we side with the probable loser
and we forfeit the good will of the freedom-fighters in
East Pakistan, aswell as the peopie of India.

‘L. . . The refugees w&e there in India to be photographed in all their pitiful misery.” I then leave out a
sentence, and go on:
L‘. . . not a word about the most appalling refugee
situation of modern times, Private diplomacy wasdoubtless going on, but there was no visible sign of American
pressure on Yahya Khan for the only step that could
concejvably bring the refugees back-a political accommodation with the Bengalis.

“Unless one believes that West Pakistan represents the
wave of the future on the subcontinent it is impossible to
reconcile this Government’s bias towards Yahya Khan’s
Government with the role in regard to the interests of the
United States.”

“Pakistan’s argument was that it was all an internal
affair. Yes, like the Nazi’s treatment of German Jews.But
even if one accepts as one must that Pakistan wasbound
to defend its territorial integrity, this issue had spilled
beyond its borders. The refugee impact on India very
soon made it clear that the peace of the whole subcontinent was threatened.

79. Of course, we are not interested in, or even concerned
with, the interests of the United States. The United States
is quite capable of looking after its own interests in a

variety of ways. One of the ways has been to cut off
economic aid to India recently-yesterday, I think-but we
can live with that. We are riot frightened by any threats or
cuts. But we have to consider what we should do.

“It was as if the entire population of New York City
had suddenly been dumped on New Jersey to feed and
clothe-only
infinitely worse in terms of resourcesavailable. Yet when Indira Gandhi went to the capitals of the
West for help in arranging a political solution in East
Pakistan, she got nothing.

80. Before the Council proceeds to the vote-and I hope I
may have another opportunity to explain a few more
details on the various resolutions and put our point of view
once again before the Council-at this stage I shall make a
few other comments on our attitude to the resolutions,

“The Indians can be sanctimonious”-1 do not mind
quoting
against my country, my Government or my
Prime Minister from a newspaperof repute-“Mrs. Gandhi
acts for political reasons, not out of purity of heart. India
has helped the Bangla Desh guerrillas and, in recent
weeks, put provocative pressure on East Pakistan. All
true. But given the extent of her interest and the
intolerable
pressure upon her, India has shown great
restraint .”

81. First, after all we have said, not only now but over the
last few months, we cannot expect that any man of reason
should equate India with Pakistan in any resolution or
decision. We do not expect that, and we certainly do not
accept it. We do not expect any reasonable man to do it,
and if he does we cannot accept it, We are not in the same
category as Pakistan. If, Mr. President, you wish me to
elaborate, I can do so; but I think the point is already well
known.

“After all, India has not intervened in a civil conflict
thousands of miles from her own border.”

82. Secondly, we think it is wrong, illogical, undesirabledisastrous, even-to have to come to a decision without
taking into account the point of view of the Bangla Desh
representatives, the representatives of the main part?
involved in these tragic circumstances. However, it is not
the fixst time that the Security Council or the United
Nations has taken an unrealistic decision simply to show

I shall skip the rest of that paragraph.
“American policy towards the Indian subcontinent is as
much of a disaster by standards of hard-nosed common
sense as of compassion. India may be annoying and
difficult,
but she does happen to be the largest nation in
9

that it is up and alive and can act. We are not letting the
Counoil down. Fair enough. We are all faithful Members of
the United Nations and we should uphold the dignity and
prestige of all its organs. But let us not say that by adopting
a purely unrealistic resolution we have done anything
except console ourselves. That by itself would not be so
bad, but if in the process we give a false hope to the world
at large that, I think, will be a disaster.
l/83.
Thirdly, we shall not, we cannot and we must not
accept any resolution or decision which does not go to the
root cause of the matter. It is no good saying we think we
should cut off a limb here or a limb there to savethe life.
The fact of the matter is that this body has been rotting for
nine months and no one has taken any notice. Now, after
all these years, when we come to this extraordinary session
of the Council, not to go to the root cause is another
shibboleth on which no solid foundation can be built. We
are meeting here in an extraordinary session-and how
extraordinary it is. Pakistan is shrieking and shouting about
aggression and so on, and yet it did not ask for a Council
meeting. Has any gentleman at this table stopped to think
why it has not? Probably they do not have to think.
Probably they know. Over the last nine months, how many
attempts have been made to bring the question to the
Council or any other United Nations body? All attempts
have been frustrated.
84. My friend and colleague, the representative of Italy,
was President of the Security Council in the month of
August, I think. On 20 July the Secretary-General sent his
memorandum. Why was that memorandum not acted
upon? We all know why. In the month of July the
representative of Pakistan was flying from Geneva to New
York to stop any discussions here, to stop any discussions
there; and those attempts went on for months. Reports
were suppressed;discussions were inhibited; a complete veil
of silence and secrecy wasthrown over this. Then suddenly
we come up and say, “The world is in flames. We must do
something. But we must not consider any of the vital
problems.” That is an approach which we totally deplore
and certainly denounce.
85. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Pakistan.
86. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Only yesterday I quoted for
the second time to the Security Council excerpts from an
important paper, which has been given the most serious
consideration by government circles in India, about India’s
plan to bring about the dismemberment of Pakistan and to
use the Security Council as an instrument to legitimize the
creation of the secessionist Bangla Desh state. I am sure
that what I quoted must be fresh in the minds of the
members of the Council and I shall refrain from quoting it
again.

88. The representative of India quoted in extemo from
Mrs. Gandhi’s statement of yesterday giving the reasonsfor
this act of war against Pakistan. She said that it was a
valiant struggle which had opened a new chapter in the
history of the freedom movement. And let it be noted that
this new chapter was inaugurated by subversion and
aggression,
89. If the President of Pakistan did designate She&h
Mujibur Rahman, as the Leader of the majority party in the
National Assembly, as”the Prime Minister, and if becauseof
the disagreement of political factions within my country his
plan for the transfer of power to She&h Mujibur Rahman
could not materialize, did it justify a neighbouring State’s
fomenting armed civil strife and launching an armed attack
against Pakistan? If a commission is given in a country to
the leader of a political party, even a majority party, to
form a Government and it is not executed for one reason or
another, however right or wrong it may be, does another
country embark on aggression and subversion to promote
freedom in that country?
90. Now we are told that the Mukti Bahini is fighting and
that the Security Council must make an assessment of the
realities, and the representative of India talked of the
successof the Mukti Bahini. What is the reality? The Mukti
Bahini is a mere auxiliary of the 120,000 Indian armed
forces which have unleashed armed attacks on Pakistan, It
can play only a subsidiary role. It is under the occupation
army of India that this Mukti Bahini will function. And it is
to that Government, set up by the occupying authority,
that this Security Council is expected to extend some kind
of acknowledgement, if not recognition.
91. We have been told about the high-sounding proclama.
tions of democracy, secularism, freedoms and what-not. We
know that words are not tantamount to actions. In how
many constitutions, in how many declarations and pro&
mations in every country in the world are these wordsnot
used? Are we to be guided just by rhetoric and eloquence?
In India itself democracy does not function in several of its
provinces; they are under direct Presidential rule. And
secularism is honoured more in the breach than in the
observance. Militant groups let loose murder and slaughter
against religious minorities-and we are asked to take the
word for the deed.
92. We were also told about foreign relations of Bangfa
Desh and its policy of non-alignment. The mentor of that
Government has set the example of non-alignment by
concluding the Indo-Soviet military alliance.
93. The representative of India talks of the freedom of
Bangla Desh. In 1905, that same East Pakistan, which was
part of Bengal Province, achieved its emancipation from the
economic exploitation and domination of the capitalists
and caste Hindus of Calcutta and became a separate
province within India-that
was done by the British
Government in 1905. But those same capitalists, indus.
trialists, the caste Hindus of India, carried on a ceaseless
agitation of murder, assassination and terror, and forced the
British Government to annul the partition. So the separa
tion of East Pakistan-which took place in 1905 becauseit
had been exploited for two centuries. both under British

87. Only yesterday and the day before the representative
of India stated that these were the views of theoreticians
and academicians in India, but now it is finally clear that
that plan has been followed with meticulous exactitude and
the Government of India has announced recognition of
Bangla Desh.
10

rule and subsequently by the privileged classesin India-was
annulled and East Pakistan wasagain made a part of Bengal,
SOthat the rule of the privileged classeswasreimposed. It is
OdY the Pakistan people and their strength that stand
between that kind of reimposition of domination and the
development of the people of East Pakistan in freedom and
as the dominant partners and the dominant elements in the
political life of Pakistan.
94. Then the representative of India went into the history
of the movement for autonomy, talked of the six points
and quoted from She&h Mujibur Rahman. Well, let me tell
YOU something about the six points.

95. On 23 March-two days before the Federal Army had
to take action to suppress the massacres of non-Bengali
elements that were being perpetrated by the secessionist
elements-the leaders of the secessionistmovement, or the
leaders of the Awami League, presented a draft proclamation to President Yahya Khan stating that it was their last
word and that the President of Pakistan could take it or
leave it; in it they also said that Pakistan shall be a
confederation-from
a Federal State it was to transform
itseIf into a confederation. The other political parties
believe that confederation is an association of two sovereign
States and not a union of provinces or states into one single
whole.

99. Then he quotes something from l%e New York Times.
This is an article by the columnist Anthony Lewis. I have
read many of his articles before. But, that is the opinion of
one individual. Did he go to Pakistan to find out the other
side of the picture? Did he take care to inform himself of
the real facts before he printed his column in this
newspaper which is read by half a million people in the
United States? Did he compare notes with other correspondents of equally respectable papers like the Manchester Guardian who have given a different assessment?
This is the kind of propaganda to which the representative
of India resorts to divert the attention of the Council from
Indian aggression and occupation of our territory. If we
begin quoting correspondents where are we going to end?
All right, if you want to quote correspondents I shall quote
James Reston who said in yesterday’sNew York Tfmes:
“For Prime Minister Gandhi to talk about the ‘wanton
and unprovoked aggression’ of Pakistan, when her own
Government’s troops have been constantly inside East
Pakistan and her colleagues have made no secret of their
aid to the East Pakistani insurgents or their desire to see
East Pakistan separated from West Pakistan, is really an
affront to the intelligence of the world.”
And the representative of India considers the intelligence of
this distinguished and august gathering so low that he
persists in his misrepresentations. I continue the quotation:
“Mrs, Gandhi did not even consider allowing United
Nations observers to see what was going on along the
Indian-Pakistani borders, which is interesting, since she is
now defending the war as a moral crusade against the
Pakistani aggressors.”

96. Surely this was a legitimate point of view with which
one may agree or not agree, but how does this become the
concern of India? In other words, the Pakistan Government was asked to accept an ultimatum to transform
Pakistan into a confederation of two sovereignStates. And
yet, we have a lecture from the representative of India
about how we should conduct ourselves in regard to the
ordering of our constitutional and political life. Let him
first study his own Constitution and see how much
autonomy is given to the provinces. How much autonomy
does West Bengal, his own province, have in the Indian
federation? To what extent are the resourcesof Bengal and
Assam spent within those provinces?

100. The representative of India cannot resist referring to
the Government of Pakistan as a military junta. Several
Member States are ruled-and these are not my words but
his words-by military juntas and he went on to say:
“President Yahya Khan decided to wipe out theresults
of election by force.”
101. If President Yahya Khan did not wish to promote
restored democracy in Pakistan in the first place why would
he have held elections and why should they have been held
in an atmosphere of freedom which he himself hailed
afterwards? Was it not far easier for him to crush the
aspirations of the Bengali people before the elections,
which would not have caused a whimper in the world? Yet
good and honest intentions if they are prevented from
being realized are denounced and the most vicious motives
are ascribed. And from whom do they come? From India.
We know that we can expect nothing better from India
than permanent hostility.

97. Then again in every forum the Indian representatives
repeat that hundreds of thousands of people have been
murdered by the Pakistan armed forces. It is a matter of the
deepest regret that he shows no human feeling in regard to
those murdered by the secessionist elements. There were
people here in the so-called delegation of BangfaDesh who
set up slaughter-houses in which thousands of people were
massacred before 25 March when the army had to intervene
and afterwards. And these people come here to represent
Bangla Desh. There is living proof of these atrocities and if
members of the Security Council want to turn away from
propaganda and what the columnists write, and Want to
find out for themselves, we shall provide them with the
means of doing so.

102. As regards what Senator Church may have said: I
regret that Senator Church had nothing to say about
subversion and aggression. He expressed himself on a
certain aspect of the Pakistan situation but he chose to
remain silent on the very issues which we are now
considering here in the Security Council,

98. The representative of India talked the other day about
films shown by his delegation. We have these films but We
have spared your feelings. But, you are welcome to Come
and see them if you so desire, I can understand his relish
that Pakistan is dead and buried. Let me tell him, it lives
end will survive, in spite of Indian aggression.

103. Finally in reply to the representative of India, he
alleged that Pakistan shouted about aggression and did not
11

ask for a meeting of the Security Council. Ambassador
Vinci was the President of the Security Council in August
and he knows of the efforts made by me under the
instructions,,of my Government to activate the Security
Council to exercise a moderating influence, and to promote
a reduction of tension. But why was no Security Council
meeting called? Because of the opposition of India and the
allies of India. And ‘we know now when we come finally
before the Security Council what is the result-a veto, a
veto. So therefore let us not talk about coming before the
Security Council.
104. Turning now from the representative of India to
what the representative of the Soviet Union said yesterday
and a little earlier today. I shall, of course, not comment on
his amendments, because I believe they are no longer before
us for the draft resolution to which they were submitted as
amendments has been withdrawn. We thank the sponsorsof
that’ draft resolution for withdrawing their proposal. But
with reference to what Ambassador Malik said in explaining
his amendments I cannot allow this opportunity to pass
without commenting on one or two points. The representative of the Soviet Union said that action by the
Security Council must be in accordance with the real
situation in the Hindustan subcontinent. The real situation
in the Hindustan subcontinent now is that brought about
by India’s subversion, support to armed secession, armed
intervention and aggression. In other words, is the Security
Council going to legitimize this so-called reality, perpetuate
occupation and guarantee the fruits of aggression and the
illegal use of force?
105. The representative of the Soviet Union said that the
cessation of hostilities must be organically linked to a
political settlement. In other words, the Soviet amendments
as explained by the representative of the Soviet Union
mean that Pakistan must immediately agree to the secession
of East Pakistan and to Pakistan’s dismemberment and that
war and military occupation must continue until it does so.
106. I am also constrained to remark that in the statements of the Soviet representative there is a persistent
preoccupation with the political situation in Pakistan to the
exclusion of every other aspect of the situation prevailing
today in the subcontinent and which prevailed in the weeks
and months before. And we are most concerned that in
addition to the security doctrine to which I referred
yesterday the pronouncements of Soviet representatives
seem to stake a claim to be the arbiter in the internal
political and constitutional life of my country.
107. I shall comment on the draft resolutions later, but I
feel I must place on record certain facts. I refrained from
doing so yesterday because I did not wish to prolong the
time taken by the Council to get to a vote on the draft
resolutions before it. First, I should like to draw the
attention of the Security Council to a misstatement of fact
by India, as contained in the Secretary-General’s report
[S/lO41O/Add.l].
According to a message from the *Prime
Minister of India, which was orally delivered to the
Secretary-General, it is claimed therein that Pakistani
aircraft attacked the military bases of India at Pathankot
and Srinagar-in the disputed territory of Jammu and
Kashmir-and at Amritsar on the afternoon of 2 December.

That is totally false. I waited until now to contradict that
claim because I was checking the correct facts. On the
instructions of my Government, I am now to state that
Pakistani aircraft took counteraction against these airfields
on 3 December, and only after India, six or seven hours
earlier, had launched armed attacks against Pakistan along a
SOO-mile-long front in the West.
108. I should also like to state on this occasion that I
would request Ambassador Malik, when he refers to any
remarks I make, kindly to quote them in context, I only
wish to say that it is regrettable that he again made a
statement yesterday which I had corrected the day before.
That was in regard to what I said about the exist&e of an
internal crisis in Pakistan. In the political life of States
internal crises are not a rare phenomenon, but it is up to
the people of those countries to overcome the crisesand
not for foreign Powers to exacerbate internal divisions,
promote secessionand armed rebellion and, finally, launch
armed attacks and use an internal crisis asjustification for
interventionist doctrines in the political life of other States.
109. Further, I should like to bring to the attention of this
Council a most deplorable action by India yesterday. On
4 December the Secretary-General, in an urgent telephonic
message to me, expressed his concern for the safety of
United Nations personnel in East Pakistan and conveyed his
decision to evacuate them to Bangkok. He requested that
the Pakistan Government be approached to see if a
cease-fire could be arranged in Dacca from 10 a.m. to
6 p.m. East Pakistan time on 5 December to enable a
transport-plane to land at the airport and evacuate United
Nations personnel to safety. The Secretary-General also
intimated that he was making a similar request to the
permanent representative of India. The Secretary-General’s
request was conveyed to the Government of Pakistan with
all due urgency. It wasfollowed up by the Pakistan Mission
with telephonic messages to Islamabad, It is understood
that both the Governments of Pakistan and India agreed to
a cease-fire in Dacca for a certain length of time to allow
the evacuation of United Nations personnel and foreign
diplomats. However, the world now knows that gle Indian
air force chose precisely the moment of evacuation of
United Nations personnel to attack the civilian airport at
Dacca. The perfidious nature of this attack needs to be
condemned in the strongest possible terms. It shows better
than we can say what kind of attitude governs India at
present. India’s air force launches an attack on the territory
of Pakistan at the time when it knows that the valiant
forces of Pakistan are committed to observing a cease-fire.
The innocent victims in this case are the international civil
servants and diplomats, and it is a fortunate accident that
no lives were lost.
110. Finally, I should like to state that in regard to the
question of extending an invitation to a particular entity to
come here I have pointed out that it would be not oh’ a
violation of rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council but also a violation of the Charter.
That has been brought out with sufficient force by the
representative of Argentina, among others. Whatever may
have been India’s actions yesterday that in no wise alters
the force of the arguments that have been urged before the
Council, and should the Council act in an unlawful maaner

12

we should have to consider that to be an unfriendly act
towards the Government of Pakistan.
111. In order not to take the floor another time, I should
like briefly to give my views on the draft resolution
proposed by the representative of France, with his characteristic eloquence, precision and lucidity.
112. We are conscious of the concern of his delegation and
the British delegation that the Council should achieve some
result and not be completely paralysed by vetoes. Therefore, while we appreciate the laudable motives and the
concern for peace that have prompted him to put forward a
proposal, we are constrained to observe that nothing has
been said about the proved fact of aggression and the fact
that India has admitted this aggression. Nothing has been
said about the cessation of interference in the internal
affairs of Pakistan and subversion and the fomentation of
armed rebellion by India. Furthermore,. this draft resolution
doea not provide for withdrawal of armed personnel and
forces. In other words, occupation would continue and
then, by the time the Security Council were to consider the
situation further, Pakistan would be called upon to acquiescein its own dismemberment.

117. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (trmsluted j?om Chinese):
At our meeting, the Soviet and Indian representatives have
repeatedly tried to sell us their stuff about the so-called
“Bangla Desh”, They wanted us to join them in inviting to
our meeting the representatives of the so-called “Bangla
Desh” with red-carpet ho,nours. What kind of thing is the
“Bangla Desh” which the Soviet and Indian representatives
have lauded so much? I think it will be useful to recall
history in this respect, for there is no lack of similar
instances in history.
118. In 1931, the Japanese militarists launched an undeclared war against China and occupied the four provinces of
Northeast China. Subsequently, they declared the establishment of a puppet government called “Manchukuo”. The
leader of that government was none other than a traitor
who had been reared over a long period by the Japanese
militarists. In so doing, the aim of the Japanese militarists
was to split China and perpetuate their occupation of the
four provinces of Northeast China. After its establishment,
that puppet government won the recognition of the
Japanese militarists, Hitler of Germany and Mussolini of
Italy. And what did the League of Nations do about the
Japanese aggression against China? Under the manipulation
of certain powers, the League of Nations tried to curry
favour with Japanese militarism at the expense of China’s
territory and sovereignty, so as to direct the Japanese
militarists’ spearhead of aggression to the then Soviet
Union, Consequently, the League of Nations did nothing in
face of Japanese aggression and let them have their own
way. It was precisely under these circumstances that
Japanese militarism further expanded its war of aggression
against China, occupying large expanses of China’s territory. This greatly inflated the Japanese imperialists’ ambitious design for world hegemony, and at the same time
abetted the German and Italian Fascists in their aggression
and expansion in Europe. All this finally led to the
outbreak of the Second World War. The events thereafter
are well known to everyone present here. The Second
World War brought untold disaster and devastation to the
people of various countries,

113. We note that the draft resolution contemplates that
the Council should meet again to consider what further
steps within the framework of the Charter could be taken
on the issues which have given rise to the hostilities, but we
know very well that any proposal for the withdrawal of
Occupation
forces is likely to attract a veto and the Security
COUIIC~~
would not be in a position to deal with the
question of withdrawal of forces. By not dealing simultaneously with the question of withdrawal together with
that of cease-fire, the Council would legitimize military
occupation and perpetuate it.
114. For these reasons we would hope that the Council
woubd ponder the considerations I have urged and aho be
conscious of the fact that while it has a responsibility for
peace and security, the United Nations as a whole cannot
absolve itself from that responsibility just because a veto
power is being arbitrarily exercised.

119. Japanese militarism created the government of a
so-called “Manchukuo” in China; the German Nazis
fostered quisling governments in Europe as well. However,
the development of history is independent of man’s will.
Today where has that so-called “Manchukuo” gone? Where
are those quisling governments? What has happened to
their creators? The grandiose plans of the Japanese
militarists, Hitlerite and Mussolini Fascists for world domination went bankrupt. They were severely punished by the
people of various countries. These historical facts are
pefhaps known even to the schoolboys, but the “erudite”
Mr. Malik and Indian Ambassador seem to be ignorant of
them.

115. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
France to take the floor on a point of order.
116. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (inteVzt@non
fic~rn French]: By way of clarification after what wassaid
by the Ambassador of Pakistan may I make clear the
following? We have introduced no draft resolution. The
draft which, I read, on the responsibility of the French
delegation alone, only marks the point at which we stopped
in our discussions. It was a draft which seemed to us to be
able to supply a basis for agreement with other delegations
during later discussions. That was the point at which we
stopped and I thought it appropriate to bring this to the
notice of the Council, in view of the statements we had
made yesterday, so that the Council might be in a Position
to judge for itself the efforts which some delegations,
including ours, had made, but it was solely a basis for
discussion which we presented. There has been, as Yet, no
formal draft drawn up, not to mention a draft formally
introduced.

120. Now after launching an undeclared war of aggression
against Pakistan with the incitement and support of the
Soviet Union, the Indian expansionists, with the collaboration of the Soviet Government, created a government of the
so-called “Bangla Desh” for the purpose of dismembering
Pakistan and perpetually occupying East Pakistan. That is a
neo-quisling government, a neo-“Manchukuo” government.
The Indian Government has already openly declared its
13

recognition of that government. Probably, the Soviet
Government will also declare its recognition of that
government tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. Whether
recognition or not, what people have now seen is that not
only has the Soviet Government failed to condemn this
neo-quisling government, neo-“Manchukuo” government,
but it has shown most solicitous concern and wanted to
invite the representatives of that government to the
Security Council as angels, to pay homage to the representatives of the so-called “Bangla Desh” as “heroes” of a
national liberation movement and even wanted everyone
else to take off their hats and salute them.

S/10410/Add.l is not correct and that it contains a
misstatement. He says Pakistani sources have reported that
India has launched an attack on West Pakistan. I maintain
this is totally false. If there is any doubt about that at least
part of the truth is established by the report ‘which is
contained in document Sj10412, which says in its paragraph 4 (a): “Srinagar airfield bombed at 1745 hours on
3 December.” Now, Srinagar is on our side of the frontier
and, therefore, it could only be bombed by Pakistani
planes. We have suggested the bombing took place at 1730
hours; the United Nations observer reports it was bombed
at 1745 hours.

121. We should be grateful to the Soviet representative,
Mr. Malik, for teaching us a very ,good lesson by negative
example. He has enabled people to see all the more clearly
the renegade features of the Soviet leaders who have
betrayed Marxism-Leninism, the Great October Socialist
Revolution, the Soviet people as well as the people of the
whole world.

127. The second point is that he said that we had
committed some heinous crime in preventing the evacuation of consular corps and United Nations personnel from
Dacca. If anyone has any regard for the truth-and I think
the Secretariat can bear me out on this, but I shall not ask
them to do so because it would be most embarrassing for
them-everything was arranged. The plane came from
Bangkok and was flying to Dacca. Here is a telegram stating
exactly what happened:

122. Why are the leaders of the Soviet Union so interested
in the “Manchukuo” government, the quisling government
of today? A reply was given in the TASS statement
yesterday, which constitutes a voluntary confession. According to that statement, the “secure boundaries” of the
Soviet Union have all of a sudden been extended to the
Indo-Pakistan subcontinent and the Indian Ocean, The aim
of the Soviet leaders is to gain control over’ the subcontinent, encircle China and strengthen its position in
contending with the other super-Power for world hegemony. What the Soviet leaders of today are frantically
seeking is the establishment of a great empire which the old
tsars craved but were unable to realize, a great empire
controlling the whole Eurasion continent.

“AS arranged, Canadian C-13 aircraft, came from
Bangkok to Dacca this morning. However, when ap
proaching Dacca airport, Dacca control tower did not
accept the aircraft and advised it to turn back. Our
Calcutta airport control monitored this talk and invited
pilot to divert to Calcutta, Pilot acknowledged offer
gratefully, but said he was venturing back to Bangkok.
The Air Force authorities confirmed that safe period
between 1030 to 12 noon IST promised by us wasfully
honoured. Our air force stopped air activity in Dacca
airfield well before such period.”
That is the truth.

123. In conclusion, I wish only to address a few words of
good intention to Mr. Malik. Please bear in mind the fate of
“Manchukuo”, quislings and their behind-the-scenes boss.
124. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of India
to take the floor.
125. Mr. SEN (India): I simply wanted to speak for two
minutes in order not to leave an impression on some of the
factual matters brought out by the representative of
Pakistan. This impression has been created on the basis of
misconception and I thought I would clear it up straight
away. I do not believe it would help our deliberations or
profit the Council if I were to reply in detail once again to
the many chargeshe brings up from time to time, charges
to which I have replied in detail on previous occasions. All
these charges are flung, as I said before, without the
slightest iota of evidence or a particle of truth. However, he
has mentioned three points in which the United Nations is
somehow or other involved and I think it is my duty to
inform the Council of the exact position.

128. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has in other
forums of the United Nations expressed the belief of my
Government that the only safe course for a world organization such as ours, charged with the responsibility for
international peace and security and composed of States
with varying ideological, political, cultural, and economic
systems, is to eschew sentiment and expedience and to
adhere strictly to the principles of international law which
we are pledged to uphold as a basis.for world order. Small
States like my own have a special interest in ensuring that
the United Nations develops its capacity as an effective
instrument for world peace. We do not depend on
armaments, nuclear or otherwise, for our security, We
depend on the provisions of the Charter and all that flows
from it. Any rejection of its fundamental principles
undermines the authority of the Charter and the source of
security of nations, large and small. The United Nations
came into being to ensure that war must not be a profitable
venture.
129. For almost three days this Council has been seizedof
a question that affects the peace and security of the
Indian-Pakistani subcontinent and of the world at large. For
three days we have had a wide exchange of views.We have
consulted intensively. We have had a proliferation of draft
resolutions all aimed at trying to discover a formula which
would be acceptable to the Council as a whole.

126. First, he talked about this tragic subject of Bangla
Desh being brought up in the United Nations. Of course,
the Security Council is one of the many forums where this
could be discussed. He did not explain why other organs
could not also be considered. However, two factual points.
He said that our memorandum contained in document
14

jurisdiction
ter . . .“.

130. When my delegation spoke on the first day of this
debate I explained that in doing so my Government was
anxious to assist in bringing to a halt the open warfare that
was being waged between India and Pakistan on several
fronts, with the use of air, land and naval forces. I
explained then that the Council would have come to grips
with some of the issues that had given rise to the conflict,
but that its first responsibility wasto demand an immediate
cease-fire, an immediate withdrawal of Indian and Pakistani
forces from each other’s territory where penetration had
occurred, and a scrupulous regard by both States, without
qualification, for each other’s territorial integrity. I said at
that time that it was a crisis hour in which the Council had
met, and that with every hour that passed there was a
danger of greater loss of life and of human suffering in a
region which had already been afflicted with suffering
unparalleled in the history of our times.

of any State, in accordance with the Char-

133. My Government believes that the tragedy that has
overtaken East Pakistan is a problem which primarily
concerns the Government and people of Pakistan. It is not
for any other State to impose a political solution on East
Pakistan by military means. In doing so we would be
opening Pandora’s Box, and that would mean that the
whole world would be turned into a bed of fire.
134. In the course of this debate my delegation associated
itself with a number of other delegations in an attempt to
formulate a resolution which would not only reflect the
concern of the United Nations in this matter but also be
predicated upon the purposes and principles of the Charter.
The result was the draft resolution which appeared in
document S/10423. Unfortunately, as we know, that draft
resolution received the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Security Council and, as a result, the will of
11 members of this Security Council-and I have reason to
believe that even those two States which abstained in the
vote on it supported it in spirit-has been frustrated. We
have seen, after three days of debate, that it is not possible
to arrive at a formula which will satisfy both Pakistan and
India, because both hold inflexible positions on certain
aspects of the problem. We have also seen that each State is
supported by a permanent member of the Council and that
any resolution which is contrary to the interests of either
India or Pakistan is rejected.

131. I explained also in my statement on that day that we
could not afford to depart from those principles and that
when we adopt a policy of political expediency we must
often accept with it a great dose of injustice. I also drew
attention to the fact that in such a situation there is
perhaps no aspect of the situation which cannot be related
to one provision or another of the United Nations Charter
and which cannot be settled within the scope of the United
Nations Charter,
132. I said that-and oh this my Government is most
firm-the principle of the withdrawal of enemy troops from
the territory of another country could not in any case, in
any circumstances be considered, particularly by this
Council-unless we wish to turn the whole concept of
international peace and security into one great farce-as
being subject to negotiation; the principle of unconditional
withdrawal is not subject to negotiation. We have seenthis
in the Middle East situation and it will appear, perhaps with
even greater force, in the situation that has now developed
between India and Pakistan. I explained that in addition to
the purposes and principles set out in the Charter we had
only last year, after considerable discussion in the First
Committee and the General Assembly, and again this Year,
elaborated upon those principles and formulated and
approved a Declaration, the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security [General Assembly resolution
2734 (XXV)], which, if followed by all Member States,
would certainly bring some ‘order to what is at present a
world of chaos; and I drew attentionsto paragraphs 4 and 5
of that Declaration, I shall not read them here. However, I
shall read one other paragraph which is most pertinent for
our consideration of this question. Paragraph 2 of the
Declaration reads as follows:

135. What do we do? This Organization cannot remain
silent when a conflagration of such dimensions is happening. It must express itself. This Organization cannot be
diverted from its main purpose by the negative vote of one,
two or three States.
136. The time has come when we must transfer this
question to the General Assembly, so that it may receive
the collective consideration of the 131 Members of the
United Nations, and hot just 15. My delegation will
therefore introduce a draft resolution under section A of
the “Uniting for peace” resolution [General Assembly
resolution 377 (V)], which reads as follows:
“Resolves that if the Security Council, because of lack
of unanimity of the permanent members, fails to exercise
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in any case where there
appears to be a threat to the peace, breach of the peace,
or act of aggression, the General Assembly shall consider
the matter immediately with a view to making appropriate recommendations to Members for collective measures, including in the caseof a breach of the peace or act
of aggression the use of armed force when necessary, to
maintain or restore international peace and security ,”

“Calls upon all States to adhere strictly in their
international relations to the purposes and principles of
the Charter, including the principle that States shall
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations;the
principle that States shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered;
the duty not to intervene in matters within the domestic

137. Pursuant to that resolution, my delegation will move
the following draft resolution, and it will be processed in
due course. It reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
‘Having considered the item on the agenda of its
1606th meeting, as contained in document S/Agenda/
1606,

15

‘%king into account that the lack of unanimity of its
permanent members at the 1606th and 1607th meetings
of the Security Council has prevented it from exercising
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security,

Council and the two parties concerned. It was clear, aswas
stated so eloquently by Ambassador Farah, that although
our efforts were prompted by the best intentions they were
doomed to failure because of a clear-cut difference in the
views held by India and Pakistan.

‘Decides to refer the question contained in document
S/Agenda/l606 to the General Assembly at its twentysixth session, as provided for in Assembly resolution
377 A(V) of 3 November 195O.“[S/.Z0429.]

143. An effort which was started yesterday, after all other
efforts had failed, by the delegations of France and the
United Kingdom-as stated here by the representative of
the former country-was also destined to fail becauseit was
impossible to win the support of the parties and some
members of the Council. So that, prompted by the best
intentions, the delegations of Belgium, Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and Tunisia offered another draft
resolution which merely, asked for a cease-fire, We understand the reason why those sponsors submitted that text,
but it too failed because, due to its extreme simplicity, it
omitted one of the matters which, in the opinion of many
delegations, was fundamental, that is, the need for the
withdrawal of armed forces from both sides of the frontier.

138. It is my hope that this draft resolution and the action
which my delegation has proposed will be supported by the
majority of the members of this Council.
139. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): The statement of the representative of
Somalia, my good friend Ambassador Farah, was so
eloquent and brilliant and went SO deeply into the heart of
the matter that I need not elaborate and will spare the
Security Council from having to devote more time to a
problem whose discussion is being extended excessively.

144. At present we have a draft resolution which hasjust
been distributed, sponsored by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics [S/10428], The Council will, of course,
have to reach a decision on it. However, I very much fear
that this too will be defeated for the simple reason, among
others and without stating any judgement on any of its
fundamental paragraphs, that this draft resolution does not
call for the withdrawal of the troops of India and Pakistan
to their own sides of the frontier either.

140. For three days the Security Council has been
examining the problem which gave rise to the outbreak of
hostilities between India and Pakistan. As a result of our
deliberations several draft resolutions were submitted to
this organ. The first draft resolution which was put to the
vote was submitted by the United States and won 11 votes
in favour, but it could not be adopted because of the
negative vote of one of the permanent members.

145. If I may be permitted to digress, may I say that I am
surprised that that country should submit this draft
resolution without this essential requirement, inasmuch as
the tragic experience of the Middle East clearly demonstrates the result of a conflict when there is no such
provision made by the Security Council?

141. Shortly thereafter the delegation of Argentina, together with the delegations of Belgium, Burundi, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and Somalia, submitted
another draft resolution. That draft resolution contained
the minimum which was acceptable to try to restore peace
to the region. I say it contained the minimum which was
acceptable because it contained three essential aspects
which I assumenobody will challenge: first, that there must
be an immediate cease-fire; secondly, that the armed forces
of India and Pakistan return to their respective frontiers;
and thirdly, that the necessaryconditions be created for the
millions of refugees who are now in India to return to their
homes. I said it was the minimum which was acceptable
also because that draft resolution did not contain some
other matters which, in my delegation’s view, for example,
were’ essential, such as the need to reiterate complete
respect for the territorial integrity of States and another
principle-which not only is enshrined in the United
Nations Charter and in the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security but is also one of the
fundamental pillars of international law and of relations
among States-that is, non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, In a desire to find a prompt solution,
my delegation did not insist on having included those two
principles to which we adhere unswervingly. Nevertheless,
that draft resolution, too-which received 11 votes in
favour-was rejected because of the negative vote of the
same permanent member who had objected to the adoption
of the draft resolution submitted by the United States.
:.
142. From that time on there were constant consultations
between all or a major part of the members of the Security

14.6. In view of all that I have stated, it is quite obvious
that the Security Council, because of the many and
complex facets of this conflict, is incapable of taking a
decision which will provide immediate peace in the region.
Like my distinguished friend, Ambassador Farah, I consider
that, in the circumstances, the Council should honestly
recognize that it is incapable of taking action and therefore,
without any delay whatsoever, transfer responsibility to the
General Assembly, which is after all the most democratic
and representative organ of our Organization where, fortus
nately, there is no veto. The United Nations, which has 13 1
representatives in that great Assembly, could then adopt a
resolution making clear the views of the internationaI
community in this tragic situation in which two countries
of the Asian subcontinent confront each other.
147. As is well known, action by the General Assembly
has a moral weight which is beyond challenge. Whatew
action the General Assembly takes, after hearing everyview
and having all the facts before it, will constitute an
irrevocable pronouncement. This action must be undertaken at once, without any manoeuvres or delays of anY
kind whatsoever, because while we are debating this very
serious question, hostilities continue on the Asian subcontinent and acquire the characteristics of a widespreadwar
with victims on both sides falling every minute.
16

148. The representative of Somalia has read out a draft
resolution which he intends to submit requesting that
action under the terms of General Assembly resolution 377
A (V). My delegation shareshis views completely, as well as
his concern when he submitted this draft resolution, and we
wish to have the honour to be considered a co-sponsor of
the draft resolution which Somalia will introduce. And in
so doing we appeal to the non-permanent members of this
Council to follow this course because ultimately that is
what has united us in the quest for a peaceful and
immediate solution to the distressing Indo-Pakistani problem,
149. Mr.

TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation ,j?om
Mr. President, the voice of reassurancewith which
YOU called upon me strongly encourages me to have faith
once again in the Security Council and in the United
Nations in its entirety.
French):

150. Despairing of this cause, the Security Council seems
to be condemned to an alternative solution. And yet I
cannot stop myself from paying a tribute, a tribute which is
h.igllIy deserved, to the non-permanent members who,
together with my delegation have striven by every means to
arrive at a formula which would immediately put an end to
hostilities. Their initiatives are all the more praiseworthy
since they are inspired by well known selflessness-that is,
the efforts of the non-permanent members and of the small
States-which the mass media have rewarded with a silence
that is customary. Such initiatives were perfectly in accord
with the position of the Republic of Burundi aswell as with
the sublime ideals contained in the Charter of the United
Nations.

this organ and at the level of the General Assembly so asto
put an end to the deadly combat and its terrible consequences.
153. The majority of the nations represented in this
Council have felt in their hearts and in their flesh the
disasters of modern wars. There is no need for any
description of the horrifying tragedy which, while I am
speaking, is taking place between India and Pakistan. How
can one explain that the Security Council should be
content to deal with this war, which may annihilate
innocent people, as being something far removed, abstract,
indeed, mythical? How can one, without trembling, observe with indifference that this calamity is added to the
painful natural disasters which only a few months ago so
devastatingly struck the people inhabiting the areas of both
Pakistan and India? Is it possible for human conscience to
sanction a war which is about to strike a death blow to
regions which epidemics and recurrent cataclysms of nature
had barely spared?
1.54. Are we without compassion for these women, exposed to intemperate &rcumstances of every kind, holding
their children in their arms, -who are the object of the
infinite love of mothers in particular and of parents in
general? Human and social courtesy and charity only reveal
their true faces when those who exercise them empathize
with those who have a right to demand them. Along the
same line of ideas, what would be our feelings, if our own
children, clutched to the hearts of their mothers-hence,
our wives-were to be deprived of shelter, threatened with
extinction, exposed to shells and grenades, that is to say,
fatally condemned to physical destruction at any time?
155. These are striking questions, I agree, which it is odr
imperative duty to respond to, not only by means of
abstractionist imperturbable reason, but also with the
participation of the human conscience which can assist US
in personifying the tragedy engendered by war.

151. Thus, it is in compliance with the spirit and the letter
of the principles of peace which I stated in the course of
the first meeting that we are at all times striving to cover
the wide gap between the positions of Pakistan and India.
In a desire to reach an honourable compromise, the
non-permanent members, including Burundi, have had to
shuttle back and forth between the two delegations directly
concerned. Despite repeated efforts, and although we
combined all our resources, we came up against a wall
which remained a wall that we could not cross. The
Security Council now faces that wall.

156. Apart from the painful sufferings imposed on innocent victims, the belligerent States deliberateIy set themselves to damage economic well-being. If the material
progress which is achieved through the edification of their
respective nations is destroyed by incendiary bombs, is it
not then legitimate to ask whether these twin brothers who
are about to destroy each other mercilessly, will be able to
bring about an economic resurrection as Japan and
Germany have done?

152. In these circumstances, that is to say, there being no
solution forthcoming from the Security Council, it seemsto
US to be imperative for the Council to discharge its duty by
transferring the question to another organ which, beyond
doubt, cannot be any other than the General Assembly. In
this connexion I wish to say that the delegation of Burundi
in joint agreement with the delegations of Somalia and
Argentina considers it to be imperative and urgent to put
the problem, which the Security Council has proved to be
impotent to solve, to the General Assembly. This new
approach i’s dictated by our steadfast position of being
against any armed conflict and our concern to avoid
scrupulously any gesture which might cast oil on the
flames. We believe we are contributing to peace by
refraining from attributing to one or the other antagonistic
States all the blame for the dispute. This straddling
attitude, we think we are warranted in believing, will enable
us to continue to act freely both within the framework of

157. The delegation of Burundi has addressed itself to the
Security Council in these terms, being moved by our cult of
peace, being moved by our genuine friendship for both
India and Pakistan, and finally, prompted by our profound
veneration for the United Nations which we must at all
costs spare future affront.
158. Mr. MALIR

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The Soviet delegation cannot
but express regret that the sponsors of the five-Power draft
resolution were unable to maintain their position, even for
a period of less than 24 hours, and that they have
abandoned that position and withdrawn their draft resolution. Apparently, insurmountable obstacles have arisen for
(translated from Russian):

17

them. Perhaps even obstacles from two sides: from imperialism and from social treachery.

from true reality and is not thereby contributing to the
adoption by the Council of the decision which is appropriate and necessaryin the present concrete situation,

159. When withdrawing the five-Power draft resolution,
Mr. Vinci produced a number of arguments of a kind which
confirmed’ the conviction of the delegation of the Soviet
Union as to the correctness of its position on the question
under consideration. He said that ‘the five-Power draft did
not reflect true reality. That is precisely what we have been
saying throughout the whole discussion of this question in
the Security Council and we appeal to the Council to take
reality into account.
160. Consequently, Ambassador Vinci, speaking on behalf
of the sponsors of the five-Power draft resolution, confirmed the rightness and justness of the Soviet Union’s
position. We have been insisting, we insist and shall
continue to insist that reality should be taken into
consideration. We were guided by precisely that considera”
tipn in introducing our amendments to the five#Powerdraft
resolution. We became firmly convinced, after examining
that draft, that it was necessary to make it realistic, to give
it a basis of reality. Without the Soviet amendments, the
five-Power draft was truly unrealistic. Our amendments
gave it reality. Our amendments to that draft provided the
close, inseparable and organic link between a cease-fireand
cessation of hostilities on the Indian subcontinent, and the
elimination of the main causeof the conflict in that region,
which has led to a very serious crisis in East Pakistan, whose
consequences have acquired an international dimension and
significance.
16 1. The international dimension and significance of the
conflict are confirmed by the fact that the Security
Council, a principal organ of the United Nations, has
already been discussing this important, urgent and serious
matter for three meetings.
162. In view of this we express our regret once again that
the five-Power draft proved so short-lived, that it lasted less
than 24 hours and washastily withdrawn. But we believe in
the justness of our own approach to the settlement of the
situation on the Indian subcontinent and so we are formally
introducing a separate draft resolution [S/10428] which
takes into account the provisions ,of the five-Power draft
resolution and the provisions in the amendments introduced to that draft by the Soviet delegation.

165. We are profoundly convinced that adoption of our
draft resolution by the Council would be the most
reasonable, rapid and effective solution for the question
under consideration. I have listened with close attention to
the statements made by representatives (I should like the
representative of Burundi to listen to me)-including the
representative of Burundi-concerning the sufferings of
women and children, and, as we know, some 10 million of
them have left East Pakistan. If the representative of
Burundi and the sponsors of the five-Power draft resolution
had voted for our amendments and adopted them, or now,
when we introduce our independent draft, if they vote for
,that, those sufferings would be eliminated and very rapidly.
That is the reality, that is life today on the Indian
subcontinent.
166. Referring briefly to the comments of the representative of Pakistan, I must draw attention merely to some
aspects of his statement. Why are you afraid of the will of
the people of East Pakistan? Why, when there was an
expression of will in such convincing figures-167 out of
313 seats in the Pakistan parliament-did you decide to
deprive those members of parliament of the right to show
themselves worthy of the trust and will of the people? Why
are you frightened to give them the opportunity to work
freely in the legislative body? These are the questions
which have not been answeredhere.
167. Ambassador Shahi attributed to me an intention that
does not exist either in my heart or my mind-to be an
arbitrator in this matter. I do not pretend to such a role.
That would be contrary to my convictions. We want the
Security Council to be the arbitrator, to take into conside.
ration the real situation on the Indian subcontinent and to
adopt a decision that takes into account the two factors I
have mentioned-a cease-fire and cessation of hostilities,
and an immediate move towards a political settlement.
168. Why are the Pakistan representative and his lofty
supporters frightened of this? This is merely an illustration
of the way in which the social traitors distort the concept
of democracy.
169. We spoke of a serious political crisis inside East
Pakistan. But nobody is denying that. In my statement I
did not quote anything from Ambassador Shahi’s statement. I merely emphasized, noted and concentrated on the
words “serious, internal political crisis”. But you spoke of
that, you did not deny that, Mr. Shahi, and all the members
of the Council who have spoken, who have taken part in
the discussion, noted that and stressedit. Why then do you
accuse me of misquoting your statement? I see no reason
for that.

163. In order to save time, I am not going to read out the
draft, since the members of the Council are familiar with
the five-Power draft and the amendments to it and the
United Nations Secretariat has promised to process our
draft very quickly as an independent document.
164. In this connexion, we should like to emphasize
especially that in that draft the two basic questions, the
two basic matters, which must be resolved in connexion
with the aggravation of the situation on the Indian
subcontinent are closely, inseparably and organically
linked. If one were to formulate the two questions briefly,
they could be called “cease-fire and settlement”, This is to
be interpreted as a cease-fire and the adoption of measures
for a political settlement. And anyone who approaches with
a different yardstick is pipe-dreaming, is divorcing himself

170. There was some talk of there being no precedent for
the Security Council having its own authoritative opinion
on the main cause of the conflict in the Indian subcon.
tinent. But since when has the Security Council been
denied the right to ,have an opinion concerning the major
cause of the conflict, when considering a conflict which has
18

t
I

I

acquired an international dimension? No one, in the 26
yearsthat the Security Council has existed, has denied the
right and authority given by the Charter of the IJnited
Nations to the organ with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security to have an opinion
concerning the main cause of a conflict which threatens
peace and security. So those who speak with such concepts
and objections in mind have no foundation for them
whatsoever. There is only one right the Council does not
have and that is to ignore reality, to ignore a threat to peace
add security. There is only one right the Council does not
have and that is to ignore life, to ignore the main reasons
wllich have led to international tension and to international
conflict. The Council does not have that right, neither
under the Charter nor on the basis of practice during its 26
yearsof work.

Union. The Chinese slanderer does all that dirty work. Let
him carry on. We believe in the rightness of our cause;our
policies and position are well known. We are proud of the
fact that we have good, friendly relations with the
overwhelming majority, to say the least, of the States
Members of the United Nations; we find understanding and
common aims and are striving jointly with many States to
increase the effectiveness of the United Nations. And we
are grateful to many of qur colleagues here who maintain
the same position and are striving to develop friendship and
co+peration with our country and with its delegation and
its representatives in the United Nations. I do not think
that any of the slanderous fabrications and falsifications of
history which ohe Member of the United Nations engagesin
so zealously today will have any significance or influence
on the future strengthening and development of our
friendship, our sincere friendship and co-operation with
very many delegations both around this table and in the
Assembly, and in the United Nations, no matter how hard
the slanderers may try to achieve their purpose.

171. Nevertheless, all the draft resolutions which have
been introduced so far have been one-sided and did not
take into account the main reason for the conflict on the
Indian subcontinent. And it is precisely for that reason that
the delegation of the USSR could not support such drafts.

176. I can brush aside all the fabrications and falsifications. But when history is falsified, I am afraid one cannot
remain silent. To provide an argument which the Chinese
representative apparently considered to be highly convincing, he mentioned Manchukuo. He reminded us that
this integral component part of China was invaded by
Japanese militarism and imperialism. But he omitted to say
who liberated that part of China from the Japanese
militarists. The heroic Soviet army and tens of thousands of
our sons, brothers and fathers laid down their lives
thrusting, if I may say so, through the Maginot Line,
pressing through the Khingan Mountains in the territory of
Manchuria, crushing the resistance of the Japanese forces,
in order to free the Chinese people from the yoke of
Japanese imperialism. This is a fact of history and everyone
sitting here knows it. However much the slanderer from the
camp of social traitors tries to keep that quiet, he will not
succeed in doing so. Indeed, the whole world knows that by
its decisive victory, including the victory in the Far East,
the Soviet Union, together with other countries, helped the
Chinese people to create the People’s Republic of China. He
also passesover that in silence.

172. One of the representatives even embarked on a
course of monstrous slander, distortion and falsification.
But let that be on his conscience, We have a Russian
proverb which says that abuse and slander will not stick to
your collar. He can carry on his dirty business.
173. That is how matters stand with the draft resolutions.
Therein lies the root cause of the fact that so far the
Security Council has been unable to adopt a resolution
which would take into account just those two important
factors of the international problem under discussion: an
immediate cease-fire and immediate measures for a political
settlement taking into account the will of the overwhelming
majority of the East Pakistan people.
174. I wish to refer once again to the draft which we are
now introducing on behalf of the Soviet delegation and
which is based, as I have already mentioned, on the
provisions of the five-Power draft and those contained in
the Soviet amendments to that draft. If all the members of
the Security Council could ignore the press of two factors
which I have already mentioned, the press of imperialism
and the press of social treachery, the adoption of that draft
resolution would contribute enormously to the ending of
the conflict on the Indian subcontinent, to the stabilization
of the situation and to a political settlement. I call on all
members of the Security Council who really sincerely desire
that to support our draft resolution.

177. Mr. Huang Hua says that Malik has not understood
history. I have brought up those two facts to show that
Mr, Huang Hua has falsified history. It is he who is
pretending that he does not understand history. But what is
that-failure to understand or shamelessness? In drawing a
comparison between Manchukuo and the serious internal
political crisis that has arisen in East Pakistan and has
turned into an international problem, he went too far. But
that, of course, is an illustration of the shameless practice
of falsification of the social traitors, and their complete
indifference to the fate of the 75 million inhabitants of
E&t Pakistan.

175. As for Mr. Huang Hua’s statement, in my first
statement I called him “Comrade” and in the plenary
meeting of ,the General Assembly I also called the head of
the Chinese delegation “Comrade”, but if he wants to call
me ‘&Mr.” then I am quite ready to call him “Mr.” if he
prefers to be “Mr,“. And as for Mr. Huang Hua’s statement,
I gave an exhaustive description yesterday of his role arid
the aims that he is pursuing here in the United Nations and
in the Security Council. He has taken on himself the role of
chief arch-slanderer of the Soviet Union. I pointed out that
now there was nothing for the slanderers from the
imperialist camp to do in the field of slandering the Soviet

178. Japanese imperialism and militarism did indeed occupy Manchuria against the wish and the will of the Chinese
people-that is a historical fact-and imposed on it Emperor
Pu Yi who was some sort of remote offshoot of the Chinese
Imperial Family. Pu Yi was installed in Manchuria with the
support of Japanese bayonets, and the part of China
occupied by the militarists was officially named Man.
19

chukuo. But what has this got to do with East Pakistan? It
must be perfectly obvious to the Security Council, from the
discussion of this problem, that in East Pakistan the will of
the people has been expressed. The elected representatives
of the East Pakistan people obtained 167 out of 312 seats
in the Pakistan parliament. But what happened to them?
Their powersand rights were trodden underfoot by the iron
boot of the military, and the representative of the social
traitors is now licking that boot.
179. Those are concrete facts. The Chinese representative
is defending terror and repression and covering up his real
unseemly position by slandering the Soviet Union and India
at the same time. In Manchuria the Chinese did not
participate in any elections. And everybody knows that. In
East Pakistan there were elections and the chosen representatives of the people were elected. And this is where the
falsification occurs. In East Pakistan there wasno “Pu Yi”;
there no one was enthroned by anyone. But the Chinese
representative is trying to tangle up reality and make
comparisons. On the contrary, in East Pakistan the leader
of the majority party, Rahman, wasput in prison and was
threatened with a trial. What kind of comparison can there
be here between Pu Yi and Rahman? Who would believe
that? Who is your anti-Soviet, anti-Indian propaganda
intended for, Mr. Huang Hua?
180. Incidentally, about Pu Yi: when he wasour prisoner
he asked for the complete works of Lenin and Marx. I do
not know if he read them but perhaps he did. When we
turned Pu Yi over to the Chinese, he had apparently
acquainted himself with Marxism and the Chinese got not
just an Emperor but a man who had read Lenin and Marx.
Such is life. But that is not the point. The point is that
there is absolutely no analogy of the kind that Mr, Huang
Hua spoke about between these two events. So.what is the
aim of such comparisons? What is it-failure to understand
or shamelessness?Apparently any means are good enough
for slandering the Soviet Union. That, gentlemen, is the
repulsive face of social treachery.
:

181. I suppose I might finish here but I am put on my
guard by a concept being developed here by Mr. Huang
Hua. He says that the plans of the Soviet Union are to
control the Indian subcontinent-and he said yesterday-to
control the Indian Ocean. You know, the imagination of
slanderers is limitless, and that of falsifiers is even greater.
The Soviet delegation considers it beneath its dignity to
refute or to speak of this stupid invention and slander
about the great friendship between the Soviet people and
the people of India. But let us consider the concept. As the
Chinese see it, it follows that friendship between a stronger
country and a weaker one is necessarily evidence that the
stronger one wishes to dominate and control the weaker
one. That, gentlemen, is a dangerous concept and it exposes
the real outlook, thoughts and aims of those who adopt
such an approach to the friendship between the Soviet and
the Indian peoples. This means that China in its foreign
policy considers the friendship of a stronger country with a
weaker one, at least in a military sense (in terms of
population India is larger than the Soviet Union-we have
240 million people and they have something like 600
million) as a desire on the part of the Soviet Union to
control India, the Indian people, the subcontinent and the
20

Indian Ocean. This is a monstrous fabrication a@ B
monstrous falsification to which we do not even wish ::
react, Suffice it to think 110~ fictitious and falsified it a? :s
But the falsification exposes China’s real aims. It follji I
that, if China is friendly with a small country, it wants r.:
control it. That is the real concept and the foreign @r;>
goals of China as regards the third world: to control ti:
third world, and, using it as a support, under a &ii&~ ,i
friendship try to become a super super-Power. Such arr P:C
aims.
182. But I have already said what great pleasure a serrd:,:
party is deriving from the Chinese representative’s con%&:
slandering of the Soviet Union. That certain party is sitrr:_;
there, rejoicing, laughing, smiling, smirking and rubb$
hands. Well what of it? If he has taken such a role up?
himself, let him carry on with it. It will not make or,:.
difference to us.
183. Mr. Huang Hua spoke of the inevitable end of tk
quislings. And who brought the quislings to that end’! TRc
Soviet Union, its people and its heroic armed forces, wlrl;?
made a major contribution to the victory over @mu::
nazism, over Italian fascism, which has been rnenlicwf
here, and over Japanese militarism.
184. But having mentioned the end of the quislings, y,-;
should have mentioned the end of the slanderers too. \‘i’h~.
from October 1917, has not slandered the Soviet U&a”
Well, what of it? It is said, for example, that 7% i\?ti
York Times, that organ of the United States monopolies,
predicted the collapse of Soviet power in Russia some 92
times. But we are alive, we exist, and are Efourishing. W:
coped with the terrible threat hanging over our homeland ‘Hitlerite fascism; we are fulfilling our economic plans, uc
are raising the standard of living of our people, we are
helping other peoples as much as we can and we are fig&$
indefatigably for the strengthening of international pear.
for security and for disarmament. The slander of Tilell;&%
York Timesdid not stick on our collar. We do not Feel it.
185. Who has slandered us? The late Churchill. Even body knows that. From the very first days of the Octobr
Revolution and the notorious “Fulton” speech, when br
tried to turn the United States against the Soviet Union,ss
the mentor and teacher of the United States politician%.
whom he called in a conversation with me “newconter$“’
who had to be taught politics. But Churchill is no longer
with us. Churchill not only Slandered us, he even organized
crusades. We brushed aside the slander and coped with the
crusades, and we exist and we are flourishing.
186. Who has slandered us? Hitler, Goebbels, Goering
Ribbentrop. And not only did they slander us, but they
advanced on us with their armed forces and with the armed
forces of the whole of Europe, subjugated by them.
187. The heroic armed forces of the Soviet Union and the
Soviet people coped with that terrible threat. We endurG
terrible sufferings of the kind that did not fall to the lot of
my other people. The quislings perished, and their masters
perished: Hitler, Goebbels, Ribbentrop, Keitel and the rest
of them. Where are they now! But the Soviet Union is in
good health and flourishing! Who ensured victory over the

quislings and their masters? The Soviet Union. Do not
forget it, Mr. Huang Hua.
188. The slanderers of today, both from the camp of
imperialism and from the camp of social treachery, should
draw the appropriate conclusions from that historical fact.
No slander is going to lead us off our Leninist path, the
path of strengthening international peace, of security, of
disarmament and the development of friendship with all
peoples of the world who want to be friendly with us in the
name of those high ideals and in accordance with the
Leninist principle of peaceful coexistence. In the past the
quislings and the slanderers had no future and there is no
future for them now. That is their fate. Lofty purposes are
not achieved by slander. We shall continue in future to
strive sincerely for co-operation with other States which are
ready for it, even in so far from perfect an organization as
the United Nations, in order to achieve, by common efforts
the purposes set forth in the United Nations Charter, in
whose elaboration we participated, for whose implementation we have striven indefatigably throughout the whole of
our presence and participation in the work of the United
Nations.
189. Such are the historical facts. And such is the
unenviable role of the slanderers and falsifiers who are
trying to distort those universally known historical facts.
190. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
Burundi on a point of order.

obstruct the proceedings of the Security Council as far as
taking a vote on the proposal presented by the representative of Somalia is concerned. He is extremely afraid to
face the General Assembly in a plenary meeting. Therefore
he has almost attacked most of the representatives in the
Security Council. He even went so far as to insult certain
representatives. His purpose is196. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
the USSR for the purpose of clarifying his statement.
197. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I should like to draw the
attention of the Chinese representative to the fact that he is
not keeping to the point. In my statement I did not touch
on the question of the draft resolution introduced by the
representative of Somalia on behalf of Argentina, Burundi,
Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and Somalia. I shall revert
to that question later and he will have an opportunity to
speak on it.
(translated

from Russian):

198. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from Chinese):
Regardless of whether he has touched upon the proposal,
the purpose of the Soviet representative is to make asmany
replies as possible in order to prevent the Security Council
from making progress with regard to the proposal of the
representative of Somalia. I should like to reserve my right
to make a further reply, but I shall not fall into Mr. Malik’s
trap. That trap consists of delaying tactics.
199. I should like to mention a very simple historical fact.
Mr. M&k mentioned Emperor Pu Yi of Manchukuo. The
historical fact is that Pu Yi was a war criminal and he was
not, as Mr. Malik stated, handed over to China as a Marxist.

19 1. Mr.

TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation from
I asked to speak at this stage in order to assure the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
that during all his statements the delegation of Burundi
constantly hangs on his every word; and there is very good
reason for that. I have set myself the duty of being present
at all times so that I shall never miss a single one of his
words. Furthermore I am extremely grateful to him for the
attention he has given to the statement made by my
delegation,
FrenchJ:

200. Emperor Pu Yi, after long prison terms in China, was
released and became a librarian for a period of time. He
passed away a few years go, If Mr. Malik admits that Pu Yi
is a Marxist, then Mr. Malik can call Pu Yi a comrade, in
spite of the fact that that is contrary to historicaI fact.
201. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I take note of the fact that the

192. Like the Soviet delegation, members of my delegation discuss among themselves the tenor of each draft
resolution; in order to be impartial and it so happened-and
this is a coincidence for which no one can be blamed-that I
was obliged simultaneously to Iisten to Mr. Malik while
receiving the draft resolution contained in document
S/10428, which was submitted by the Soviet delegation.
Accordingly, my deIegation believes that we deserve a
double reward for a double courtesy.

quisling Pu Yi was not punished in China but was made a
librarian.
202. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I should like,
first, to make a very brief comment regarding the statement
by the Ambassador of India. I appreciate his omitting
certain passages from the column that he quoted. In all
sincerity, I say that this was most considerate and courteous of him. But I do believe that a brief reply is in order.

193. Furthermore, if my delegation has been guided by
the dictates of humane conscience and morality in pleading
for the women and children who have been affected, we
believe that at present there are still children both in East
Pakistan, which has 75 million inhabitants, and also even
more in India, where there are 700 million inhabitants.
194. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative
of China on a point of order.

203. He insists on deflecting the Security Council’s attention from the fire on the subcontinent by using this ageless
device of quoting selectively from columns or editorials
printed here that are unfavourable to the policy of the
United States Government. Let me here and now assurethis
Council that our people-and that is what counts in this
country-support what the United States Government has
been trying to do, selective columns to the contrary
notwithstanding.

195. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from Chinese):
It is extremely clear that Mr. Malik is doing his utmost to

204. Our people, our policy, supported the SecretaryGeneral in his call for help for the refugees, in his call for
21

observers. Were not those efforts by our Secretary-General
even-handed? We think they were. Our people supported
the massive relief effort for refugees in Pakistan and the
massive relief effort for refugees in India. Our people
supported the vigorous private diplomacy in which our
President engaged in trying to get the forces of both sides
to pull back. And our people supported, happily and
proudly, the recent visit of the Indian Prime Minister to our
soil. I can also assure our colleague that the American
people strongly support the United States draft resolution
which received such an overwhelming vote in the Security
Council, a resolution to stop kilhng, a resolution for a
cease-fire and withdrawal, a resolution-and let me quote it
very briefly:
towards the creation of a climate conducive to the
voluntary return of refugeesto East Pakistan”.
“

.

.

.

Our people support that, as they did a resolution supporting the Secretary-General’s offer for good offices for peace.
That is what we support, selective columns to the contrary
notwithstanding.
205. This is not a one-sided policy. I hope it is a
compassionate policy, a compassionate policy towards a
continent in flames. I wish the draft resolution had
garnered even more votes than the overwhelming number it
did receive. I wish it had received the unanimous support of
the world community,
206. In summary, we can find voices of dissent on our
policy in this country; we can find editorials. But I do not
want this Council to be diverted by this device of shifting
the focus to our Government by quoting unfavourable
domestic sources. No matter from where those articles
come, they will not divert the world’s attention from the
massive war that has descended upon the subcontinent.
And while the war goes on, blame is unimportant. Each of
us in this Council can have his viewsas to who is to blame;
and certainly our colleague from India is entitled to his. But
at this critical moment in history blame is unimportant;
stopping the slaughter, stopping the invasion, somehow
seems to our people to be desperately important.

208. But unfortunately-as our colleague from Argentina
mentioned and as we pointed out last night-one permanent
member of this Council did not support that approach and
exercised, under the rules, its veto over those two draft
resolutions. In the midst of this grave situation the action
of that member has rendered the Council unable to act in
order to restore peace and security in South Asia and we
are not able in this crisis even to call for a halt to the
fighting and the return of troops to within their own
borders. In these circumstances we are faced with the
prospect that the world will conclude that the United
Nations is unable to fulfil its Charter obligations to restore
international peace and security where they are threatened.
209. This Council must do all within its power to ensure
that this does not happen. It must explore every feasible
avenue for action. And, to judge by statements made by
most members at our last meeting, it is also clear that a
large majority is agreed that we cannot leave the matter
where it is; the status quo is intolerable. The threat to peace
is too real and the plight of the refugees and the civilian
population in general is too urgent for us to engage in
further demonstrations of the inability of this CounciI to
carry out its duties under the Charter. Fortunately, there
are additional steps that we can take to permit the full
membership of the United Nations to examine this urgent
question and bring its influence to bear in favour of
restoring peace in South Asia.
210. The “Uniting for peace” resolution of the General
Assembly [377A (V)/ provides that:
“ . . . if the Security Council, because of lack of unanimity of the permanent members, fails to exercise its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in any casewhere there appears
to be a threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of
aggression, the General Assembly shall consider the
matter immediately with a view to making appropriate
recommendations . . .”
211. Accordingly, the United States joins the representatives of Somalia, Argentina, Burundi-and hopefully
many more-in supporting the draft resolution which
provides for referral of this urgent and important question
to the twentycsixth session of the General Assembly for
immediate consideration. We fervently hope that the
Assembly will prove itself equal to the task SO that the
United Nations will have fulfilled these grave responsibilities that it bears under the Charter.

207. At our meeting last night I noted that the Council
had been convened because it was faced with a clear and
present threat to the peace of the world, because the area
and the scope of the fighting had broadened and had
intensified and because the Council had a responsibility
under the Charter to stop the fighting and to preserve the
territorial integrity of Member States. Eleven members of
this Council-a clear majority-signified on two separate
occasions their desire to exercise the responsibilities of the
Security Council under the Charter. They voted in favour
of two draft resolutions which called upon the Governments of India and Pakistan to take measures forthwith for
an immediate cease-fire and withdrawal of their armed
forces from the territory of the other to their own side of
the borders. They recognized the need to intensify efforts
to bring about speedily and in accordance with the
principles of the Charter conditions necessary for the
voluntary return of the East Pakistan refugees to their
homeland.

212. The PRESIDENT: I should like Somake a statement.
I feel that I must remind members of the Security Council
of rule 27 of the provisional rules of procedure which states
that “the President shall call upon speakers in the order in
which they signify their desire to speak.”
213. Accordingly, will those who wish to take the floor
kindly add their names to the list of speakers which the
Secretariat and I keep. They will then be called upon in the
order of their inscription. We cannot conduct orderly
debates if representatives who indicate that they wish to
raise points of order instead make substantive Statements or
proceed to exercise their right of reply.
22

214.
from

Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
Spanish): It is a pity that the solution of a grave

problem which sheds blood among two peoples who are our
friends, lndia and Pakistan, and which threatens peace in
the world does not in this case depend on the majority of
the members of the Council.
215. I have always believed that Article 27 of the Charter
is detrimental to the sovereign equality of States because
nobody here is going to discuss the fact that the sovereign
equality of States is and must be one of the bastions of
Peace and international security. In other words, it is not
possible to agree that while blood is flowing in torrents in
areas of India and Pakistan the noble purpose of so many
should be frustrated because of the decision of one.
216. In the General Assembly there is no veto. There are
votes, votes which are binding and which, when cast, veto
minorities
thus characterizing the representative and
democratic nature of the General Assembly.
217. If the principal function of this Council is to
maintain peace and international security, let it maintain
them. with the full awarenessof that responsibility so as to
deserve universal respect. If tomorrow-God forbid-a larger
conflict were to break out in Asia in the frontier areas of
India and Pakistan because we have taken no decision due
to the veto used under Article 27 of the Charter, then I
wonder what the world will say about us. What would we
be able to reply to all the criticisms which would fall on
this COU~CS like a painful whip.

222. On the contrary-and I have said this in a previous
statement, in speaking of the draft resolution of the United
States-that can lead to unacceptable solutions: allowing
the existence of a situation of military and political
repression by Pakistani military forces, which we can under
no circumstances do; giving equal weight to the responsibility of India and of Pakistan for this situation, which we
cannot accept.
223. Another effort has been made now: the draft
resolution of the Soviet Union, which partly reproduces
and adds to the draft resolution of five Powers. We approve
that draft resolution; we support it, for a reason which I
will express in a single sentence: it deaIs with the root of
the evil in order to cure it and eliminate ah its external
manifestations which are so tragic and so dangerous.
224. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

218. And yet I have always believed that the resolution
“Uniting for peace” is wise and courageous. Let us do
honour to what we decided in 1950. Let Pakistan and India
realize that in the United Nations not everything is words
and promises, but rather a reality inspired by good faith,
that good faith which should be the substance of our
international conduct.

225. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): The basic principles
on which the United Nations Charter is predicated are at
stake. The fundamental principle of non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States has no doubt been violated. Any
civil conflict inside a country should be resolved by the
people of that country themseIves and not by the invasion
of the troops of one State into the territory of another to
support rebellious elements that may serveits own national
interests. The tragic situation of the refugees from East
Pakistan should not be exploited by anyone-without
naming the country.

219. Consistent with what I said in my initial statement, I
support as a co-sponsor the draft resolution to which the
representative of Somalia has referred so eloquently. What
he has stated is the truth. The opposing viewsheld in regard
to this problem by the protagonists, India and Pakistan, and
the certainty we feel that texts of one kind or another with
pronouncements
of various kinds mentioning the two
nations which are parties to the conflict, would not be
adopted because of the inexorable action of the veto, a
right conferred on the great Powers under Article 27 of the
Charter, leads us to believe that it is only the forum of the
General Assembly which can respond to the desires for
peace of the expectant world in which we live.
220.

agenda must, necessarily and in the first instance, take into
account the basic fact-?he situation in East Pakistan. We
consider also that the situation is extremely complex and
difficult. The long negotiations and consultations in this
Council have demonstrated as much. A solution, if it is to
be judicious, realistic and lasting, must take into account all
the essential elements of the situation, their complexity and
their interdependence both ‘in time and in space. To deal
with these elements separately, independently of each
other, independently, in the first instance, of the political
settlement of the situation in East Pakistan, cannot lead to
the solution of the problem before us.

226. Although the refugees on Indian soil are a burden on
India, there is no excuse for championing a separatist
movement inside the State of Pakistan. If the Security
Council fails to prevail on India amicably to withdraw its
troops from the territory of Pakistan, what will prevent
other States from exploiting similar tragic situations for
their own benefit? Even subversion, not to speak of
flagrant intervention, should be considered impermissible in
the era of the United Nations-although,
unfortunately,
agentsprovocateursare still planted by States to undermine
other States.

Mr.

KUI,lAGA
(Poland) (interpretation frmn
We have already spoken in this debate several
times. I shall limit myself now to presenting, in as concise a
fashion as possible, the position we hold at this stageof the
debate.

French):

‘227. Here, I have to say something in a low voice to my
good friend Ambassador Malik. I am sure he will take it in
good faith. There is something that has been taking place
for several years, but I have not told. him about these
incidents. I have been approached several times every year
by alleged representatives of the three Baltic States-I say

22 1. In the attitude which my Government has constantly
maintained, in the interventions which my delegation has
made in the course of this debate, a fundamental element
has always been repeated: a solution of the conflict on Our
23

“alleged” because I do not consider them “representatives”-in New York and elsewhere.They have followed me
to Paris. They want me to clamour in the United Nations
for the right of self-determination. They tell me: “They call
you ‘Mr. Self-Determination’. Over a period of eight years
with your colleagues you elaborated that principle into a
right. Help us out.” My reply, my good friend, Ambassador
Malik, has invariably been that only the people resident in
the Baltic States have the right to speak for themselves and
not emigres like them, who live outside the legitimate
components of the 16 republics of the Soviet Union.

no choice but to fight and fight and keep on fighting until
both countries, I submit, would become bankrupt and have
to be assisted financially from outside. The Soviet Union
would have to extend aid-and I am not specifying what
aid-to India, and China would have no choice but to do
the same to Pakistan, and international relations in Asia
-mostly in Asia-would be exacerbated, some States siding
with Pakistan and others siding with India, That would be
the situation. There would be fighting, continuous fighting,
some States siding with India and other States siding with
Pakistan.

228. The representative of China mentioned yesterday
that there had been attempts to separate Sinkiang from
China. I did not know about that. Had he not said it, I
should not have known it. Many countries are confronted
with various secessionistmovements. If we encourage such
secessionist movements, we may have to gerrymander many
countries and prepare a new map of the world.

232. IS there no solution to such an impasse? I submit
that the Council should improvise, at this last minute,
urgent action, lest the people of India and Pakistan become
the victims of the conflict between two giants, namely, the
Soviet Union and China. Neither India nor Pakistan should
find comfort in the exchange of vilifications between the
two major communist States among us. Invective hurts, It is
like putting salt on a wound. How are we to expect any
clear thinking on the part of those who indulge in
vituperation and incrimination? What have the communist
States left for the capitalists if they tangle with them? If
this is the type of debate we are to witness, exchanges of
recrimination between two sister States, Asian States-to a
large extent the Soviet Union is Asian and China is wholly
Asian-what are we to expect them to do if this tone 1s
continued in the United Nations, reviving the cold war of
the fifties? As I see things, the Ambassadors of China and
the Soviet Union have the key to the solution of this sad
situation, but of course they have to receive instructions
from their capitals.

229. Self-determination-and I am speaking from my
humble experience in having spent several years elaborating
the principle into a right-is an inalienable right of peoples
and nations, on the sole basis of a community of interests.
The other day I mentioned Belgium. There is a so-called
Flemish group and a French-speaking group there, but the
community of interests made them into a State. If some
people in East Pakistan were disgruntled-and we should
not set ourselvesup here asjudges concerning whether they
are right or wrong-they should compose their differences
with their own Government, without interference from the
outside. I submit that there is no State in the world with a
so-called homogeneous people. The Soviet Union consists
of 16 Republics. Are they ethnologically the same? What is
the cohesive force that keeps them together? A community
of interests, bolstered by the power of the central Government , and rightly so.
230. I want to tell my good friend, Ambassador Sen, that
I have been a student of Asia and I know that India itself
has many ethnological groups-apart from a diversity of
cultures and languages. Would the Government of India
accept any movement that tended to break India into a
number of States? Certainly not, and if any attempt is
made I will be the first one to stand with it in casethere is
subversion. The Indian thesis is that it can no longer bear
the burden caused by several million refugees from East
Pakistan who fled to the soil of India. It seems to me that
India has decided to invade East Pakistan for the repatriation of these refugees to their homeland. India may claim
that the only way to get rid of these refugees, who are a
financial burden, no doubt about it, would be to create a
secessionist State, namely, Bangla Desh, and prevail upon
the refugees to return to their homeland. However, the
United Nations had already been seized of the tragic
situation of the refugees, and continuous efforts are being
exerted to have those refugees repatriated without undue
deIay.

233. I have watched, throughout, the cool and collected
attitude of two of our colleagues in the Council. They are
major Powers-the representatives of France and the United
Kingdom. They have been quite reticent. Perhaps they saw
that the better part of wisdom is to watch this drama and
see whether they can lend their good offices between the
two major Powers, namely the Soviet Union and China. Of
course, I do not expect that the United Kingdom will make
headway with the Soviet Union on account of those alleged
spies. I have noticed the sagacity of the Soviet representative and the Chinese representative-they are both cool and
collected. I notice how placid our Chinese brothers from
Asia are, and I have noticed also how cool and collected the
British can be, without being ruffled. I have lived amongst
them for a decade. Then, relations between France and the
Soviet Union are better than ever. Good. So why not have
the French use#their good offices with the Soviet Union-in
Peking, in Moscow and, of course, in New York.
234. So there are these two illustrious representatives, and
there is my illustrious friend from the Soviet Union,
Although I do not see eye to eye with him all the time, ire
is a very reasonable man personally. Both he and ou*
Chinese colleague were having a good time and both were
laughing. Is it a tragi-comedy, while people are suffering in
the millions and there is war going on?

231. Let us for a moment visualize what might happen if
India persisted in refusing to withdraw its troops from
Pakistani soil until a Bangla Desh State was firmly
established and that would encourage the refugees to return
to their homeland. The Pakistani Government would have

235. I believe that, after tonight, or tomorrow morning,
those four colleagues I mentioned could start to do some
spade work.
24

236. I must confess that the intervention of Ambassador
Bush of the United States moved me deeply this afternoon.
There was no phoney ring about it, I think it came from the
heart. The United States has been extending assistance to
both India and Pakistan. We should not be so obsessedwith
the idea that if a great Power has so much weight in the
international community we should always treat it with
suspicion.
237. Now, may I refer to the question of transmitting the
whole situation to the General Assembly under the “Uniting for peace” resolution? When I was writing my notes, I
thought that this should be done as a last resort. But it
seems to be the trend. May I say, from my personal humble
experience, that such a step, although laudable in its
motives, would hardly contribute to a speedy solution of
the problem? It will not bring comfort to the unabated
suffering of the teeming millions of refugees and potential
refugees, including Indians and Pakistanis.
238, I am not going to mention the abortive work of the
Assembly on matters that should have been the prerogative
of the Security Council. In order not to embarrass certain
States I shall not name them. But had it not been for a
frightfid Secretary of State in the United States-frightful, I
said, because he adopted the policy of so-called brinkmanship-nothing would have happened in 1956 when a certain
question was referred to the General Assembly. Then,
without mentioning the problem by name, in 1967, when
the Security Council failed to take effective measures, -they
thought of referring the question to the General Assembly.
239. I was sitting where my Indian colleague is now
sitting, and Ambassador Fedorenko of the Soviet Union,
who accepted that transmittal, was sitting where my
Belgian colleague is now sitting. I looked toward Ambassador Fedorenko of the Soviet Union and I said: “The
result will be zero.” I did not say it in a whisper. I
mentioned this on the record, and I stand to be vindicated.
I do not know why the Soviet Union found common
ground with the United States at that time and transmitted
the problem of Palestine to the General Assembly in 1967.
We are still talking a blue streak about it in the General
Assembly-year in and year out for the last four or five
years.

Assembly may work out some miracles. But the age of
miracles is past, I submit.
242. War negates all fundamental human rights. Think,
gentlemen of the Council, of the millions who need your
help regardless of whether they are Indian or Pakistanis, for
in the :end the whole population of the subcontinent will
find itself in a quagmire of poverty and misery, with the
meagre living that each one ekes out reduced even more.
How can a person maintain his dignity if his country is torn
by war and he is not able to make a living, not to speak of a
decent living? Even the big Powers can no longer afford
war. The victors usually end up by being losers economically, as we witnessed after the Second World War. The people
of the world, whether they belong to the victors or the
defeated, have to be taxed heavily. When will our leaders
wake up, especially the leaders of the big Powers, and read
the writing on the wall: “The young refuse to be thrown
into the slaughterhouse”?
243. Have we no mercy for the individual? No compassion? These last words of mine are nothing but an appeal
to my good friend Ambassador Malik to relay to the Soviet
Union what might happen to the teeming millions of the
Asian subcontinent should war trail on. Likewise, I appeal
to my brother Ambassador Sen to see whether he may not
work out with his own Government a solution in which the
dignity of everyone concerned in the area would be
preserved. I appeal too to my Asian Chinese brothers to use
their wisdom and political sagacity, perhaps accepting that
they should talk to our friend Ambassador Malik instead of
exchanging accusations and recriminations and forget for a
while their strategic difference-freeze it, put it in the
refrigerator for a while and concentrate on the misery of
the teeming millions. Only when they do may there be a
possibility-through
the intervention of such illustrious
colleagues as the representative of the United Kingdom, Sir
Colin Crowe, and the representative of France, Mr. Kos.
ciusko-Morizet-to see a gleam of light that will show us the
path to wisdom and comfort those who are suffering and
who in the end will curse the United Nations if it cannot
find a solution to their problems.
244. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan.

240. What will happen to the teeming millions who are
suffering in the Indian subcontinent, both Indians and
Pakistanis? After all, the Indians who are fighting can also
be killed, and they have mothers and wives and children;
and needless to say, there are millions of suffering Pakistani
refugees.

I now call on the representative of

245. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): It was not my intention to
take the floor again, but the “Ambassador of the Soviet
Union addressed a direct question to me which arisesout of
the draft resolution contained in document S/10428, which
he has circulated. This question was: ‘Why are you afraid
of the expression of the will of the people of East
Pakistan? ” I believe that he is entitled to an answer and I
shall give him an honest answer, but before I do that I
should like to make a comment or two on his draft
resolution as explained by him.

241. As I said, I had a chance to participate in the General
Assembly on that question, and I said: “The result now is
below zero.” Nothing has happened in the Assembly so far.
And you want to refer this tragedy to the General
Assembly? I have no objection. If I had any objections, I
have no vote here, not even the right to abstain. It is only
the Security Council which has the mandatory power to
act. Each one of us knows that if the Security Council fails
repeatedly in its duties and obligations, it had better declare
its impotency once and for all and merge with the General
Assembly, and perhaps nurture the hope that the General

246. I draw the attention of the Security Council first to
the fact that while the Soviet draft resolution attempts to
merge the elements of the five-Power draft resolution
contained in document S/10425, it also changes that draft
resolution, which has been withdrawn. For example,
compare paragraph 1 of the five-Power draft resolution
with paragraph 1 of the Soviet proposal. The five-Power
25

draft reads: “Calls upon the Governments concerned
forthwith, as a fist step, for an immediate cease-fire”. The
Soviet draft “Calls upon all parties concerned forthwith, as
a first step, for an immediate cease-fire and cessation of all
hostilities”. This is a basic change because, while one
request is addressed to “the Governments concerned”, the
other is addressed to “all parties concerned”. Since we
know that the secessionistelements are accompanying the
Indian invading forces, the Soviet draft resolution would
make them a party to this first step, compel us to negotiate
with them and straightaway accord them the status of a
party. In other words, it would pave the way for recognition. For us, as one of the parties, this is a most
fundamental change introduced by the representative of the
Soviet IJnion,
247. I shall respond to the appeal of Ambassador Malik to
examine his draft resolution in the light of life and in the
light of reality as it obtains now. There is an element of
internal contradiction in the Soviet draft resolution. Paragraph 1 gives status and recognition to the auxiliary
secessionist forces accompanying the Indian armed forces
by making them a party. Paragraph 2 of the Soviet draft
resolution calls for a political settlement, “giving immediate
recognition to the will of the East Pakistan population as
expressed in the elections of December 1970”.’ The fact is,
the reality is, that the auxiliary secessionist elements
accompanying the invading Indian forces have repudiated
the mandate. They stand for the creation of an independent
Bangla Desh State. That wasnot the will of the population
of East Pakistan as expressedin the elections of December
1970. There is a qualitative change in the demand that is
now being made. Therefore, the Soviet draft resolution on
the one hand accords status to the secessionist elements
who demand independence and who have repudiated the
mandate of the people of East Pakistan as given in the
elections and on the other hand talks of giving expression
to the will of the people of East Pakistan. In this situation
it is the auxiliary armed secessionistelements which will be
given a decisive voice by this draft resolution. I point out
this internal contradiction.
248. I earlier expressed the view that the Soviet amendments, on which I commented and which are now part of
this Soviet draft resolution, linked a settlement with a
cease-fire. That is, as Ambassador Malik explained, there is
an organic bond between them: that is, until there is a
settlement, hostilities must continue; war will continue.
249. Then there is an element of political negotiation
involved for the Government of Pakistan, under the duress
of the presence of the invading Indian armed forces. We
have been called upon to negotiate under these circumstances-which has never been the practice of the Security
Council or the United Nations.
250. Whatever the organs of public opinion may say,
whatever columnists may say, whatever intellectuals may
say-and many of them do not have a high opinion of the
United Nations-we all know that many great intellectuals
are political innocents. But here we are working within the
framework of the rules and provisions of the Charter, and
we have to act in accordance with those principles. The
intellectuals and the columnists and the newspaper editors
26

consider themselves superior; they override the law of the
United Nations in moulding public opinion. But we have to
conform to the Charter.
251. Therefore, the principle that there can be no political
solution to any problem while a country is under invasion
and occupation is a fundamental one, and we regret 10 fiid
that that principle-a United Nations principle-is ignored
in the Soviet draft proposal.
252. Further, I should like to point out that in all the
draft resolutions that the United Nations has considered it
is a sacrosanct practice to couple cease-fire with withdrawal, and we have admired the position of principle of
the Soviet Union, until now, that it has always mairltained
the organic link between withdrawal and ceasemfre. But,
unfortunately, we do not find a consistent approach by the
Soviet Union on the present occasion.
253. AS I have said, East Pakistan is a part of Pakistan
recognized as such by all Member States. The armed attacks
and invasion of East Pakistan from 21 November consti.
tuted an armed attack-an aggression-on all Pakistan.
254. The representative of the Soviet Union made the
charge that Pakistan started this on 3 December. But we
must go back before that date. I should like to point out
that the aggression started on 21 November, against Pakistan, which is one single State.
2.55. Then, in regard to my remarks, let me make clear
what I said about our internal crisis. We do have an internal
crisis, which is a political crisis. That political crisis is our
internal affair. The international aspects of this crisis are
the following: there is the humanitarian aspect-the purely
humanitarian aspect-and there is the other international
aspect created by Indian subversion, promotion of armed
rebellion and secession within East Pakistan, and, finally,
the invasion of East Pakistan. I should like to make clear
once and for all what are the internal aspects of our crisis
and what are the international aspects so that there will be
no misapprehension whatsoever.
256. Now, coming to the question whether we are afraid
of the expression of the will of the people of East Pakistan.
No; it is a great tragedy that that wilI could not be given
political expression in the meeting of the National Assembly, in which differences between political parties could
perhaps have been resolved. But as$result of a postpoflemerit for a short time, the secessionist elements in East
Pakistan launched a rebellion involving the non-payment of
taxes to the Government, defiance of the authority of the
Government, and the release of 18,000 criminals from
gaols, who were armed and let loose in an orgy of massacre257. That is the truth. If evidence is required one need
only consult the newspapers published in East Pakistan
from the time of the crisis, from January and February and
on 25 March. That was a notorious fact, which is known
not only to Members of the United Nations. Those armed
criminal elements, thousands of them, were armed and let
loose to go and commit massacres; and, regrettably, some
of the elected representatives were involved in those crimes.
No member of the Assembly has been disqualified for
political dissent or for his political views.

258. There is evidence of the organization of slaughterhouses-1 do not wish to go into these details-and those
responsible were requested to come and clear themselves of
the charges. Now, in this situation, while an amnesty
extends to political offenders, can the international community demand that it should also be extended to those
who have organized murder?
259. Therefore, I should like to point out in regard to the
Soviet
draft resolution the internal contradiction that the
armed secessionist elements are being made a party to
certain directives and actions of the Council, and then there
is a demand about recognition of the will of the population
of East Pakistan. If the secessionist elements were to
repudiate secessionist aims and abide by the will of the
people of East Pakistan as expressed in those elections, we
might perhaps emerge from this dark night and from the
gloom which surrounds us. That is a pertinent question
Which
every member of the Security Council must ask
himself before he exercises his vote on the Soviet draft
resolution,
260. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of India, on whom I now call.

raging. I can recall areas not far from India where warfare
had been going on for years. I shall leave history to judge
how and at what speed human lives are saved and the
flames of conflict put out. Did we not then consider justice
and the question of blame? I shall leave it at that.
267. Now, when we started this debate I asked myself and
some of my friends what exactly the Council would wish to
achieve. When I came here to participate in this important
debate, in spite of many reservations-mainly for reasons I
will explain briefly in a minute-1 had hoped that the
Council would proceed on the basis of that threefold motto
of peace, progress and justice.
268. Let me not be soft-mouthed about it: those who cry
for peace, progress and justice must realize that these
principles apply to all areas, not merely to India and
Pakistan, not merely to this area or that area, but to all
areas. We are all committed to them, and we cannot
separate these concepts merely because someone feels
something ought to be done quicMy after having slept on it
for nine months.
269. The second question I asked myself was: can we
achieve it? I think we can achieve it. The Security Council
has enough power to achieve it, but I rather doubt it will
exercise that power. That power could have been exercised
a long, long time ago. We are bogged down on the matter of
internal jurisdiction, and so on and so forth, and therehas
been no attempt yet today to have us look at the problem
in its entirety and take suitable decisions. No, we are very
anxious to get rid of a resolution somehow or other.

261. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, we are coming to the
end of the debate, and I am grateful to you and to the
Council for this opportunity to make a few comments.
262. This debate has shown that selectivity is the order of
the day. Now, several principles have been quoted by
various delegations: sovereignty, territorial integrity, noninterference in other peoples’ affairs, and so on. But I
wonder why we should be shy about speaking of human
rights. What happened to the Convention on genocide?
What happened to the principle of self-determination?
What happened to all the other social rights and conventions which you have so solemnly accepted? Are we
therefore to be selective in serving what is known as the
motto of our eta: peace, progress and justice? What
happened to the justice part?

270. Then I asked myself: how should we achieve it?
Now, here is where my hesitation, reservations and protests
come in. I should have thought, I repeat, that any
consideration of the question of cease-fire should require
the parties who are fighting. I suppose it is not the
intention of the Council that fighting between Pakistani
soldiers and the people of East Pakistan should not be
halted, and that violent massacres should go on all over the
place, and that those who resist those massacresshould be
blamed for resisting them. I should have thought that the
intention of all men of goodwill would be to put an end to
all hostilities. And we have just heard argued that the
secessionist movement-I have again and again explained
that aspect of the problem, and we do not have to dwell on
it-that the Pakistani army can take whatever action it likes
against helpless women, children and men, but they must
not resist because that is immoral.

263. We cannot proceed on this important and very
serious matter in that selective way. The Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security has been quoted.
What happened to article 22 of that Declaration? What
happened to the other articles? According to your views,
you can select as you like, but when I select a particular
article, then that is being selective,

264. I should have thought that the normal, civihzed
course of debate would be for each speaker to support his
271. That is why I wanted Bangla Desh people to come
and give us their view. But that has not happened. In this
argument with the best evidence available; and if that is a
crime then I have to be taught all the lessonsof democracy
system of unrealism can the Council really expect to come
all over again.
to any sensible decision?
cc”‘-’
272. Now, let me explain very briefly what some of tltese
265. I was also glad to hear that the people of the United
realities are. Refugees are a reality. It is not a question of
States support their Government. I should have thought
economic strain alone. I have explained that again and again
that in an elected government-one elected for at least four
so I shall not go into that. But anyway, refugees are a
years-that is a self-evident truth, But I was glad to have
reality. Genocide and oppression are realities. The intense
that confirmation.
desire of people to live their own lives, in their own ways is
266. Then I was told that we are here not to apportion
an overwhelming reality. There is no hope of Pakistan ever
blame but to do something to calm down the fire which is
controlling these lives. Total collapse of all the administra27

tion of Government is a reality. The extinction of all civil
rights is a reality. Armed conflicts of various kinds are
realities. Provocation and aggression of various kinds by
Pakistan from 25 March onwards is a reality. As a result,
retaliation has followed in exercise of the right of selfdefence, and we have warned that we shall exercise this
right without hesitation. Recognition by India of Bangla
Desh is a reality. Bangla Desh itself is a reality. Those who
do not accept these realities or the facts on which these
realities are based are entitled to do so. We are not here to
convince those who do not wish to be convinced. There are
those who do not wish to see facts and nobody can make
them see facts. As the saying goes, no one is so blind asthe
man who refusesto see.

which I there seems to be no way out. While we are
continuin! to discuss for hours and days, with no prospect
of arriving at any fruitful result, hundreds of thousands of
innocent people are dying and suffering in the undedared
fratricidal war. Peoples of the whole world are appalled and
distressed at this sight and they are hoping and expecting
that the United Nations will take some effective steps to
stop this tragedy. The United Nations is the organ
specifically created for the purpose of keeping the peace
and security of the world. The United Nations cannot
resign its duty simply because the Security Council has
immobilized it. We must exert every possible effort and
endeavour to fulfil this duty. It is only for this reason that
my delegation co-sponsored the draft resolution now before
us embodied in document S/10429, which would refer the
question to the General Assembly, as provided for in
General Assembly resolution 377 A(V) of 3 November
1950. In doing so, our only aim and desire is to see peace
and brotherly relations restored as quickly as possible
between the two great Asian nations.

” 273. If we go against these realities it is not India which
will suffer but, I fear, the entire concept of the United
Nations. We thank the Soviet Union, not because of the
India-Soviet treaty, but because it is one of the countries
which has accepted these realities as they are. The realities
have also been dawning in various quarters, but much too
slowly. After nine months we are still not anywhere near
reality.

277. The PRESIDENT: There being no further speakers, I
would observe that four draft resolutions have been
considered by the Council. The French draft resolution has
not been circulated, so members may feel that it is not
before the Council. I understand that the draft resolution
contained in document S/10428, sponsored by the Soviet
Union, may not be pressed. I understand also that the draft
resolution sponsored by China may not be pressed.

274. Now, much has been said about the India-Soviet
peace treaty, that it is a bond of slavery. Now, those who
believe that a country like India today can be controlled
and ruled by some other power, however powerful it is, are
not lacking in erudition. They do not need erudition, but
they need attention in some other field. Pakistan continues
to represent that the elections and subsequent wiping out
of their verdict by force was inevitable and because of the
secessionist elemenk
Again, I shall hVe it at that because
we know the facts much too well. I simply wish to make
our position quite clear at this stage. We have made it clear
before but again, I should read out formally a brief
paragraph about our position:

278. Subject to what members of the Council have to say,
I propose to put to the vote draft resolution S/10429
sponsored by Argentina, Burundi, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra
Leone and Somalia.
279. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (intefpretatiua
First of all I should like to make it clear
once again that there is not, and there has never been, any
French draft resolution. I quoted from a working document
which we had discussed with several delegations and which
seemed to be likely to provide the basis for an agreement,
but it was no more than that. So there wasno French draft
resolution to be introduced or distributed, or even talked
about, There was an initial text which I simply sought to
bring to the attention of the Council.

fram French):

“We have made our position perfectly clear and we shall
adhere firmly to it, for what is at stake-perhaps it is
difficult for others to understand it-is our national
security, is our entire social and economic fabric, and the
complex of life of over 500 million people of India, and
many others besides. We have faced aggression from a
neighbour four times and we are threatened again. The
sizes of different countries have little relevance, for small
Powers can have powerful allies, expensive and efficient
military machines, and strange ambitions. Added to this,
we face the mortal danger through the annihilation of 75
million people at our doorstep. This cannot but fail to
overwhelm us and we shall not tolerate it .”

280. Am I to understand that we shall immediately
proceed to the vote on draft resolution S/10429? Or are
we to have a discussion prior to the vote?
281. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The delegation of the Soviet
Union does not consider that it would be correct either
from a substantive or from a procedural standpoint to refer
this question to the General Assembly. This shows a desire
to avoid solving the substantive aspect of the question and
to avoid taking measures to eliminate the principal Cause of
the conflict in the Indian subcontinent. That is apparently
something needed by those who are trying, in accordance
with their former practice, perhaps to use the rostrum for
various kinds of insinuations and fabrications against those
countries whose views they do not share. But it is quite
obvious that the main purpose is to divert attention from
the substance of the problem, from the principal Causeof
(translated from Russtin):

275. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): My country is very much
distressed to see the situation in the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent so much deteriorated that a large-scale war has
actually started between two brotherly countries with both
of whom Japan has traditional friendship. My delegation,
together with a number of other members of the Security
Council, has tried very hard to arrive at some solutions
which may receive the approval of this Council.
276. However, in the course of the last two sessionsit has
become clear to everyone that because of lack of unanimity
of the permanent members, we are facing an impasse from
28

responsibility of maintaining international peace and security. And yet the great majority of the members of our
Council have striven continuously, either here in the course
of our meetings or outside this Council Chamber, to agree
on a draft resolution likely to win unanimity and which
would reflect the points of view of the two parties
concerned.

the conflict, to confuse the issue and mislead the United
Nations, and to avoid resolving the question,
282. Those who are supporting this draft resolution know
that resolutions of the General Assembly are recommendations while Security Council resolutions are mandatory
decisions which, according to the Charter, States Members
of the United Nations must implement. Since they have no
desire to find an effective solution to the question under
discussion, they are attempting to toss the matter into the
lap of the General Assembly.

283. The Soviet delegation still considers that only a
solution of the problem along the lines set out in our draft
resolution would ensure an effective settlement of the
situation on the Indian subcontinent.
284. YOU stated quite correctly, Mr. President, that the
Soviet delegation is not insisting on a vote on its draft
resolution at this moment. It is our intention to consult
some of the other delegations, irrespective of whether this
item is referred to the General Assembly. We shall continue
this work and we shall defend the rip@ cause and our just
position.
285. I should like to say a few words about some of the
remarks made by my very old friend, the distinguished
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia, Mr, Baroody. He informed
the Council that he had often been approached by the
so-caBed representatives of the Baltic States. I do not know
if MI. Baroody is here in the Chamber. Do not believe them,
they are not the representatives of the Soviet Baltic
Republics, they are quislings and betrayers of the people of
those Republics. They served Hitler, and now they serve
whoever will pay them the most, they serve various
imperialist intelligence services and are being used as a
Iabour force to carry out the really dirty jobs against the
Soviet Union and against the Baltic Republics. SOput an
end to your relations witb them, Mr. Baroody; they are
scum. If you want to make the acquaintance of the real
representatives of the Baltic Republics, I can help you and
be an intermediary. One of the members of the Soviet
delegation to the twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly is a representative of the Latvian people. I can
introduce you to him tomorrow. I can even give you his
card today-he is the Latvian Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs. I shall be very happy to bring the two of YOU
together and introduce you.
286. One small point of information: there are 15 Union
Republics in the Soviet Union and not 16.
287. Finally, I should like to say that, if Mr. Baroody,
with his superb erudition, oratorical skill and ability to
present his views and proposals had helped to convince
certain members of the Security Council to adopt the draft
resolution intrdduced by the Soviet Union, that would have
been useful and the sufferings of many people of which he
spoke here could have been ended.

289. Nevertheless, one cannot forget that in our Organization any draft resolution is the result of compromise and
of mutual concessions. No country will find in the text of a
draft resolution the genuine and original concepts which it
would like to see therein. However, my Government could
not compromise in regard to certain essential principles
which, on the question now before the Council, seem to us
to be the minimum prerequisite for arriving at realistic
solutions in keeping with the requirements of the situation.
290. Allow me, on behalf of the delegation of Belgium, to
pay a particular tribute to the European representatives, as
well as to those of Africa, Asia and Latin America, who
have given proof of their confidence in us and have assisted
us with their counsel from the time when Belgium took the
initiative, approximately 10 days ago, of consulting all the
members of the Council in order to convene an urgent
meeting.
291. We now find that there is a typical breach of the
peace which, because of its dimensions and the emotions
and passions it arouses, is likely to cause particularly grave
political and human consequences.
292. As I have already pointed out in previous statements,
the conflict between India and Pakistan by far exceeds the
limits of a regional dispute. What is at stake, in the first
place, are the lives of human beings who, as in every war,
are the innocent victims of the political ambitions of men.
But beyond the irreparable losses, the fighting that is now
going on will no doubt for many years to come endanger
peace and security in one of the most densely populated
regions of the world.
293, The most fundamental principles on which the
international community is based and which have governed
inter-state relations since 1945 are now in jeopardy. Last
year during the twenty-fifth anniversary session of our
Organization we adopted, as a result of an initiative taken
by the Soviet Union, the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security, in the drafting of which the
delegation of India-like the delegation of Belgium-made a
major contribution. The commitments to which we subscribed at that time complemented, as it were, the United
Nations Charter. I would venture to recall in particular the
duties of States as set out in articles 2 and 4 of the
Declaration, without forgetting article 24 in regard to
respect for human rights. I am, furthermore, grateful to the
representative of Somalia for having read out article 2 of
the Declaration.
294. At a time when we are bound to recognize our
failure, our impotence to act, our inability to restore peace
on the Indian subcontinent, there is no choice left to us but
to call on the General Assembly to examine the IndoPakistani situation immediateIy so as to make appropriate

288. Mr, VAN USSEL (Belgium) (i?ZterPretation from
?+enckr): After three days of almost uninterrupted deliberations and consultations, the Security Council must now
note that it has not succeeded in discharging its primary
29

recommendations to the world on collective measures to be
taken under paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
377 A (v), wmch is called the “Uniting for peace”
resolution.
295. My delegation will, accordingly, Vote in favour of
draft resolution S/ 10429.
296. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) linterpretntion
from Spanish): I shall not take up the time of this Council
unduly. I think we have already lost much Of our very
valuable time because of statements which were eXtremelY
lengthy the purpose of which can have escapedno one. But
I am bound to refer to the statements made by the
representative of the Soviet Union a few moments ago.
297. 1 always listen with the greatest respect to all the
statements made here because I have respect for the ideas
of others, even though I may not share them. I alwayslisten
most attentively to all the representatives, and that rule
certainly applies to the statements made by the Ambassador of the Soviet Union. But respect is not to be confused
with weaknessor complacency.
In the statement he just made the representative of
the Soviet Union referred to those countries which advocate the immediate transfer of this problem to the General
Assembly in the following words which I shall try to repeat.
He said that the countries which seek that course of action
are interested in fabrications-“fabrications” was the word
he used-against countries which do not share their ideas;
that their purpose is to distract attention, to confuse the
United Nations and to prevent a proper solution of the
problem by avoiding a realistic decision.
298.

302. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (iW’&WHor&n
from Fknch): I should like to make two comments: one a
formal one, the other a substantive one.
303. The first comment has to do with General Assembly
resolution 377 A (V), the “Uniting for peace” resolution on
which it must be said that the procedure for bringing
something before the General Assembly is somewhat
equivocal. That resolution tells us that:
“If not in session at the time, the General Assembfy
may meet in emergency special session . . .“-and at that
point-“such emergency special session shall be called if
requested by the Security Council on the vote of any
seven members”-nine
now-“or by a majority of the
Members of the United Nations.”
So that the procedure is very clear when the Assembly is
not in session; it is far less clear wherr the Assembly is
already in session. It would be sufficient as a matter of
fact-because we do not want to quibble over form-to
seize the Assembly under Article 12 of the Charter which
says:
“While the Security Council is exercising in respect of
any dispute or situation the functions assigned to it in the
present Charter, the General Assembly shall not make any
recommendation with regard to that dispute or situation
unless the Security Council so requests.”

300. It is true that the great Powers do not have the right
of veto in the General Assembly. That is, perhaps, one of
the wise provisions of the Charter. But it is obvious that in
the General Assembly every country, every sovereign State
Member of the United Nations expressesitself on the basis
of the draft resolutions submitted. The delegation of the
Soviet Union, like any other delegation, has every right to
submit a draft resolution to the General Assembly and, in
the m?rCise Of its sovereign right, the General Assembly
will then further decide which draft resolution deservesits
support.

Thus it is in fact that we must interpret the draft resolution
that is presented to us by Argentina and other sponsor%
Accordingly, it is possible for the Security Council to
request the General Assembly to take up this matter, not so
much in terms of the text of the “Uniting for peace”
resolution but under Article 12 of the Charter. But regard.
less of formal details, what I want to say is that in the
French text of “Decides to refer the question contained in
document S/Agenda/l606 . . .” renvoyer for “refer” in
English does not appear to me to be appropriate. Remoi in
French-referral-is correct when an assembly refers something to a committee, a subordinate organ. There is in
French no renvoi-or referral-when there is a transmission
between two organs that are quite different. The Assembly
is not subordinate to the Council any more than lhe
Council is subordinate to the Assembly. They are two
different bodies that each have functions and powers that
are different, so it would be more correct to say “to bring
the question contained” and so on “before the General
Assembly”. This question of form has, after all, a COWquence, and that is that the very fact of bringing the
question before the General Assembly in no way implies
-and the precedents are numerous-that the Council jtsclf
is no longer seized of the question. So that, regardless of
the debates in the Assembly, or the results they may yield,
the question remains before the Council and therefore
consultations may continue. That is a point that I wanted
to make quite firmly.

301. If bringing this matter to the General Assembly can
be construed as confusing the United Nations, avoiding a
solution, or distracting attention, that is simply not to have
confidence in the decision of 131 countries. I have such
confidence and I maintain our text.

304. And now the substantive comment. We all deplore
the failure of the Council. Of course, I have not either the
right or the desire to cast blame upon anyone, but if is
quite obvious that this debate does no honour to the
Council, either by its result or even by the way in which it

299. I do not think that the representative of the Soviet
Union is the best authority on avoiding a realistic decision
after vetoing two draft resolutions which were intended to
achieve precisely that. It is possible that the representative
of the Soviet Union considers that his present draft
resolution, like the one which was defeated by a great
majority the other day, constitutes an adequate, moderate,
realistic and constructive basis ; but, in any case,that is not
the view of the majority of the Council, and I would hope
that the representative of the Soviet Union is not afraid of a
decision of the General Assembly.

30

’

wasconducted. I do not think that those who watch us or
hear us, or read about us will have a very high opinion of
the United Nations at the present time, and I regret this
profoundly.
305. A consolation, nevertheless, is perhaps that those
who were most interested, the Ambassadors of India and
Pakistan, have been able, in spite of the trials that their
respective countries are going through, to present their
interventions both with understandable forthrightness and
with a dignity and restraint to which all members of the
Council must pay tribute.
306. And now there is a proposal to bring this debate to
the General Assembly. We have some doubts about what
will happen. We think there will be more delays, more
POIemics,
and to what end? To adopt a resolution which
will only be a recommendation. We must not confuse
procedures, nor confuse the powers of the organs of the
Organization. That is why we shall be‘ unable to associate
ourselves with this draft resolution. Nevertheless, we shall
not oppose it, in keeping with the position we have taken
since the beginning, There are a certain number of members
of the Council who believe in all good faith that they can
find a solution by bringing the debate to the Assembly. As
far as we are concerned, we have doubts, but if it is to be
done let it be done. We hope that something will emerge,
but we feel nevertheless -that unfortunately, the situation is
quite likely to deteriorate and that the Council sooner or
later will have to face up to its responsibilities.
30’7. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Saudi
Arabia wishes to speak and I shall now invite him to the
C’ouncil table to make his statement.
308. I call first on the representative of Italy on a point of
order.
309. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I understand that we have entered
into the stage of voting on the draft resolution and
explanations of vote. I think that only the members of the
Council may speak at this stage. Of course I do not want to
prevent the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia from speaking, but
I think that he should do so after we have given our
explanations of vote and voted. I think that is the correct
order of business.
310. The PRESIDENT: It is my understanding that there
is no rule to that effect, but if that has been the practice I
am prepared to yield if the members so decide.
311.

Since I hear no objection, it is so decided.

312.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
In analysing the reasons for
referring this question to the Assembly, I did not have in
mind either the Ambassador of Argentina or Argentina as a
country, nor the other sponsors of the resolution. I had in
mind those who have elevated anti-Sovietism to make it
official policy. That does not apply to Argentina. We have
the best of relations with Argentina and for our part we are
making every effort to develop them further. We, the Soviet
delegation and that of Argentina, are not frightened of the
General Assembly. On the contrary, we often address it and
(translated

from

Russinn):

we often submit proposals, and the most important items
being ‘discussed at the twenty-sixth session-on the’ convening of a world disarmament conference and on the
strengthening of international security-were proposed by
the Soviet Union. We shall also defend our position in the
Assembly actively and with as much purpose and conviction as we defend it in the Security Council.
313. We had in mind those who wereplanning this action
long before the Ambassador of Argentina introduced his
draft resolution. Here is a communique published this
evening before\ there was any resolution in the Security
Council. The communique states:
/The speakercontinuedin English.]

“Ambassador George Bush and his staff planned a
strategy to move the IndoPakistan issue from the Council
to the General Assembly. This would be done under the
resolution called ‘Uniting for peace’ “.
[The speakerresumedin Russian.]

That is what we had in mind. We had in mind another party
which actively supported that move.
314. Mr. VINCI (Italy): In a statement I made at our
meeting last night I said that if the Security Council was
unable to take any action, even the minimum indispensable
action-at least as we saw it at that time-1 was afraid that
there would not be any choice left except to bring the
conflict between India and Pakistan to the General Assembly. In a few minutes, this will be the result of the
deadlock we have reached.
315. It was precisely in order to enable the Council to
exercise its primary responsibility that my delegation,
together with five other delegations, submitted a very short
cease-fire draft resolution, In introducing that text, I said
that I knew that it would look unsatisfactory to many
delegations. My delegation and the other sponsors were
moved only by two main purposes: first, to break the
deadlock and at the same time save the Security Council
from discredit; and secondly, to take first things first and.
try to bring the fighting to a halt, to stop the killing, to
stop the misery and the bloodshed-and, I added, if it was
not already too late. Unfortunately, the events of these last
24 hours have shown that it was too late.
316. We certainly appreciate the fact that the Soviet
delegation has today adopted our short “cease-fire” and
embodied it in a new draft resolution which Ambassador
Malik has introduced. Ambassador Malik said that any
resolution should reflect the reality of the situation. Well,
there are many sides to this reality; there are many
different opinions, as ‘has been very clearly shown from the
debate that has’taken place. That is why I also said in my
statement yesterday that in our attempts to act we were
perhaps not well inspired in trying to face and deal with all
the crucial aspects of such a complex problem. We now
note that the Soviet delegation is not pressing its draft to
the vote, and therefore I will not make further comments.
317. I turn now to draft resolution S/10429, sponsored by
Argentina, Burundi, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and

Somalia. We agree with the sponsors and with previous
speakers that if the Security Council is unable to act, the
United Nations as a whole must not be allowed to fail and
must try to respond to the expectations of the general
membership and world public opinion.
318. That is why my delegation supports the Six-Power
draft resolution and will vote in favour of it.
319. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (inrePpretUriOn
from Spanish): I should like to place on record my
gratitude to the representative of the Soviet Union for the
clarification which he wasgood enough to provide in regard
to the meaning of what he had said previously. I am glad
that this is what he meant because the intention of the
sponsors of this draft resolution is constructive. As proof of
this it will be observed that there are three African, one
Asian and two Latin American countries which have
submitted this draft resolution to the Security Council.
320. Indeed, there are excellent relations between the
Soviet Union and Argentina and for our part we are
completely prepared to continue and strengthen them.
Indeed, on many occasions we have found ourselves in
agreement with the Soviet Union. For my part, I was
totally unaware of the communique from which he just
quoted-probably it comes from a newsagency-in which it
is stated that the United States delegation intended to put
forward a proposal like the one submitted by the six
sponsors. I was unaware of that, but I would like to say
how happy I am to learn that the United States supports
this proposal, becausejust as we sometimes agree with the
Soviet Union, so too, do we sometimes agree with the
United States.
321. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): This is not the first time the
Security Council has referred a question to -the General
Assembly. I would remind the members of the Council that
in October 19.56 during the Suez Canal crisis the Council
referred the question to the General Assembly, and only
France and the United Kingdom voted against, In November 1956 the question concerning Hungary wasreferred
to the General Assembly, with only the Soviet Union voting
against. In 1958 the Council as a whole voted to refer the
question of Lebanon to the General Assembly. So we are
guided by precedents. We have now reached a situation
where even the most optimistic among us find there is no
hope for, the present of reaching a formula that would be
acceptable to all members of the Council.
322. The PRESIDENT: As there are no further speakers, I
take it that the Security Council is now prepared to
proceed to the vote on the six-Power draft resolution
contained in document S/ 10429.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, Italy,

Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, United States of America.
Against: None.

Abstain@: France, Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.

The draft resolution
with 4 abstentions”

was adopted by II

323. The PRESIDENT: I shall immediately communicare
this decision of the Security Council to the President oftit
General Assembly.
324. I now call on the representative of the United
Kingd,om for an explanation of vote.
32.5. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): My delegation
abstained on this draft resolution because we are not
convinced that to proceed forthwith to discussion of thz
matter in the General Assembly is really desirable. We a~
that the situation is serious and urgent, and it is regrettable
that the Security Council has not reached agrcemenl.
However, we do not operate in a vacuum. It is the nature of
the international situation itself that imposes limitations 019
us and has so far made it impossible for us to reach
agreement. A discussion of the matter in the Gener;al
Assembly now, with the dissensions we have heard here staI
fresh in everyone’s mind, is not likely to change matters or
immediately overcome the limitations. It is concrete results
that we want to see, an end to bloodshed and the
promotion of reconciliation and peace. Within or outsids
the Security Council my Government and my delegatti
will pursue this course with those who &ant to see a
peaceful solution, and it is because we doubt that discus.
sion in the General Assembly will advance the process that
we have abstained.
326. The PRESIDENT: Now that the Security Councg has
concluded its consideration of the six-Power draft rcsolution in document S/10429, which has just been adopted, I
shall call on the representative of Saudi Arabia, whose narw
is inscribed on the list of speakers. I invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council t&e
and to addressthe Council.
327. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr. President, for being so kind as to grant me permission to speak.
I did not mean to interrupt the proceedings of the Council,
and my good friend Ambassador Vinci brought to your
attention that you were in the processof voting or that tk
representatives were addressing themselves to the d&t
resolution that has just been voted upon. But I do nor
know why I am begrudged the opportunity of taking the
floor, with your permission, w%n many points of order
were raised which were not points’of order but were points
raised in exercise of the right of reply. If there are any
irregularities, consider me among the irregulars. I appreciale
all the same, Sir, your kindness in giving me an opportunily
to exercise the traditional right of reply to none other than
my good friend and colleague Ambassador Malik. I thought
he understood my statement with regard to the Baltic
States, and I must assure him again that I never encouraged
any political ‘Cmi&G from that region who contacted me in
New York ‘or elsewhere and sought my support for
self-determination and secession from the Soviet Union. Qn
the contrary, I told them that the Baltic States were
recognized as an integral part of the Soviet Union and that
there wasno movement for secessionfrom inside the Soviet
1 Seeresolution 303 (1971).

32

votes to none”

L

Union, and therefore their request for assistancewould be
out of order in the United Nations, since any such
dtkarche on their behalf would be regarded as interfering
in the domestic affairs of States.
328. Therefore, 1 do not see why he qualified his
statement by saying that they were my friends. They were
never my friends. I have noted that there is a Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Lithuanian SSR who is a
member of the delegation to the twenty-sixth session of the
United Nations General Assembly, Mr. V. M. Zenkyavichus,
and 1 would be happy to meet him.
329. With regard to the component parts of the Soviet
Union, I have noted the correction that there are 15 and
not 16 States. That is a slip of the tongue and one should
consider this a good omen. Perhaps one day there will be 16
States: it may be that somebody will join the Soviet Union
and become the sixteenth State.
330. With your permission, Mr, President, I should like,
without embarrassment to any State, to ask whether the
representatives of China and the Soviet Union would be
willing to freeze, so to speak, their differences on bilateral
questions between them, questions that do not pertain to
the India-Pakistan
conflict, and, hopefully, be willing,
graciously, to take into account the humanitarian aspects of
the problem and be willing, after getting instructions from
their respective Governments, to accept the mediation of
such illustrious colleagues as Sir Colin Crowe with regard to
China, and the Ambassador of France with regard to the
Soviet Union.
331. 1 believe that Ambassador Malik motioned to me
with his hands that the relations between France and the
Soviet Union are excellent. I said-not sarcastically-that on
account of the alleged spy case between the United
Kingdom and the Soviet Union, the efforts and good offices
of our good friend and colleague, Sir Colin Crowe, could
perhaps be used with regard to our Asian brother, I say
“Asian brother” because I come from Asia. For, as has been
rightly mentioned by the representatives of the United
Kingdom and France, and even the Soviet Union, nothing
much will come out of the “Uniting for peace” resolution
and referring the question to the General Assembly.
332. Now, what is wrong in asking you, Mr. President
-and I am a humble member of the United Nations, not a
member of the august body called the Security Council-to
use your good offices in seeing that Sir Colin Crewe gets in
touch with our brother from China, and in seeing that our
illustrious colleague from France tries again to negotiate’on
the humanitarian
aspect of the whole conflict with the
representative of the Soviet Union-because all this talk in
the General Assembly will get us nowhere, while people are
dying.
333. Of course, there is no alternative, you say. What is
the alternative? The alternative would be not to hold any
more meetings of the S&urity Council on any question
unless the members are assured, beforehand, that no veto
will be exercised. At one time we had a consensus.But the
consensus covered only narrow areas of agreement that
signified nothing. The veto is not the answer to that

question, nor is consensus. A weak agreement or an
agreement on very small areas would not be effective.
Therefore, you will see, Sir, as President for the month
-and it is now only the 6th of the month-that I will be
vindicated. Please bear with me. You will find out,
Mr. President, that, by the new year, nothing will be
resolved by the General Assembly, nothing, because, aswas
rightly said, the decisions of the Assembly are recommen
datory; it is only the Security Council which has the power
to decide on questions of peace and security.
334, So whom are we fooling? Are we fooling ourselves
or the people of the world by shifting the responsibility
from the Council to the General Assembly? You said,
Mr. President, that you are new amongst us. But, Sir, you
have a strong personality. You fill the Chair majestically.
Why not try tomorrow, Mr. President-and I am not saying
that the Ambassador of the Soviet Union should kiss and
embrace the Ambassador of. China-it would be marvellous
if they did-to arrange something at the last minute. As was
stated by our illustrious colleague from France, this
measure has obtained only an abstention, because, as Sir
Colin Crowe and indeed as the representative of the Soviet
Union indicated, this measure would not accomplish
anything because the prerogative of taking decisions here
belongs to the Security Council.
335. It is not too late, Mr. President. I think that, without
holding an open meeting, you should try and make contact.
This is not a proposal and this is not a resolution. I have no
right to submit a resolution. It is a simple suggestion-take
it in that way-to see whether the Soviet Union and China
will freeze their bilateral differences and, strictIy on the
humanitarian basis, deal constructively on this question, SO
as to save the lives of millions, and also saveboth States in
the subcontinent from insolvency, should this war go on.
When I speak of insolvency, it means that millions upon
millions may suffer and be on the brink of starvation and
famine. Have we envisaged such a possibility? War today
erodes the economies of the wealthiest of countries, and we
have witnessed what has happened to currencies as a result
of inflation.
336. SO what will happen to India and Pakistan should
they be embroiled in a war that will last not weeks but
several months, and maybe years? And who will pay the
price? The people in the street, the common people. They
will pay the price while we bicker here in the United
Nations, whether it is in this Council or in the General
Assembly.
337. The hour is late only by the hands of the clock with’
regard to a date, 6 December. But tomorrow is another day,
another dawn. Let the dawn bring with it some hope, the
hope that you, Mr. President-hailing from Africa as one of
its sons, who has emerged here in our midst as President of
this Council which should decide on questions of peace and
security-will exert a last effort, that you will bring about a
meeting between Ambassador Malik and our Chinese
brother, with the help of the Ambassadors of France and
the United Kingdom.
338. I thank you, Mr. President, for graciously allowing
me to make this statement in reply, and also an additional
statement.

33

339. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Saudi Arabia for the kind words he addressedto me.

should have as many meetings as may be necessary, in the
morning, the afternoon, the evening or night.

340. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Now “that we have a&pted
the resolution to refer the question ,concerning r$Jions
between India and Pakistan to the General Assejpbly, I
wonder whether we could decide upon a time at whrch the
General Assembly can meet to take up ‘the
all, there is a great deal of urgency inv6lved and the
Assembly should meet tomorrow morning, or at the ve’ry
latest tomorrow afternoon. I think it important to sound
out the viewsof members on this question.

342. I vent.ure to suggest, Mr. President, that you transmit
this concern to the President of the General Assembly so
that he may take the final decision asto the hour when the
Assembly will be convened to consider this urgent and
delicate question.

341. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): It seemsto me that the time for the meeting
of the General Assembly must be decided by the President
of the General Assembly and not by the Council, However,
I understand very well the concern of my friend Ambassador Farah. It is quite obvious that in order to be effective
the resolution which we have adopted should receive
immediate attention by the General Assembly and we

343. The PRESIDENT: There being no further speakers I
propose, in view of the lateness of the hour, to adjourn this
meeting of the Security Council.
344. May I remind members that a meeting of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members has been
scheduled for 11 o’clock tomorrow morning to examine the
application of the United Arab Emirates, in accordance
with the decision taken at the outset of this meeting?
The meeting rose at 11.35 p.m.

34
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 2.50 (or equivalent

in ofhsr currencies)

822154uly

19744050
