S/PRST/2000/10

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 March 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4119th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 March 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
peace and security and post-conflict peace-building”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the statement of its President of 8 July
1999 (S/PRST/1999/21) and welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the Role of United Nations Peacekeeping in Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration of 11 February 2000 (S/2000/101). The Council recalls its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security
and reaffirms its commitment to the principles of the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in conducting all peacekeeping
and peace-building activities and the need for States to comply with their
obligations under international law.
“The Security Council has considered the matter of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment as part of its overall and continuing effort to contribute to
enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities in conflict situations around the world.
“The Security Council underlines that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants are mutually supportive and that the success of
the process is dependent on the success of each of its steps. The Council
stresses that the political commitment of the parties involved in a peace
process is a precondition for the success of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. The Council reaffirms that disarmament and
demobilization must take place in a secure and safe environment, which will
give ex-combatants the confidence to lay down their arms, and underlines the
importance of international assistance for long-term economic and social
development to facilitate successful reintegration. In this regard, the Council
notes that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration must be addressed
comprehensively so as to facilitate a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peace-building.
“The Security Council recognizes that the mandates of peacekeeping
missions increasingly include oversight of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration as one of their functions. The Council further recognizes the
importance of incorporating, as appropriate, within specific peace agreements,

00-35804 (E) 230300
`````````

S/PRST/2000/10

with the consent of the parties, and on a case-by-case basis within United
Nations peacekeeping mandates, clear terms for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, including the safe and
timely collection and disposal of arms and ammunition. The Council
emphasizes that the international community’s advocacy is essential in this
regard. The Council also underlines the necessity of a clear definition of tasks
and division of responsibilities among all actors involved in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, including United Nations agencies
and programmes, and that this should be reflected, where relevant, in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations.
“The Security Council recognizes that effective action to curb the illegal
flow of small arms and light weapons into areas of conflict can contribute to
the success of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, and
encourages further efforts and cooperation at the national, subregional,
regional and global levels to this end.
“The Security Council underlines in particular the importance of
disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating child soldiers, as well as taking into
account the problems faced by war-affected children in mission areas. It is
therefore imperative that child soldiers be fully included in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, and that programmes also be
designed to address the special needs of all war-affected children, taking into
account differences in sex and age, and their differing experiences in the
course of armed conflict, with particular attention to girls. In this regard, the
Council requests the Secretary-General to consult relevant United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and other relevant organizations with expertise in the field with a
view to the development of appropriate programmes, and underlines the
importance of coordination in this regard.
“The Security Council welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General
to include within all peacekeeping operations personnel with appropriate
training in international, humanitarian, human rights and refugee law,
including child- and gender-related provisions. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the inclusion of a child protection adviser in some of the recent
peacekeeping operations, and encourages the Secretary-General to include
such personnel in future operations as appropriate. The Council stresses the
importance of addressing, in particular, the needs of women ex-combatants,
notes the role of women in conflict resolution and peace-building and requests
the Secretary-General to take that into account.
“The Security Council recognizes that adequate and timely funding for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is critical to the successful
implementation of a peace process, and calls for coordination of voluntary and
assessed funding to that end, including among all elements of the United
Nations system. The Council welcomes the increasing involvement of the
World Bank in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes and
stresses the importance of support of Member States for its activities in this
area. The Council further encourages other international financial institutions
to become involved.

2

S/PRST/2000/10

“The Security Council stresses that training of peacekeepers in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants continues to
be an important asset in the implementation of these activities in mission areas.
In that regard, the Council notes that the review by the Secretary-General of
lessons learned from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
experiences may assist Member States and others in their training efforts. The
Council encourages the Secretary-General to explore avenues of cooperation
with existing and new peacekeeping training centres in the implementation of
such training programmes.
“The Security Council takes note that the ultimate success of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process may require efforts
long after the withdrawal of multidisciplinary peacekeeping operations. In this
regard, the post-conflict United Nations presence, including the deployment, as
appropriate, of a follow-on mission, may help support the advances made and
further make progress on the matter.
“The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
address this issue on a regular basis and to draw to its attention any new
developments in this area.
“The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.”

3
