V.

14. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Mozambique;
(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions and other bodies concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second
regular session of 1981, of the current status of the special economic assistarce programme for Mozambique:
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Mozambique and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special economic assistance
programme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/100.

157

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Assistance to Zimbabwe

The General Assembly,
Noting the statement made before the General
Assembly at its eleventh special session, on 26 August
1980, by the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, 217 in which he
outlined his Government's economic development
priorities and invited the international community to
render assistance in dealing with serious economic and
social problems in Zimbabwe, and having heard the
statement made before the Assembly by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, on 29 September 1980, 2 1x
in which he described the serious economic and social
problems facing his country,
Recalling Security Council resolution 460 ( 1979) of
21 December 1979, in which the Council called upon the
international community to provide urgent assistance
for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Zimbabwe,

Having studied the report of the Secretary-General of
25 'August 1980 219 on assistance to Zimbabwe,
Stressing the necessity for major programmes for reconstruction and rehabilitation of both rural and urban
areas in Zimbabwe and the fact that the country inherited at independence an obsolete and worn-out infrastructure, showing obvious signs of lack of repair and
maintenance,
Noting the heavy burden of resettling returning
refugees and displaced people in Zimbabwe,
Also noting the significant role which an independent
and economically strong Zimbabwe can play in the economic development of the southern African region,
Deeply concerned, however, that the assistance so far
provided or pledged by the international community
falls far short of the amount needed for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Zimbabwe,
1. Endorses fully the assessments and recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General
and draws the attention of the international community
'" Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 4th meeting, paras. 2-90.
'" Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session, Plenary Meetings, 15th meeting.
paras. 158-192.
219
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year. Supplement for July, August and September /9i/O, document S/ 14121.

to the requirements for assistance to carry out the projects and programmes identified in that report
" Appeals to Member States. regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide effective and continuous financial,
material and technical assistance to Zimbabwe to help
that country to overcome its financial and economic difficulties:

3. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account which was established by
the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Zimbabwe:
4. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Bank and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Zimbabwe and to report the
decisions of those hodies to the Secretary-General by
15 August 1981;
5. Requests the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to report
periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they
have taken and the resources they have made available
to assist Zimbabwe;
6.

Requests the Secretary-General:

To continue his efforts to mobilize resources for
an effective programme of financial, technical and
material assistance to Zimbabwe:
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of
international assistance for Zimbabwe;
(c) To keep the situation in Zimbabwe under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981,
of the current status of the special economic assistance
programme for Zimbabwe;
(d) To arrange for a review of the progress made
in organizing and implementing the assistance programme for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
(a)

7. Expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Zimbabwe
in response to the appeals by the Security Council and
the Secretary-General;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for co-ordinating a
programme for the return to Zimbabwe and resettlement of refugees and displaced people.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/101.

Assistance to Saint Lucia

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 186 of 19 December 1977,
33/152 of 20 December 1978 and 34/194 of 19 December 1979, in which it. inter alia, stressed the urgency of

158

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session
----

---

---- - - - - -

rendering all necessary assistance to Saint Lucia in its efforts to strengthen and develop its national economy,
Noting the recent attainment of independence by
Saint Lucia,
Mindful of the report of the Secretary-General on assistance to Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent, 220
Bearing in mind that Saint Lucia requires the continued attention and assistance of the United Nations in
the achievement by its people of its development objectives,
Recalling resolution 111 (V) of 3 June I 979 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 221
in which specific action in a number of identified areas
was urged in respect of island developing countries,
Emphasizing the special problems faced by Saint
Lucia with regard to territorial size, geographical location, highly limited internal markets and limited economic resources, as well as the serious adverse effects of
recent world-wide economic and financial problems,
Gravely concerned at the recent damage incurred by
Saint Lucia as a result of hurricane "Allen", which
created immeasurable economic hardship,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent;
2. Expresses its gratitude for the support that Member States and agencies of the United Nations have
given during this emergency, which aided the people of
Saint Lucia in their reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts;
3. Emphasizes the urgency of rendering all necessary
assistance to Saint Lucia in its efforts to develop and
strengthen its economy, with particular reference to the
sectoral redevelopment of its infrastructure, consistent
with insulation from disasters of this nature;
4. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme
and international financial institutions, as well as aid
donors, to continue to increase and intensify their assistance to Saint Lucia within their respective spheres of
competence;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular that of the developed countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to helping to meet
the short-term and long-term development needs of
Saint Lucia;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session an
analytical report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/102.

Assistance to Dominica

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/19 of9 November 1979, in
which it expressed deep concern at the magnitude of the
220

A/35/499.
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development; Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.
221

--

-------- -

-------

damage caused in Dominica by hurricanes "David" and
"Frederic" and urged Governments of Member States
and international organizations to provide with the utmost urgency assistance for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and development of Dominica,
Recalling also resolution 418 (PLEN.13) adopted on
19 October J979 by the Committee of the Whole of the
Economic Commission for Latin America in respect of
assistance to Dominica, 222
Concerned that in 1980 Dominica has been struck by
hurricane "Allen", which has aggravated an already
serious situation in the country,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Dominica, m
I. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance
provided so far to Dominica by various States and
regional and international organizations;
2. Urges Governments of Member States and international organizations to continue to provide, with the
utmost urgency, the assistance called for in resolution
418 ( PLEN .13) of the Committee of the Whole of the
Economic Commission for Latin America for the
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development of
Dominica;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly informed of the results achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenary meetinl(
5 December 1980

35/103.

Assistance to Uganda 224

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34/122 of 14 December 1979,
in which it, inter alia, expressed its deep concern at the
tragic loss of life, widespread destruction of property
and s.!vere damage to the economic and social infrastructure of Uganda and urgently appealed to the international community to contribute generously to the
reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of
the country,
Reaffirming the urgent need for international action
to assist the Government of Uganda in its efforts for
national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development and for resettling the large numbers of returning
refugees and displaced persons into the permanent
fabric of society,
Recognizing that Uganda is not only land-locked but
also one of the least developed and most seriously affected countries,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 26 September 1980w submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 34/122,
Noting with concern that severe drought has destroyed
the livelihood of several hundred thousand people and
that urgent assistance is required for the rehabilitation
of essential community facilities and services in the affected areas,
Noting the appeals of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for
emergency humanitarian assistance to Uganda,
'" See E/CEPAL/G.1105, sect. IV.
'" A/35/445 ~rid Corr. I.
"'See also sect. X.B.3, decision 35/423.
"' A/35/489.
