-

TWEiVTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

NEW

7 DECEMBER

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l562)

Pfip

. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . 1

Adoption of the agenda .,,....,,....,.......,........,II..l......I..L.

1

Complaint by Guinea:
(cl) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9987);
(b) Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
established under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . 1

SlPV.1562

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents ar’e composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention qf such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .> are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records oj’ the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information &bout it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-SECOND

Weld in New York on Monday,

Presidcnr: Mr. Y. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics).

3. I invite the representative of Guinea to take a place
at the Council table, and the representatives of the
other countries to which I referred earlier to take the
seats reserved for them in the Council chamber. Each
will be invited to the Council table when it is his turn
to speak.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l562)

2.

7 December 1970, at 3 p.m.

be invited to participate, without vote, in the Council’s
work. I propose that the representative of Haiti should
be invited to participate in the debate,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

1. Adoption

MEETING

At the President’s invitation, Mr. A. TourP(Guinea)
took a place at the Council table;,and Mr. I. Boye
(Senegal), Mr. G. Sow (Mali), Mr. .I. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. A. Ould Taya (Mauritania),
Mr, M. Yazid (Algeria), Mr. N. Barnes (Liberia), Mr.
S.A. Snlim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. N.
Mondjo (People’s Republic of the Congo), Mr. A.
Psoncak(Yugoslnvia),
Mr. R. K. Ramphul(Mauritius),
Mr. M. Fnkhreddine
(Sudan), Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(United Arab Republic), &lr. T. Gebre Igzy (Ethiopia),
Mr. A. M. Ismail (Southern Yemen), Mr. R. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. P. Ofu~ono (Uganda), Mr. S. San (India),
Mr. A. A. Farah (Somalia) and Mr. M. Antoine (Haiti),
took the places reserved for them.

of the agenda.

Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9987);
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established
under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and
Add. 1).

Adoption of the agenda

4. The PRESIDENT
(translated j?om Russian): I
also wish to inform the members of the Council that
a letter received from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of Poituga to the United Nations has been circulated as an
official Security Council document under the symbol
S/10024.

The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Guinea:
(0) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9987);
(b) Report of the Security Council Special Mission
to the Republic of Guinea established under
resoldion 289 (1970) (S/10009 and Add.1)

5. The Council wil1 now resume its consideration of
the item under discussion,
6. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): Mr. President, I am
pleased to have this opportunity to extend to you the
best wishes of my delegation for yourpresidency during
the month of December, as the representative of a
Power which is a neighbour of Finland and with which
my country happily maintains close relations of friendship and co-operation, and as an outstanding diplomat
who has virtually unrivalled experience and knowledge
of United Nations affairs and of international politics
in general.

1. The PRESIDENT
(tmnslated from Russian):
_. .
Before we begin our work I should .like to recall that
at its previous meetings the Council decided to invite
the representatives of Guinea, Senegal, Mali, Saudi
Arabia, Mauritania,
Algeria, Liberia,
the United
Republic of Tanzania, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Yugoslavia, Mauritius, the Sudan, the United
Arab Republic, Ethiopia, Southern Yemen, Cuba,
Uganda, India and Somalia to participate, without vote,
in its discussion of the item on its agenda.

7. I am also happy to have this opportunity to join
in paying a tribute to Ambassador Tomeh of Syria,
our President for November, who conducted the affairs
of the Council with great effectiveness and impartiality.

2. I also wish to inform the CounciI that a communication has just been received from the representative
of Haiti [S/10027] requesting that his delegation should
1

14. I believe that it is in the wider context of thea
African situation that the work of the Special Mission
to the Republic of Guinea should be judged. It has
been said that it was not necessary to send this mission
to the Republic of Guinea because the facts of the
case were known anyway, and in any case the Mission
arrived there after the event and was therefore pointless. Such criticism would be justified if we were dealing with the attack against Conakry as an isolated
event, divorced from any wider issues. In fact, however, we are dealing with what could be called a case
of structural friction and conflict in Africa, of which
the recent attack against the Republic of Guinea was
but one symptom.

8. As a member of the Special Mission to the Republic
of Guinea,’ I have in effect already stated my views
on the events we are dealing with here in the, conclusions of the report &Y/l0009 and Add.11, which the
Chairman of the Special Mission, the representative
of Nepal, Ambassador Khatri, introduced to the Security Council last Friday 11559th meeting].
9. I should like here to pay a tribute to the Chairman
of the Special Mission whose integrity and fairness
should assure anyone of the Mission’s sincere striving
for objectivity. I should like say how much I enjoyed
working with my colleagues on the Special Mission,
which, as someone already has said, had a very good
team spirit. I should also like to express my appreciation to the members of the Secretariat who performed
their duties with great dedication and skill in often
difficult circumstances.

15. In the consideration of the fundamental issue
involved in the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies, the report of the Special Mission may
well prove to be significant. The report demonstrates
in more vivid, and therefore more effective, terms the
dangers inherent in the continuation of the present
situation. Its impact on the international community
is decisively enhanced by the fact that it is a unanimous
report. But this impact would be seriously weakened
if the Security Council were now to fail to agree on
what steps it should take on the basis of that report.

10. The conclusions of the report of the Special Mission are, of course, also my own conclusion. They
represent the considered opinion of the representatives
of five members of the Security Council, and I have
nothing to add to them. Instead, I should like now
to put forward on behalf of my delegation some comments on the wider implications of that event.
Il. The attack against Conakry cannot be viewed in
isolation.1 It is a symptom of a built-in tension along
the borders of Portugal’s possessions in Africa, a tension arising from the suppression of the legitimate aspirations of the peoples living under Portuguese administration who have the right to self-determination and
independence.
12. The exceptionally strong and unanimous reaction
of the independent African States, echoes of which
we have heard here in the Security Council, expresses
their deeply felt concern about any attempt to interfere
from the outside with their independent development.
In fact, it seems that no real sense of security or stability
can be established in large parts of Africa so long as
the Government of Portugal continues to pursue a policy which cannot be reconciled with the legitimate aspirations of the African peoples living under Portuguese
rule or with the deep convictions of the independent
African States or, indeed, with the conscience of the
great majority of mankind.

16. The decision to send a Special Mission of the
Security Council to the Republic of’ Guinea may welt
represent an important new stage in the evolution of
the Council’s methods of work. Nevertheless, in the
view of the Finnish delegation, the members of the
Council cannot afford to dismiss as unimportant or
misguided the expressions of disappointment voiced
by the Government of the.Republic of Guinea or the
representatives of many other African States with the
United Nations as an agency for the maintenance of
international peace and security. No smaI1 nation can
fail to reflect seriously upon the questions with regard
to the capability of the United Nations to act effectively
for the protection of the security of its Member States
raised by the representative of the Republic of Guinea
in his talks with the Special Mission in Conakry.
17. In the final communiquC issued at the end of the
first periodic meeting of the Security Council [15551/f
meeting], members of the Council declared that the
capability of the Council to act effectively for the
maintenance of international peace and security should
be further strengthened and they agreed to examine
further improvements in the methods of work of the
Council. They also emphasized the importance Of
reaching early agreement on guidelines for future
peace-keeping operations in conformity with the
Charter.

13. Accordingly, in our view, the Security Council
should not only condemn Portugal for the armed attack
committed against the Republic of Guinea, but also
call upon Portugal to recognize that the peoples living
under Portuguese rule in Africa have an inalienable
right to self-determination and independence. It would
be tragic if Portugal’s refusal to observe this rightnow nearly universally accepted and supported-or to
take into account the present realities prevailing in
Africa, created a situation in which a peaceful change
from colonial rule to self-determination were no longer
possible. The reaction of the independent African
States to the recent events in Conakry show that the
point of no return may be close at hand.

18. The urgency of these tasks has been underlined
by the recent events in Conakry. In this sense I agree
with the observation made by the representative of
the Government of Guinea that although the Special
Mission was unable to help Guinea, whose people
turned back the attack by its own efforts, it may help
the United Nations, and thus all its Member States,
by demonstrating
the urgent need to make the
Organization more effective as a guardian of peace.

* Security CouncilSpecialMissionto the Republic oFGuinea established under resolution 289 (1970).

2

19. The PRESIDENT
(translated .fi-o/n Russian):
Thank you for your kind words and good wishes.

noble Guinean people. Thus the armed forces of Guinea
have risen in their patriotism, and with them the third
world and all peace-loving nations, to defend to the
last inch the much-coveted soil and subsoil of Guinea.

20. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Haiti; I invite him to take his place at the Council
table, and I give him the floor.

27. The delegation of Haiti associates itself with the
defence of its brother people of Guinea. The people
of Haiti, loyal to its origins, at the very hour of its
independence, in 1804, laid the groundwork for the
emancipation of peoples subjugated by colonialism,
which became a reality in 1945 with the formation of
a large number of independent States in Africa.

2 1. Mr.

ANTOINE
(Haiti) (interpretation
from
The role of the Security Council, in pursuance
of the intentions of the United Nations Charter, is of
paramount importance. The entire world with grave
anxiety and profound anguish looks to the Security
Council as the main organ entrusted with the maintenance of peace and ensuring international
security,
which is the supreme aim of our Organization. It is
not only today that this great Council meets to discharge its lofty mission. It has done so in the past,
it is doing so now and it will do so in the future,
whenever lack of understanding, abuse of power, ambition and selfishness motivate the deeds of certain
peoples who irresponsibly seek to crush the small
countries striving for development under the aegis of
the United Nations.
French):

28. The delegation of Haiti will support any draft
resoiution of the Security Council intended to provide
restitution for Portugal’s acts of aggression against
Guinea. Those are the wishes of the Haitian delegation,
in view of the fact that the report of the Special Mission
sent to Conakry is conclusive with regard to the invasion of Guineaby the forces of Portugal in collaboration
with other foreign mercenaries and dissident Guinean
elements coming from abroad.
29. The PRESIDENT
(translated fiorn Russian): I
have just received a letter from the representative of
Pakistan[s/l0029]requesting
that his delegation should
be invited to participate, without vote, in the meeting
of the Council. If there are no objections, I propose
that the representative of Pakistan should be invited
to participate in our proceedings in accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

22. It is to the Security Council that nations large
and small look for settlement of the disputes that divide
them whenever such disputes arise, so as to build a
stable international peace. Dr. FranCois Duvalier, President for life of the Republic of Haiti, was indignant
when he learned the news of the act of barbarism perpetrated against the peaceful Government of Guinea
and the Guinean people, which since its emancipation
and accession to life as a republic has been able to
command respect and preserve its independence with
dignity.

30. If there are no objections, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to invite the representative of Pakistan
to take the place reserved for him in the Council
chamber, it being understood that he will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when it is his turn
to speak.

23. This act of aggression constitutes a flagrant violation of the fundamental principles of international law
and of the United Nations Charter.
24. The Republic of Haiti, the first black republic
in the world, in the course of its long life as a Republic-167 years-has been cut to the quick, has suffered
in its inmost being and been wounded in its dignity
as a free and sovereign people by the aggressions of
extracontinental
and even continental
colonialist
Powers, which we always heroicaIly repelled, and we
are outraged at this act of barbarism committed by
of which Portugal
is an
foreign mercenaries,
accomplice by reason of its direct participation.

At the Preside,?t’s invitation, Mr. A. Shahi(Pakistan)
took the place reserved for him.

3 I. The PRESIDENT
(translatedfr-o/n Russian): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of India;
I invite him to take a place at the Council table, and
I give him the floor.
32. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, my delegation
would like to thank you and the members of the Council
for your courtesy in permitting me to speak in this
important debate. We offer our sincere congratulations
to you for your presidency of the Council for
December. We should also like to express our appreciation to the outgoing President, Ambassador Tomeh
of Syria, for his able guidance of the Council’s work.
It was during his presidency thai the Council received
the news of the most recent attack by Portugal on
the Republic of Guinea. Immediately we heard of this
attack in India, our President sent the following message to the President of Guinea:
“The Government and people of India deplore
the attempt ,by foreign agencies to violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Guinea. We
note with satisfaction that the valiant people Of

25. The Government of Haiti, in view of its African
affinities, protests most energetically against that dastardly aggression. We are convinced that in this trial
the Government of Guinea will have the courage and
spirit necessary to repel these unjust attacks. But-it
is also the duty of the Security Council to support
that spirit and that courage so that a small country
may escape destruction and so that justice may be
done to it.
26. The cause of Guinea is yours, distinguished members of the Security Council; it is identified with international justice, which is vested in the Council. It will
triumph over every manoeuvre of the secret and reactionary forces which dream of the annihilation of the
3

Guinea have successfully resisted these attempts.
The entire civilized world is in sympathy with YOU
and your people. We are glad that the United Nations
Security Council has unanimously
demanded
immediate withdrawal of all external armed forces
and mercenaries and their equipment and the cessation of the armed attack. We hope that the strong
resentment generated in the world community will
restrain these adventures. You have our full sympathy and support in your efforts to resist this gross
interference in your internal affairs.”

36. What has been the attitude of Portugal to all these
attacks‘? We in India have some experience of the
Government of Portugal, and its attitude and its denials
have not come to us as a surprise. On the one hand.
they moan and groan that “jurisprudence has been
evolved in the United Nations that is systematically
adverse to Portugal”-whatever
that may mean-and
on the other hand, they ruthlessly carry out a campaign
of annihilating
freedom fighters, attacking foreign
countries regardless of cost in blood, treasure and
human misery, and refusing to pay the slightest heed
to the basic principles of the Charter that all colonist
territories must obtain independence in the speediest
manner possible. The Government of Portugal does
not even have the elementary civility to explain its
point of view, if indeed it has one, before the Council
while it is discussing one of the most serious charges
laid before it, that of established aggression by a
Member State. Portugal’s
latest letter [S/10024]
impugns the impartial work of the Special Mission,
alleges easy gullibility on the part of the Mission, and
is also critical of the international press. The Government of Portugal must be condemned with all the
authority of this Council, not for these accusations,
but for its repeated and continuous aggression in
Africa.
37. Quite evidently the Portuguese Government
could not undertake these campaigns and keep up this
blatant effrontery towards, and violation of, United
Nations decisions, but for the support and assistance
which it has obtained from its friends and allies. We
have heard it argued that Portugal is vita1 to some
countries. I do not know what those countries are:
but we cannot accept the allegation that Portugal’s
allies, as a group, are so feeble that without this poor
and backward country their military plans and
economic growth would suffer some set-back. Nor
have we known any instance where the foreign suppliers of arms have beeriable to ensure that the arms
are used only for a specified purpose or purposes. lt
should be easy for Portugal’s allies to cut off this diseased limb. No question of honour is involved, as the
Government of Portugal is not only dishonourable but
it has also been universally condemned for its cruelty
and utter lack of any civilized standards.
38. If, in these circumstances, colonial wars are tolerated and the use of force for maintaining foreign
domination, with its philosophy of ruling over “lesser
breeds”, is allowed, we can come to only one conclusion: that conclusion is that Portugal, together with
its friends, is determined to follow an arrogant and
unrealistic policy, to the complete disregard of the
rights of the African people in general and of the coltnial peoples, in particular. We are absolutely certain
that it will do incalculable damage to the United
Nations if such a conclusion is encouraged, even to
the slightest extent, by any action that this Council
might take or by any statements it might hear. I sfl
glad to note that so far all the statements we have
listened to put the blame entirely and without qualifie*
tion upon Portugal. The Government of Portugal csttnot escape the verdict of this Council simply by denying
the charges, unless of course we are to think that the
Governor-Genera1
of Guinea (Bissau), General

33. We now have before us the report of the Special
Mission which was headed by Ambassador Khatri of
Nepal. I should like to add my voice to the many
eloquent tributes which have been paid to this Mission,
its Chairman, its members and its secretariat. The
report it has produced is remarkable for three reasons:
first, it is brief, conclusive and unanimous; secondly,
it is supported by a recorded wealth of evidence from
various groups who might possibly know what was
happening; and thirdly, it has been submitted with the
utmost speed. We congratulate the Mission. We also
should like to express our appreciation to a large
number of diplomatic representatives at Conakry who
spoke before the Mission or sent written statements.
Their assistance and their courage were of great help
to the Mission. In expressing our sense of sorrow and
grief concerning the many persons who were killed
or wounded in the fighting, we do not forget the members of foreign missions who also suffered during the
aggression by foreign murderers coming from the colonial Territory of Guinea (Bissau).,
34. The most noteworthy feature of the report is that
on substantial matters there is no disagreement among
the numerous witnesses the Mission examined.
35. On the morning of Sunday, 22 November, when
the Moslems were observing their month of Ramadan
and Christians were preparing for the Sunday prayers,
a group of murderous men and mercenaries moved
out on their mission of massacre. That they did not
succeed in the vicious work is a signal tribute to the
courage, preparedness and patriotism of the armed
forces and the people of Guinea. The cowardly attack
was bkaten off and the city defended. The mercenaries
therefore failed in their primary objective, which was
to try to change the Government of the Republic of
Guinea by the,assassination of itsleaders and by capturing important and vital institutions in that country.
Another significant objective of the attack was to assassinate Mr. Cabral, the distinguished leader of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape
Verde (PAIGC), and to cause as much damage to his
freedom movement as possible. From the testimony
appended to the report of the Special Mission, it seems
that the invaders were apparently under the impression
that they had killed Mr. Cabral. However, while they
succeeded in freeing some prisoners held by PAIGC
in the course of their movement to ensure freedom
of African Territories in bondage to Portugal, they did
not succeed in killing Mr. Cabral, whose liberation
movement includes some of the finest men dedicated
to their motherland.
4

Antdnio de Espinola, has revolted and declared
independence from Portugal in the same manner as
Ian Smith did in Rhodesia. None of us can believe
this, nor does the Government of Portugal claim it.
39. There exists a moving account of a conversation
between an Algerian soldier and a French colonel
which took place during the Algerian fight for independence. After the two men had talked for some time,
the Algerian soldier, who was in a French prison, concluded by saying: “Colonel, both you and I are brave
men and not afraid to die. However, I shall win and
you will lose, because I have faith in the cause I am
fighting for.” That statement sums up the philosophy
of the freedom fighters. No matter what vendetta is
let loose on them, no matter what price may be
extracted from them, no matter what the Council and
other bodies may decide to do, they will win in the
end. The struggle may be long and arduous, the path
may be strewn with misery, humiliation,
death and
sacrifice, but the goal will be achieved. It is this spirit
that we share with all colonial peoples and the African
States; we also share tha?ir wishes for the speedy liquidation of the colonial empires in Africa and elsewhere.
40. But clearly, the United Nations has an important
responsibility in this field. The representative of Zambia 11561,rtmmting] quoted President Kaunda’s statement that the United Nations is wise only after the
event. The event did take place in Guinea, but will
the United Nations now become wiser and use its ample
power? Or shall we once again be lost in cynicism
and sophistication and power politics when faced with
clear evidence of aggression‘?
4 1. Colonialism has been condemned everywhere in
all the various f&urns of the United Nations, and the
Security Council has the duty of eliminating it. It am
sure that the Council will not allow any outside impression to gain ground that the organ of the United Nations
most directly concerned with international peace and
security did not take adequate and appropriate action
to put an end to colonialism, which has repeatedly
been found to be a threat to international peace and
security. Over the years the Security Council has
proved itself unable to deal with this problem. If the
Council does not and cannot act adequately and
promptly in a simple and established case of aggression,
what credence or reliance can weaker and smaller
nations place on the great Powers’ guarantees in any
other fields? Quite often complaints are allowed to be
submerged in power politics. The record of the Security
Council is too familiar to need any elaboration. I only
hope that Guinea’s complaint will not end in a similar
manner. Portuguese colonialism, which draws its lifeblood from its military alliances, does not understand
reason and is bent on a collision course in its attempts
to maintain its colonies at all costs. India, from its
own experience, can say Portuguese colonialism will
understand and listen to only one thing, and that is
force.
42. The colonial peoples of Africa, suffering under
Portuguese domination, have repeatedly appealed to
the Powers and organizations which might be of help,

but all this has been in vain. Africa has shown the
greatest patience, but that should not be mistaken for
weakness. Those who still refuse to believe that colonialism is a threat to international peace and security
can only be those-mainly
white-peoples whose interests or countries are not suffering from this pernicious
system. In fact, some of them are benefiting from it.
But we cannot expect the Africans, the Asians and
the Latin Americans to be so calm about it. In fact,
it would be wrong of them to do so. So the test today
is whether all Europeans and those like them have
genuine sympathy for the Africans, or whether they
wish to enmesh every clear-cut issue in a morass of
platitudes and sanctimony.
43. I speak both in sorrow and in anger: in sorrow
for the victims, and in anger because this evil of colonialism is allowed to continue to exist and to take
its regular toll of African lives and property. We must,
all of us together, stop this insensitive anachronism
in an age which we claim to be civilized.
44. The PRESIDENT
(tra/zslated .fionz Russian): I
thank the representative of India fir the kind words
and congratulations he has addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
45. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretdon from
French): We have aIready had to delay the opening
of this meeting, Nevertheless, knowing the major
importance you attach to the cause we are defending,
Mr. President, we hope that the request we are about
to make will not cause you too much inconvenience.
The request is that this meeting of the Council should
be suspended for about twenty minutes to permit completion of the work we are now doing, which will contribute to the Council’s success, by allowing the consultations now in progress to be concluded.
46. The PRESIDENT
(tmmlatcd from Russian): 1
see no difficulty in acceding to the request made by
the distinguished representative of Burundi, If the other
members of the Security Council have no objections,
I shall suspend the meeting for twenty minutes. There
are no objections; it is so decided.
The meeting was suspended nt 5.30 p.m. and
resumed

at 6 p.m.

47. The PRESIDENT
(t~LlnslatedJ~or??.Russian):
The
meeting of the Security Council is resumed.
48.

Mr. TERENCE

(Burundi)

(interpretation

from

French): Mr. President, the delegation of Burundi will

have an opportunity to discharge its duty to you in
the course of its statement in the general debate on
the problem with which the Security Council is seized.
49. In the meantime, I have the great honour to take
the floor on behalf of the delegations of Nepal, Sierra
Leone, Syria, Zambia and Burundi, my country. To
help the Security Council find as rapid a solution as
possible to the problems now before it, the five Powers
I have just mentioned are submitting to the Security
Council a draft resolution whose text was circulated
last Saturday in its initial form. Nevertheless, because
of urgent circumstance, it has not been possible to
submit the draft resolution in all the working languages

and consequently we should be grateful if all delegations into whose language the text we are going to
submit has not yet been translated would be good
enough to consider it in its present form-and I think
they constitute the majority, since so far the text is
only available in English.

“3. Demands that full compensation
by the
Government of Portugal be paid to the Republic of
Guinea for the extensive damage to life and property
caused by the armed attack and invasion and
requests the Secretary-General to assist the Govern.
merit of the Republic of Guinea in the assessment
of the extent of the damage involved;

50. I also apologize to you, Mr. President, and to
my colleagues for the fact that I shall myself introduce
the draft resolution in the languag$ in which it is ready.
Here, then, is the text of the draft resolution in its
present form, as submitted by Nepal, Sierra Leone,
Syria, Zambia and Burundi:

“4. Appends to all States to render mom1 and
material assistance to the Republic of Guinea to
strengthen and defend its independence and territorial integrity;
“5. Declares that the presence of Portuguese colonialism on the African continent is a serious threat
to the peace and security of independent African
States,

“The Security Council,
“Having considered with appreciation the report
of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established under resolution 289 (1970)
of 23 November 1970,
“Hrwilzg henrd further statements by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Guinea,

“6. Urges all States to refrain from providing the
Government of Portugal with military and material
assistance enabling it to continue its repressive
actions against the peoples of the Territories under
its domination
and against independent African
States;

“Gravely concerned that the invasion of the territory of the Republic of Guinea on 22 and 23
November 1970 from Guinea (Bissau) was carried
out by naval and military units of the Portuguese
armed forces, and by the armed attack against the
Republic of Guinea on 27 and 28 November 1970,

“7. C&s upon the Government of Portugal to
apply without further delay to the peoples of the
Territories under its domination the principles of
self-determination and independence in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Councit
and General Assembly resolution 1.514 (XV);

“Gravely concerned that such armed attacks
directed against independent African States pose a
serious threat to the peace and security of independent African States,

“8. Solemnly WQEI’Wthe Government of Portugal
that in lhe event of any repetition of armed attacks
against independent African States, the Security
Council shall immediately
consider appropriate
effective steps or measures in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations;

“Minclful of its responsibility to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to internatioiial peace and security,

“9. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to
comply fu!ly with all the resolutions of the Security
Councu and in particular the present resolution in
accordance with its obligations under Article 25 of
the Charter.

its resolutions 218 (1965) of 23
November 1965 and 275 (1969) of 22 December 1969
which condemned Portugal and affirmed that the
situation resulting from the policies of Portugal bothas regards the African populalion of its colonies and
the neighbouring States adversely affect the peace
and stability of the African continent,
“Recalling

“10. Requests all States, in particular Portugal’s
allies, to exert their influence on the Govermnent
of Portugal to ensure compliance with the provisions
of the present resolution;

“Rec&kming
the inalienable right of the people
of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) to freedom and independence in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of
General Assembly resblution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960,

“11. Requests the President of the Security COW.cil and the Secretary-General to follow closely the
implementation
of this resolution;
“12. Decides to remain actively
matter.“2

“Grieved at the loss of life and extensive damage

caused by the armed attack and invasion o1 the
Republic Guinea,

seized of the

51, After that introduction, I should perhaps offer
some explanations and comments.

“ 1, Endorses the conclusions of the report of the
Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea;

52. First, this is a problem which, while being African
and directly affecting Africa and Africans, is likewise

“2. Strongly condemns the Government of Portugal for its invasion of the Republic of Guinea;

* Subsequently circulated as document S/10030.

6

an international problem which consequently must
involve the responsibility of the international community. The sponsors of the draft resolution have
accordingly taken the initiative of drafting it and submitting it in due course to all members of the Security
Council. This step seemed to us appropriate and indeed
useful, SO that we might unite our efforts, join out
forces and arrive at an appropriate solution. Moreover,
we know that the draft resolution as submitted is not
exactly what was wanted by either the people of Guinea
or the African States, which are automatically sympathetic to the cause of Guinea, which is alsp and
always will be the cause of Africa.

Power reflects and represents Western civilization, we
for our part think that it rather represents an affront
to the West and to Western civilization. This premise
being established, Portugal’s allies themselves have
every advantage in demonstrating that they can in no
way endorse Portugal’s aggressive acts or the perpetuation of Portuguese colonialism in Africa.
58. It is for that reason, therefore, that those members
of the Security Council that are Portugal’s allies could,
by their solidarity, better serve the interests ofportugal
itself and their own interests by associating themselves
with us, and even, if necessary, by co-sponsoring the
draft resolution. To do so would be clear evidence
of their wish to dissociate themselves from Portugal’s
acts. For in the final analysis, if Portugal continues
to behave in this fashion, that is to say, to engage
in aggression against independent countries, it is the
prestige and the interests, if not the very dignity of
the members of NATO that will be at slake. Surely
they would not wish to be considered as favouring
acts of aggression such as we have recently witnessed.

53. That is why we circulated the draft resolution
and also engaged in consultations with all the members
of the Security Council. We recognize that the contents
and the language of the text are far from commensurate
with the gravity of the present situation. However,
for want of a better alternative and also in the spirit
of collective responsibility which is incumbent on the
Security Council as a whole, it was our belief that
the initial text could be revised and, in this regard,
we should like to say that the consultations which have
taken place have shed some light.

59. The draft resolution is not pure invention, For
its essential features it draws on the conclusions contained in the report of the Special Mission, which
recently completed its visit to Guinea and its investigations there. Since the five members of the Special Mission represep?ed the Security Council in its entirety
and the mission itself was composed in such a way
as to ensure geographical representation, it goes without saying that their conclusions reflect the attitude
of the Security Council. Accordingly, the draft resolution should be the common endeavour of all members
of the Security Council.

54. We should also like to emphasize in particular
the present paragraphs 5 and 8 of the draft. It goes
without saying that the appropriate and effective
measures that are to be considered and taken in the
event of a repetition of these acts by Portugal are to
be found in Chapter VII of the Charter. It is in reality
Chapter VII which should be invoked and implemented
in circumstances of this kind, in conformity with the
Charter itself.

60. We also note that some members that usually
hesitate to support draft resolutions of this kind have
been greatly assisted on this occasion by the testimony
and the facts collected by the SpeciaI Mission of the
Security Council. Those facts and that testimony
should secure a unanimous vote for this draft resolution
which, as I said before, is already weakened by the
very fact of additions that were dictated by the spirit
of compromise which, in certain circumstances, can
jeopardize international peace and security.

55. We also felt that when one sovereign State is
attacked and invaded by another sovereign State, that
fact in itself constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. In this case, since Portugal set off from
a foreign continent and attacked another continent,
that is to say, a sovereign country in the continent
of Africa, then CIfortion’ the problem is not just an
international one but also a continental one. The word
implies
international,
continental
automatically
because there is no continent which does not contain
seveCa1States. Therefore, we believe that the armed
attack and the invasion suffered by Guinea placed international peace and security in jeopardy. That is why
we think that even the independent African countries
are already qualified to have international relations.

61. On behalf of the sponsors of the draft resolution,
I should therefore like to urge that this our concern
and this common responsibility we bear for international peace and security should prevail, so that rapid,
effective and appropriate action may be taken.

56. We therefore conclude that the draft resolution
should be interpreted as finding that there is a threat
to international peace and security on the part of Portugal. We should like to appeal to all members of the
Security Council, in view of the consultations we held
before submitting this draft resolution, to display an
understanding attitude.

62. Should my delegation consider it necessary to
speak again on the draft resolution, we shall beg the
indulgence of the President and our colleagues at that
time.
63. For the moment, this is all I have to say on my
own behalf and on behalf of the other co-sponsors.
We urge that speed be regarded as an extremely important element.

57, We are fully aware, at the same time, of the difficulties that may be experienced by some members
of the Security Council that are allies of Portugal in
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Nevertheless,
contrary to the claims of Portugal that that colonialist

64. The PRESIDENT
thank the representative
7

(trcrnslntecl fi.017~ Xussi~rn): I
of Burundi.

65. Mr. KHATRI
(Nepalj: On 22 November the
Government of the Republic of Guinea charged that
an act of aggression had that day been committed
against Guinea by Portugal. According to the communications from the Government of Guinea, as also the
statement made by the representative of Guinea in the
Security Council [155&h twcting],
Portuguese commando troops had landed by sea at Conakry and had
carried out bombing raids at various strategic points
in the capital city. The presence of external debarkment
ships off the coast at Conakry was confirmed by the
United Nations Development Programme Resident
Representative in Guinea. The Government of Guinea
requested the Security Council to intervene urgently
to restore international peace and security.

with that situation in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter. Actions of that kind by the Security
Council restore the faith of the international corn- /
munityand particularly the smaller States- in the
United Nations as an effective instrument for the
maintenance of international peace and security. To
my delegation it appears that this practice could be ;
advantageously followed by the Security Council in
its consideration of comparable situations in the future,
1
70. With regard to the report ofthe Security Council’s i
Special Mission, it is clear for every member of the
Security Council to see that the conclusions of the
Special Mission support and confirm the contentions
of the Government of Guinea in all essential respects. ’
In Section III of the report, “Conclusions”,
is set out, I
first, the construction and pattern of the events of 22 ~
and 23 November; secondly, the aims and objectives
of the armed invasion; and, thirdly, the origin of, and ,
responsibility for, that invasion.

66. It may be recalled that, in a communication of
the same day addressed to the President of the Security
Council [S/9989), the Government of Portugal categorically denied the accusations of the Government of
Guinea.

71. It has been established beyond any doubt that
the purpose of the invasion was to overthrow the
Government of the Republic of Guinea and replace
it by dissident elements, at the same time striking al
the leadership and headquarters of the anti-colonial
liberation movement. The Special Mission unanimously reached its considered opinion that:

67. When the Security Council met to consiber the
complaint of the Republic of Guinea it recognized that
the situation was an extremely serious one and consequently was able to act unanimously on an urgent
basis. In strict conformity with its responsibility under
the Gharter for the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Security Council, in adopting resolution 289 (1970), brought the full weight of its authority
to bear on the invading forces to cease the armed attack
immediately and to withdraw. But the Council did not
merely confine itself to demanding the cessation of
armed attack and the withdrawal of the invading forces.
It decided to dispatch its own Special Mission to the
Republic of Guinea to report on the situation
immediately, it being clearly understood that when a
report on the situation became available it would take
further necessary measures in the light of the findings
or conclusions of the Special Mission.

“(u) The ships used to transfer the invading force
to Guinean waters were manned by predominantly
white Portuguese troops and commanded by white
Portuguese officiers;
“(b) The force consisted of units of Portuguese
armed forces, mainly African troops from Guinea
(Bissau) under the command of the regular white
Portuguese officers, as well as of a contingent corn.
posed of dissident Guineans trained and armed on
the territory of Guinea (Bissau).

68. A five-member Special Mission was duly Formed
after only a few hours’ consultation between the President of the Security Council and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, taking fully into account the
wishes of all members of the Security Council. The
Special Mission was able to proceed to the Republic
of Guinea to carry out its task without delay. The Special Mission has submitted a unanimous report on the
situation, which is contained in documents S/l0009 and
Add-l, and is now being considered by the Security
Council.

“In the best judgement of the Special Mission,
the invading force was assembled in Guinea
(Bissau).” [S/10009, parns. 40 and 41.1
The Special Mission concludes by stating categorically
that:
“The invasion of the territory of the Republic of
Guinea on 22 and 23 November was carried out bg
naval and military units of the Portuguese armed
forces, acting in conjunction with Guinean dissident
elements from outside the Republic of Guinea.”
[Ibid., para. 41.1

69. Before making some brief comments on the report
of the Security Council’s Special Mission I should like
to say that in the view of my delegation the decision
of 22 November 1970 constitutes one of the most important decisions ever taken by the Security Council. The
Council thereby demonstrated its will and ability to
be swift, decisive and united at a moment of crisis;
it showed that its concern lay not only in the cessation
of fighting and the withdrawal of invading forces but
also in finding out all the circumstances and facts surrounding the situation, which threatened international
peace and security, so that it could deal effectively

72. The Government of Portugal has stated that it
did not order, authorize or consent to the armed attack
against the Republic of Guinea. That may in some I’#
imply that the colonial authorities in Guinea (Bisssu)
undertook the invasion without the knowledge of the
authorities in Lisbon; that is incredible. Anyway, thr
Government of Portugal has denounced the report @f
the Security Council’s Special Mission. That was10
be expected. Portugal’s long-standing hostility towards
the United Nations on account of the Organization’s
8

opposition to the policies and practices of colonialism
is well known. It is also a fact that the Security Council
has several times in the past had occasion to censure
Portugal for violating the territorial integrity of the independent African States which adjoin the territories of
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), and in none
of those instances did the Government of Portugal
admit its guilt.

75. My delegation has the honour to be one of t.he
sponsors of the draft resolution which was so ably
introduced to the Security Council just now by the
Ambassador of Burundi. The provisions contained in
the draft resolution are not entirely satisfactory, in so
far as they do not adequately measure up to the requirements of the situation, which clearly warrants more
energetic action by the Security Council. However,
the draft resolution is a product of protracted consultations and one which contains the minimum demand
of the sponsoring delegations. My delegation hopes
that, basing itself entirely on the facts of the present
situation, the Security Council will see its way clear
to adopting this draft resolution unanimously.

73. The report of the Special Mission leaves no doubt
as to the culpability of Portugal for the invasion of
the territory of the Republic of Guinea on 22 and 23
November. It is clear that the invasion was carried
out by Portugal in furtherance of its colonial policies
in Africa. The Security Council must not lose sight
of the fact that the colonial presence of Portugal in
Africa is rightly regarded by all African States as the
equivalent of a permanent threat to the peace and security of that continent.

76. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russicrtz):
Thank you for your statement and for introducing the
draft resolution jointly with the representative of
Burundi..

74. In the matter now under consideration the facts
concerning the armed invasion, its motives and
authorship, have been established beyond any reasonable doubt. It is for the Security Council fully to live
up to its responsibilities under the Charter. In the view
of my delegation, punitive measures are clearly
indicated, coupled with the preventive measures provided for in the Charter to prevent the recurrence of
such an act by Portugal.

77. The list of speakers for today’s meeting is
exhausted. As a result of the consultations held with
the members of the Council, the next meeting, at which
we will resume consideration of this item, will be held
tomorrow, 8 December, at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

9

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

rnoy be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
tot United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLlCAflONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

UNIES

Les publieationr
der Notions
Unier
sent en vente
danr
ler librairier
d&poritairer
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
auprks
de votrc librairie
ov
Notions
Unies, Section
der venter, New York ou GenBva.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

LOS publicociones
de lar Nociones
Unidas
ertdn
en todos porter
del mundo. Conrvlte
o su librero
Venlos,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

I.itho

in Unitecl

Nations.

New

York

I’ricc:

$U.S.

throughout
New
York

et Ies agencer
adresser-vour
b:

UNIDAS

en vente en librerios
y cosos dirtribuidoror
o dirijose
a; Naciones
Unidos,
Seccicin

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

dc
