VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982
37/26.

Question of the United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States Vir­
gin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In­
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 16
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to the United
States Virgin Islands,
Noting with appreciation the continued active participa­
tion of the administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the United States Virgin Islands,
thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and mean­
ingful examination of the situation in the Territory and ex­
pressing its satisfaction at the willingness of the administering
Power to receive visiting missions in the Territories under
its administration,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power, 17
Taking note of the fact that the proposed constitution
submitted to a referendum on 3 November 1981 after an
extensive debate was not accepted by the people of the
Territory,
Bearing in mind that the territorial Government has taken
positive steps by adopting legislation designed to solve the
problem of aliens in the Territory,
Noting that the territorial Government has pursued its
efforts to diversify the economy and noting also the progress
achieved in the fields of construction and manufacturing,
including developments in oil refining and the production
of alumina and rum,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts to revitalize health
care programmes and to discourage juvenile delinquency,
the measures to improve crime prevention and the action
taken to expand and upgrade school facilities,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United
States Virgin Islands; 18
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands to self-determination and in­
dependence in conformity with the Declaration on the Grant­
ing of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy im­
plementation of the Declaration contained in General As­
sembly resolution 1514 (XV). which fully applies to the
United States Virgin Islands;
16
17

Ibid., chaps. III. IV and XXIV.
Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Fourth Committee. 20th meeting,

paras. 13-18.

18
Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session. Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev.1 ),
chap. XXIV.

225

4. Calls upon the administering Power, taking into ac­
count the freely expressed wishes of the people of the United
States Virgin Islands, to take all necessary steps to expedite
the process of decolonization in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Declaration, as well as all other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is the obligation of the administering
Power, in consultation with the territorial Government, to
inform the local people of the possibilities open to them,
so as to enable them to exercise freely and without inter­
ference their inalienable right to self-determination and in­
dependence in accordance with General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and, in this respect, calls upon the administering
Power to facilitate the work of the recently established Status
Commission and to ensure that the people are fully informed
of the discussions concerning the future political status of
the Territory;
6. Urges the administering Power to expedite the pas­
sage of legislation currently before the Congress of the United
States of America concerning the problem of aliens in the
Territory;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power
under the Charter for the economic and social development
of the Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to strengthen the economy of
the Territory by taking additional measures of diversification
in all fields and developing an adequate infrastructure;
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the Government of the United States Virgin Islands, to safe­
guard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to
the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective
measures which guarantee the right of the people to own
and dispose of those resources and to establish and maintain
control of their future development;
10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to continue to improve social
conditions and to pay particular attention to overcoming
problems of unemployment, public housing, health care,
education and crime;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the ex­
amination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the United
States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in consul­
tation with the administering Power, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November /982
37/27.

Question of Montserrat

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Montserrat,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In­
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 19
Having also examined the report of the United Nations
visiting rnission20 dispatched to the Territory in August 1982,
19
20

Ibid .. chaps. Ill and XXV111
AIAC.109/722.

226

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

at the invitation of the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering
Power,
RecalUng its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 36/62 of 25 November 1981
on the question of five Territories, including Montserrat,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power,2 1
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations to help
the people of Montserrat realize their aspirations in accord­
ance with the objectives set forth in the Declaration,
Recalling that the administering Power has the respon­
sibility to ensure that the people of Montserrat are kept fully
informed of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence, in accordance with the Declaration,
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtue of its isolation, small size, limited resources and lack
of infrastructure,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Montserrat; 22
i. Approves also the report of the United Nations vis­
iting mission to Montserrat in 1982;20
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Mont­
serrat to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Reiterates the view that such factors as size, geo­
graphical location, size of population and limited natural
resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation
of the process of self-determination in accordance with the
Declaration, which fully applies to Montserrat;
5. Commends, for appropriate action, the conclusions
and recommendations of the visiting mission23 to the Gov­
ernment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and North­
ern Ireland, as the administering Power, and to the
Government of Montserrat;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
visiting mission for the constructive work accomplished and
to the administering Power, the territorial Government, the
Legislative Council and the people of the Territory for the
close co-operation and assistance extended to the mission;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take the nec­
essary measures to promote the political, economic and
social development of Montserrat;
8. Calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the Government of Montserrat, to launch programmes
of political education so that the people of the Territory may
be fully informed of the options available to them in the
exercise of their right to self-determination and independence;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue to inten­
sify and expand its programme of aid in order to accelerate
the development of the economic and social infrastructure
of the Territory;
10. Requests the administering Power, in the light of
the conclusions and recommendations of the visiting mis­
sion, to continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-seventh Session,
Fourth Committee, 17th meeting, paras. 64-66.
22 Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev. I),
chap. XXVIII.
23 A/AC. 100/722, sect. IV.
21

agencies and other organizations of the United Nations sys­
tem, as well as other regional and international bodies, in
the strengthening, development and diversification of the
economy of the Territory;
l l . Requests the Special Committee to continue the ex­
amination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Montserrat
at an appropriate time and in consultation with the admin­
istering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assem­
bly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982
37/28.

Question of Western Sahara24

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to self­
determination and independence in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 De­
cember 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolutions 35/19 of I I November 1980 and
36/46 of 24 November 1981 on the question of Western
Sahara,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In­
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,25
Having heard the statements made on the question of
Western Sahara, in particular the statement of the repre­
sentative of the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia
et-Hamra y de Rfo de Oro, 26
Recalling its resolution 36/80 of 9 December 1981 on co­
operation between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity,
Recalling all the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity on the question of Western Sahara,
Recalling also the decision of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African Unity
at its eighteenth ordinary session, held at Nairobi from 24
to 27 June 1981, to organize throughout the Territory of
Western Sahara a general and free referendum on self­
determination, 27
Taking note of the various decisions adopted by the Im­
plementation Committee on Western Sahara of the Organ­
ization of African Unity concerning the establishment of
appropriate machinery to enable the people of Western Sa­
hara to express themselves freely and democratically on their
future,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of West­
ern Sahara to self-determination and independence in ac­
cordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the Charter
of the Organization of African Unity and the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as well as with
the relevant resolutions of the Assembly and the Organization of African Unity;
24 See also sect. I, footnote 7, and sect. X.B.6, decision 37/411.

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev.1), chap. IX.
2• Ibid., Thirtv-seventh Session, Fourth Committee. 20th meeting,
paras. 2-8.
27 See A/36/534, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.103 (XVIII)
