V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Expresses its gratitude to the States and organizations that have contributed to the reconstruction ofEl Salvador;
4. Notes with concern that the contributions from bilateral and multilateral donors provided during 1987 were
not sufficient to meet the urgent needs facing the Government of El Salvador, so that additional assistance is required;
5. Urges Governments, organizations of the United
Nations system and governmental and non-governmental
organizations to continue to contribute generously to the
reconstruction of El Salvador, especially through grants
and low-interest, long-term loans, in view ofthe country's
needs and limited resources;
6. Requests ali Governments and concerned organs
and organizations to provide voluntary contributions as a
matter of urgency, directly or through the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in order to alleviate
adequately the consequences of the earthquake in El Salvador;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take any measures that he may deem necessary to promote the implementation of the present resolution so as to accelerate
the process of reconstruction in El Salvador, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/204.

Special economic
America

assistance

to

Central

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/1 of 7 October 1987 entitled
"The situation in Central America: threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives", in particular paragraph 6, in which it urged the international community to increase technical, economic and financia}
assistance to the Central American countries and requested the Secretary-General to promote a special plan of
co-operation for Central America,
Bearing in mind the need to contribute etfectively to
peace, co-operation, respect for human rights, the implementation of genuine democratic and pluralist processes and economic and social development, which are
indispensable for ensuring the well-being of the peoples of
the Central American region,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Central America, 99 in particular with regard to the need to implement an emergency plan for the
reconstruction and large-scale economic development of
the region, which in turn will facilitate the resolution of
the political and security crisis facing the region,
Recalling the terms of the recent agreement on "Procedures for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in
Central America", too signed at Guatemala City on
7 August 1987 by the Central American Presidents, which
stressed the need to adopt agreements that would accelerate development in order to create more egalitarian societies that are free of poverty,

99 A/42/127-S/18686. For the printed text. see Official Records ofthe
Security Counci/, Forty-second Year, Supp/ement for January, February
and March 1987, document S/18686.
too A/42/521-S/19085, annex. For the printed text, see Official
Records ofthe Security Council, Forty-second Year, Supplementfor Ju/y,
August and September 1987, document S/19085, annex.

171

Con vinced of the urgent need to improve the standard of
living of the Central American peoples,
Emphasizing the importance of appropriating additional
resources for development and ofthe full use ofhuman resources, as recognized in the lnternational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 27 and recognizing the economic co-operation efforts being made to this end by the European Economic
Community and others with the countries of the region,
Commending the concerted etforts being made by the
countries of the Central American region to deal with adverse economic and social conditions through economic
and social integration and co-operation,
Convinced that peace and development are inseparable,
1. Supports the implementation of mechanisms essential to achieving the economic and social objectives agreed
to by the Governments of Central America in the Document of Objectives of 9 September 1983, sponsored by the
Contadora Group; 101
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme, to send a technical mission to the Central American countries for the purpose of determining, in
consultation with each of the Governments of the region,
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean and such integration bodies as the Permanent
Secretariat of the General Treaty on Central American
Economic Integration, the Central American Bank for
Economic Integration, the Latin American Economic
System and the Action Committee for the Support ofEconomic and Social Development in Central America, the
economic and social priorities of the countries of the region;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
priorities identified, to formulate, in close consultation
with the Governments of the region and the appropriate
organs and organizations of the United Nations system, a
special plan of co-operation for Central America to be submitted, in view of the immediate needs, no later than
30 April 1988 for consideration by the General Assembly
during its current session;
4. Urges the international community to increase technical, economic and financia) assistance to the Central
American countries, as a way ofbolstering their etforts to
achieve peace and development;
5. Appeals to the organs and organizations of the
United Nations system to co-operate in implementing the
special plan of co-operation for Central America and to
continue and expand their assistance programmes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

1º1Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-eighth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1983, document
S/16041, annex.
