A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/58
31 January 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 34
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.32)]
48/58.

Middle East peace process

The General Assembly,
Stressing that the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict will constitute a significant
contribution to strengthening international peace and security,
Recalling the convening of the Peace Conference on the Middle East at
Madrid on 30 October 1991, on the basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, and the
subsequent bilateral negotiations, as well as the meetings of the multilateral
working groups, and noting with satisfaction the broad international support
for the peace process,
Noting the continuing positive participation of the United Nations as a
full extraregional participant in the work of the multilateral working groups,
Bearing in mind the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements, signed by the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization in Washington, D.C., on 13 September 1993, 1/
Also bearing in mind the Agreement between Israel and Jordan on the
Common Agenda, signed in Washington, D.C., on 14 September 1993,
1.
Welcomes the peace process started at Madrid, and supports the
subsequent bilateral negotiations;
____________
1/

A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
/...

A/RES/48/58
Page 2

2.
Stresses the importance of, and need for, achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East;
3.
Expresses its full support for the achievements of the peace
process thus far, in particular the Declaration of Principles on Interim SelfGovernment Arrangements signed by the State of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, and the Agreement between Israel and Jordan on the
Common Agenda, which constitute an important initial step in achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East, and urges all
parties to implement agreements reached;
4.
Stresses the need for achieving rapid progress on the other tracks
of the Arab-Israeli negotiations within the peace process;
5.
Welcomes the results of the international donors Conference to
Support Middle East Peace, convened in Washington, D.C., on 1 October 1993,
and the establishment of the high-level United Nations task force to support
the economic and social development of the Palestinian people, and urges
Member States to provide economic, financial and technical assistance to the
Palestinian people during the interim period;
6.
Calls upon all Member States also to extend economic, financial
and technical assistance to States in the region and to render support for the
peace process;
7.
Considers that an active United Nations role in the Middle East
peace process and in assisting in the implementation of the Declaration of
Principles can make a positive contribution;
8.
Encourages regional development and cooperation in the areas where
work has already begun within the framework of the Madrid Conference.
79th plenary meeting
14 December 1993
