18

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

tilateral and bilateral proposals adopted at the Tunis and
Amman meetings;
8. Takes note with appreciation ofthe arrangements for
the convening of a regional workshop on human resources
development in the Arab region in Kuwait on 28 and
29 November 1987, in implementation of paragraph 6 (e)
of resolution 41/4;
9. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to arrange for ajoint meeting in 1988 ofthe representatives of the United Nations system and the representatives of the League of Arab States and its specialized
organizations in order to review and appraise progress
achieved in their co-operation during the past five years,
with the objective of enhancing future co-operation;
10. Requests both the Secretary-General ofthe United
Nations and the Secretary-General ofthe League of Arab
States to initiate consultations for the purpose of drafting
an agreement of co-operation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States;
11. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in close co-operation with the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, to hold periodic consultations,
as and when appropriate, between representatives of the
Secretariat of the United Nations and of the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States on follow-up policies, projects, actions and procedures;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a progress report on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Co-operation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States".
40th plenary meeting
15 October 1987

42/6.

Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1986, 15
Taking note of the statement of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 19 October
1987, 16 which provides additional information on the
main developments in the Agency's activities during 1987,
Recalling that this year the Agency is celebrating the
thirtieth anniversary of its establishment in 1957,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
to promote further the application of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes, as envisaged in its statute,
A/so. recognizing _the sp~cial needs of the developing
countnes for techmcal asststance by the Agency in order
to benefit effectively from the application of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes as well as from the contribution of nuclear energy to their economic development,
. Consdous of the importance of the work of the Agency
tn the 1mplementat1on of safeguards provisions of the
15
In_ternational Atomic Energy Agency, TheAnnual Reportfor /986
(Austria. July 1987). (GC(XXXl)/800 and Corr.1); transmitted to the
members of the General Assemhly by a note of the Secretary-General
(A/42/458 and Corr. l).
16 See Official Records of thc General Asscmbly, Forly-second Session.
Plenary Meetings, 42nd meeting

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 17
and other international treaties, conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar objectives, as well as in
ensuring, as far as it is able, that the assistance provided by
the Agency or at its request or under its supervision or
control is not used in such a way as to further any military
purpose, as stated in article II of its statute,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
on nuclear power, nuclear safety, radiological protection
and radioactive waste management, including its work directed towards assisting developing countries in planning
for the introduction of nuclear power in accordance with
their needs,
Again stressing the need for the highest standards of
safety in the design and operation ofnuclear plants so as to
minimize risks to life, health and the environment,
Welcoming the entry into force on 27 October 1986 and
26 February 1987, of the Convention on Early Notífication of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological
Emergency, 18 and the fact that many States have already
ratified them or consented to be bound by them provisionally pending ratification,
Noting with appreciation the entry into force on 8 February 1987 of the Convcntion on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material,
Bearing in mind resolutions GC(XXXI)/RES/470,
GC(XXXl)/RES/4 72,
GC(XXXl)/RES/ 473,
GC(XXXl)/RES/ 474,
GC(XXXl)/RES/4 7 5
and
GC(XXXl)/RES/485 adopted on 25 September 1987 by
the General Conference of the Agency at its thirty-first
regular session,
1. Takes note ofthe report ofthe International Atomic
Energy Agency;
2. Affirms its confidence in the role of the Agency in
the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
3. Urges ali States to strive for effective and harmonious international co-operation in carrying out the work of
the Agency, pursuant to its statute; in promoting the use
of nuclear energy and the application of the necessary
measures to strengthen· further the safety of nuclear installations and to minimize risks to health; in strengthening
technical assistance and co-operation for developing countries; and in ensuring the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Agency's safeguards system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records ofthe forty-second session ofthe General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
43rd plenary meeting
20 October 1987

42/7.

Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3187
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of
19 November 1975, 31/40 of30 November 1976, 32/18 of
11 November 1977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of
17 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
18 See lnternational Atomic Energy Agency, Final Document.
Rewlulions and Convenzions Adopzed by the Firsr Special Session of zhe
General Conference. 24-26 Septcmber 1986, sect,. !-IV.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

29 November 1979, 35/127 and 35/128 of 11 December
1980, 36/64 of 27 November 1981, 38/34 of 25 November
1983 and 40/19 of 21 November 1985,
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property 19 adopted on
14 November 1970 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General submitted in co-operation with the DirectorGeneral ofthe United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 2º
Noting with satisfaction that following its appeal other
Member States have become parties to the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,
A ware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is offundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that they
may constitute collections representa ti ve of their cultural
heritage,
Reaffirming the importance of inventories as an essential tool for the understanding and protection of cultural
property and for the identification of dispersed heritage
and as a contribution to the advancement of scientific and
artistic knowledge and intercultural communication,
Deeply concerned at the clandestine excavations and the
illicit traffic in cultural property that continue to impoverish the cultural heritage of all peoples,
Again supporting the solemn appeal made on 7 June
1978 by the Director-General ofthe United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for the return of irreplaceable cultural heritage to those who
created it,
1. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural
Property to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in
Case of Illicit Appropriation on the work they have accomplished, in particular through the promotion of bilateral negotiations, for the return or restitution of cultural
property, the preparation of inventories of movable cultural property, the reduction of illicit traffic in cultural
property and the dissemination of information to the public;
2. Reaffirms that the restitution to a country of its objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts, documents and any other cultural or artistic treasures contributes to the strengthening of international cooperation and to the preservation and flowering of universal cultural values through fruitful co-operation between
developed and developing countries;
3. Recommends that Member States adopt or
strengthen the necessary protective legislation with regard
to their own heritage and that of other peoples;
4. Requests Member States to study the possibility of
including in permits for excavations a clause requiring archaeologists and palaeontologists to provide the national
authorities with photographic documentation of each object brought to light during the excavations immediately
after its discovery;
19 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session, vol. 1, Resolutions,
p. 135.
2º A/42/533.

19

5. Invites Member States to continue drawing up, in
co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, systematic inventories of
cultural property existing in their territory and of their
cultural property abroad;
6. Recommends that Member States should ensure
that inventories of museum collections include not only
the items on display but also those in storage, and that
they comprise ali necessary documentation, particularly
photographs of each item;
7. A/so invites Member States engaged in seeking the
recovery of cultural and artistic treasures from the seabed, in accordance with international law, to facilitate by
mutually acceptable conditions the participation of States
having a historical and cultural link with those treasures;
8. Appeals to Member States to co-operate closely with
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Retum of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation and to conelude bilateral agreements for this purpose;
9. Also appeals to Member States to encourage the
mass information media and educational and cultural institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general
awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural property to its country of origin;
10. Requests States parties to the Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit lmport,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property to
keep the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization fully informed of the
measures taken to ensure implementation of the Convention at the national leve);
11. Welcomes the steady increase in the number of
States parties to the Convention;
12. Invites once again those Member States that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Retum or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin".
47th plenary meeting
22 October 1987

42/8.

Prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), caused by one or more naturally occurring
retroviruses of undetermined origin, has assumed pandemic proportions affecting ali regions of the world and
represents a threat to the attainment of health for ali,
Having considered World Health Assembly resolution
WHA40.26 of 15 May 1987 21 on the Global Strategy for
the prevention and control of AIDS and Economic and
Social Council resolution 1987 /75 of 8 July 1987 on the
prevention and control of AIDS,
21 See World Health Organization, Fortieth World Health Assembly,
Geneva, 4-15 May 1987. Resolutions and Decisions, Annexes
(WHA.40/1987/REC/I).
