A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/144
10 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 19
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/51/588)]
51/144.

Question of New Caledonia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to New
Caledonia,1
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New
Caledonia by the French authorities, in cooperation with all sectors of the
population, to promote political, economic and social development in the
Territory, including measures in the area of environmental protection and
action with respect to drug abuse and trafficking, in order to provide a
framework for its peaceful progress to self-determination,
Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and
social development, as well as continued dialogue among the parties involved

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 23 (A/51/23), chap. IX.
97-76543

/...

A/RES/51/144
Page 2

in New Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination of New
Caledonia,
Welcoming the strengthening of the process of review of the Matignon
Accords2 through the increased frequency of coordination meetings,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New
Caledonia and neighbouring countries of the South Pacific region,
1.
Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people
of New Caledonia and building on the positive outcome of the mid-term review
of the Matignon Accords, to maintain their dialogue in a spirit of harmony;
2.
Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework
for the peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of
self-determination in which all options are open and which would safeguard the
rights of all New Caledonians according to the letter and the spirit of the
Matignon Accords, which are based on the principle that it is for the
populations of New Caledonia to choose how to control their destiny;
3.
Welcomes measures that have been taken to strengthen and diversify
the New Caledonian economy in all fields, and encourages further such measures
in accordance with the spirit of the Matignon Accords;
4.
Also welcomes the importance attached by the parties to the
Matignon Accords to greater progress in housing, employment, training,
education and health care in New Caledonia;
5.
Acknowledges the contribution of the Melanesian Cultural Centre to
the protection of the indigenous culture of New Caledonia;
6.
Notes the positive initiatives aimed at protecting New Caledonia's
natural environment, notably the "Zonéco" operation designed to map and
evaluate marine resources within the economic zone of New Caledonia;
7.
Acknowledges the close links between New Caledonia and the peoples
of the South Pacific and the positive actions being taken by the French and
provincial authorities to facilitate the further development of those links,
including the development of closer relations with the countries members of
the South Pacific Forum;
8.
Welcomes, in particular, in this regard, continuing high-level
visits to New Caledonia by delegations from countries of the Pacific region
and high-level visits by delegations from New Caledonia to countries members
of the South Pacific Forum;
9.
Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue the examination of this question at its next
session and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-second
session.
83rd plenary meeting
13 December 1996

2

See A/AC.109/1000, paras. 9-14.
