SECURITY COUNCIL
OF~FI.CIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

COl'lSEIL DE SECURITE·
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNIE

No. 103
.

218th and 219th meetings
1 November 1947

218eme et 21geme seances
1 novembre 1947
Lake Success

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Two hundred and eighteenth" meeting

Deux-eent-dix-hnitieme seance

Page

Pagu

. . . .2721

404. Provisional agenda • • . • • • .2721

404. Ordre du jour provisoire.

405. Adoption of the agenda.

4p5. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . .2721
406. Suite de la discussion de la question indonesienne" • . .". . . . . . .2721

• • . • .2721

406. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesi;m question. • . • • • .2721

[

~

.-'

Two hundred and nineteenth meeting

Deux-eent-dix-neuvieme sean~e

407. Continuation of the disCussion on the Indonesian question. • . • . •.• .2734

407. Suite de la discussion de la question indonesienne ., l ~ • . . . . . • .2734

Documents

Documents

The following documents relevant" to the two
hundred and eighteenth meeting appears as £01rows:
.

Le document se l:apportant cl la deux-eent~·
huitieme ~ce figure dans.la publication suivante:

Official Rt'cords oj the Security'Council:
Special Supplement No. 5

Proces-'llsrbaux ofJiciels clu Conseil de securite: "
Supplement special No 5

Report by the Consular Cotnmission at Batavia
to the Security Council
"

Rapport de la Commission consulaire cl Batavia
an Conseil de securite"

':-

:::;

,

,
2734

ne

Je
sais pas si je me suis exprime clalremerit,.
I do not 'know if I have made myself clear, but
it does seem to' me that that is the clear meaning mais,il·me semble que telfe est la signification eviof this text. I am' not arguing against it. I have dente'de ce texte. J e ne 'le ,discute pas. J'ai deja.
already said that I think it is an improvement on dit que j'estime que ce texte constitue un progres
the ' different proposals that it is supposed to par rapport aux diverses propositions dont 'il est
merge. I am prepared to vote for it, if it is clear suppose constituer une synthese, J e suis dispose
that the Council believes that, it has no compe- it voter pour lui, s'il est clair que le Conseil estime
tencein the matter. But as I believe we have some qu'il n'est pas competent en la matiere; mais comcompetence, I have reservations to make and that me je croisque "nous avons' une certaine compeis what I was trying to drive at. I think it would tence en la matiere, j'ai de.SJreserves a. faire, et
be a very serious matter for the Council to admit c'est la que je voulais en venir. J~ crois qu'il seso explicitly that it viewed without alarm or con- rait tres' grave que le Conseil admette ouvertement
cern that its recommendation, such as the r~sotu- , qu'il voit sans inquietude et sans crainte que ses
tion of 1 August, is not complied with for one recommandations, telles que la resolution du ler
reason' or another.
aOllt, ne sont pas appliquees pour une raison ou
pour une autre.
The PRESIDENT: I have three requests to speak.
We shall therefore recess until three dclock this
afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT (trqduit de l'anglais): Trois orateurs ne sont fait inscrire. Nous alIons donc lever
la seance; nous nous reunirons de nouveau cet
apres-midi a trois heures.

The '-meeting rose at 1.15

La seance est levee a13 h. 15.

TWO HUNDRED AND l''1NETEENTH
'MEETING

DEUX·CENT·DIX.;NEUVIE~iE

SEANCE

Held at Flushing Jvf eadow, New York,
On Saturday, ! November 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenu; aFlushing Met;triow, New-York,
le sa-medi ler novembre 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. W. AUSTIN
(United States of America) :
Present: The representatives' of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

President:lM. W. AUSTIN
(Etats-U nis d',Amerique).
Pr~sents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Be1gique" Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes .sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.
'

407. Continuation of the discussion on
the Indonesian question

407. Suite de la discussion de la question
indonesienne

At the'invitation of the President, M r. Pillai,
representative of India; Mr. van KlefJens, representative of the Netherlands; General Ro-mulo, rep, resentative of the Philippines; and Mr. Palar, 'representativeof the Republic of Indonesia, took their
.'
places at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Pillai, representant de l'Inde; M. van KlefJens, re'pt'esentant
des Pays-Bas; le general Ro-mulo, representant
des Philippines,et M. Palar, representant de la
Republique. d'Indonesie:, prennent place a la table
du Conseil.
.
,

The PRESIDENT: The que.stion with which the
Security Council is seized this afternoon is the
resolution relating to the Indonesian question,
submitted. at our morning meeting by the SubCommittee appointed ',by the Security Council at
its two hundred and seventeenth meeting held 011
31 October 19471 •

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais t: Le Conseil de securite est, cet apres-midi, saisi de la resolution sur la question indonesienne,. presentee
a notre seance du matin par le Sous-Comite nomme par le Conseil lors de, sa deux cent dix-septieme seance tenue le 31 octobre 1:9471 •

Mr. GROMYKO: (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian). It is not
quite clear to me how the question of the competence of the Security Council has arisen here. We
dealt with that question at the outset of our discussion on the, Indonesian problem. As you know,
certain proposals were made in that connexion
and were rejected. I would remind the Council
that the Belgian representative proposed asking
the opinion of the International Court of Justice
on whether the Security Council was ~ompetent
to discuss the question of the Indonesian situation,
raised by Australia and India. The text of the

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques, socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Je necomprends pas tres bien a quel propos on a pose ici
la question de la competence du Conseil. N ous
en avons discute au commencement des debats sur
la question indonesienne. Comme le Conseil le
sait on nous avait soumis certaines propositions
a ce sujet, mais elles ont ete rejetees. J e r~pelle­
rai au Conseil que le representant de la Belgique
avait propose de demander I'avis de la Cour internationale de Justice pour savoir si le Conseil
de securite a le droit d'examiner la question soulevee par les representants de l'Australie et de

I

ji22

w. .. ; ....

~.,

2735

. Belgian proposa1,l which was circulated to the
members of the Council, reads as follows:

l'Inde; a savoir la situation en Indonesie. Le tex'te
de la proposition de la Belgiquel. a ete cOIl1munique aux membres du Conseil; il etait dit dans ce
document:

!'Requests the International Court of Justice,
under Article 96 of the 'Charter, to give it, as
soon as possible, an advisory opinion on whether
the Security Council' is competent to deal with
the aforementioned question,"

"Prie la Cour internationale de Justice,en
-vertu de l'Article 96 de la Charte, de vouloir
bien lui donner le plus tot possible,un avis
consultatif sur le'point de savoir si le Conseil
de securite est competent pour connaitre de la'
question ci-dessus mentionnee";
-

Ainsi donc, 'les membres qui avaierit des doutes
sur le' point de savoir si le Conseil de securite est
competent ou non pour examiner la situation en
Indonesie ont propose d'adresser une requete a
la Cour internationale de Justice. Cette proposition a ete rejetee. Quatre repn~sentants seulement
ont vote en sa favenr. La question de la competence du Conseil a donc ete tr,anchee par l'affirmative, car si nous admettions le contraire, nous
devrions conclure, et ce serait absurde, que le
Conseil de securit~, depuis trois mois, perd /son
temps a examiner la question indonesienne, alors
qu'il n'a ni le pouvoir ni le droit de se livrer acet
examen.
I am therefore unable to agree with the stateVoila pourquoi je ne puis accepter la declarament made bv the President at the two hundred tion que .le President a faite a la deux cent dixand .' eighteenth meeting-presumab}y in his ca- huitieme seance, sans doute en la qualite de reprepacity as representative of the United States-that seritant des Etats-Unis, et selon laqudle le Conno decision has yet been taken by the Sec;urity seil n'aurait encore pris aucU11e decision sur laCouncil on the'question of competence. It is true . question de sa propre competence. Certes, it
that there has been no formal decision, but the n'existe pas de decision formelle sur cette quesCouncil· rejected a 'proposal which cast doubt on tion, mais le Conseil a rejete une proposition qui
the competence of the Secudty·Council; thus the mettait en doutesacompetence; par consequent,
situation was clarified, for otherwise the Security il a clarifie la situation. S'il n'en etait pas ainsi,
Council would not have dealt with the Indonesian le Conseil ne s~ occuperait pas de la question indoquestion and would not have continued to deal nesienne, ou du moins il ne continueraitpas a s'en
with it.
occuper.
Dans la resolution que nous a soumise le SousThe resoltition submitted by the Sub-Committee
does not state either that the Council has the right, Comite, il n'y a rien qui indique que le -Conseil
and, po~er to deal with this matter, or that it has ait le droit et le pouYoir d'examiner cette question,
no such right. Such questions are irrelevant both ni .tien non plus qui indique le contraire. En fait,
to this resolution and to any other proposal, for ces questions sont oiseuses lorsqu'on les pose a
the .Security Council has been discussing the prop'os de l'examen de cette resolution ou de
pr.9blem for three months, and has heen discussing toute autre proposition; si le Conseil de securite
it because it has the right and the duty to do so.
s'occupe depuis trois mois de cette question, c'est
parce qu'il a le droit et le devoir de le fai~e.
Th~ President, therefore, has no power to make
I1 va sans dire que le President ne peut prendre
any ruling in this connexion, for the question was aucune decision presidentielle a ce sujet, puisque
settled at the very outset of our study of the In- pous avons tranche cette question des le comdonesian situation~ Any representative on the Se- mencement des debats sur la situation en Indocurity Council may hold his own opinion on this nesie. Si un membre du Conseil de securite a
question, but that opinion is in no way binding une opinion particuliere a cet @gard,cela n'engage
upon any other representative. If. the representa- personne. Si representant des Etats-Unis estime
tive of the United States considers that the Se- que le Conseil de securite en est encore it se decurity Council is still uncertain as regards its mander s'il peut ou non examiner cette question,
competence to deal with this matter, that is his c'est la une opinion personnelle qu'exprime le
opinion. I am unable to share it.
representant des Etats-Unis, et je ne puis me
rallier a son avis.
I therefore hold that the question of the Security
Voila pourquoi j'estime 'que la question de laCouncil's competence ought not to arise here-at competence du Conseil de .securite n'aurait pas
least, not in the form in which it has been pre- du ctre posee ou, tout au moins, qU'elle' n'aurait
sented by the representative of the United States pas du etre'poseesous la forme que lui a donnee
It is our duty to discuss the substance of every le representant des Etats-Unis. Nous devonsexaproposal. I understand the· interest of the Co- miner chacune des propositions quant au fond. Je
lombian representative in this matter; I under- conc;ois que le representant d.e la Colombie s'in~tatid it fully, for it is precisely the view that there teresse a cette question, et je le comprends fort
IS som~ doubt whether the Council has the power
bien, car il s'opposait precisement it ceux· qui
to discuss this question that he .is opposing. If croyaient pouvoir mettre en doute la competence
Thus, those who doubted the competence of the
Security Council to consider the Indonesian situation proposed requesting an, opinion of the International Court of Justice. That proposal was rejected. Only four representatives voted for it.
The question of competence -Was thereby decided in
the affirmative, for, if we were to take the opposite view, we should be forced to the completely
absurd conclusion that the Security. Council has
been dealing with the Indonesian question for three
months absolutely in vain, with neither the right
nor the power to do so.

le

IIIIiI
: .' . flit'

, See Official Records of the Security CO'IIIICil, Second

No. 83.

'~L.

ILt...........

1 Voir les Proces-verba1l:~ officiels dft C011seil de seen-rite,,Deuxieme Annee, No 83.

•

a

:q

2736

there are any grounds for such fears at this moment, I should like to know them.
Perhaps the Colombian representative considers that the text we are discussing. throws some
dQubton the campetenceof the Security Council, but I do not see why that should be ·so. It is
true that the resolution is weak and unsatisfactory,
but its adoption ,yould certainly in no way cast
doubt on the competence of the Security Council, which, as I have already stated, has been considering this question for three months and has
allowed the adoption of a resolution on the matter
to remain on its agenda. In principle, I share the
Colombian representative's view that it is our duty
to prote<;t the rights and competence of the Council against any attempt to undermine.tllem but the
adoption of any resolution on the Indonesian question .cannot in any way weaken the competence
6f the Security Council.
.

duConseil de securite en: la matiere. S'il existe
en ce moment des raison~ qui justifieraient . 'ces
inquietudes, je voudraisbien les connaitre.
Peut-etre le representant de la Cololllbie estimet-il que ~e texte gui nous a ete soumis fait pianer
un certain doute sur la competence du Conseil de
securite,mais je ne vois pas pourquoi. Certes,
cette resolution est peu effi.cace et peu satisfaisante; mais l'adoption de c~te ne ferait nullement douter de la competence du Conseil de securite qui, comme je l'ai deja dit, examine cette
question depuis trois mois et maintient a son ordre
duo jour un point prevoyant l'adoption d'un~ resolution a ce sujet. En prirt.cipe, je suis d'accord
avec-- le representant de la Colombie qui estime
que nous devons de£endre les droits et la competence du Conseil de securite contre toute tentative
de les mettre en doute; mais queUe que -soit la
resolution que nous adopterons sur la question
indonesienne, la competence-du--€onseil de securite n'en sera nullement restreinte.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : J' estime
qu'il est de mon devoir, en qualite de President
du Conseil de securite, de preciser tres nettement
ce donne Conseil est saisi et ce dont il n'~t pas
saisi. J'ai, en ()uvrant la seance, annonce que la
question qll'iL nous fallait examiner etait la resolution sur la question indonesienne presentee par
le Sous-Comite nomme par le Conseil lors de sa
deux· cent dix-septieme seance tenue le 31 tlctobre
1947. Pour le moment, leConseil de securite n'est
saisi d'aucune autre question et le' probleme de
la competence generale est entierement etranger
au debat. Pet-sonne n'a pose la question prealable
de la competence generale du Conseil de securite.
Le representant de)a Colombie rendait compte
par'ses observations de sa position et de son- attitude en ce qui concerne la question dont nous
sommes saisis.
.
I shall rule that any member of the Security
J e decide maintenant que tout membre .du ConCouncil who wishes to discuss jurisdiction as it seil de securite qui voudrait discuter la question
might upon this resolution and might affect his de la competence dtl Conseil, parce qu'elle a une
vote has a parliamentary right to do so. But there incidence que1conque sur la p,resente resolution,
is no issue now pending in the Security Council' parce qU'elle infiuerait sur son vote et serait
regarding the general jurisdiction by the Security susceptible de le modifier, a selon l'usage parleCouncil over the Indonesian question; and I shall mentaire, le droit de le faire. Mais, pour le moask the Council kindly to refrain from entering ment, le Conseil de securite n'est saisi ·d'aucune
that field and to adhere to the question that is be- question relative a 'sa competence generale en ce
fore the Security Council, whic~ is the resolution qui concerne la question indonesienne, et je prieon the Indonesian question submitted by the Sub- rai les membres du Conseil de bien vouloir s'absteCommittee appointed by the Security .Council at nir de s'engager dans cette voie et de s'en tenir a.
its two hundred and seventeenth meeting on 31 ,la question dOllt le Conseil est saisi, c'est-a-dire a
Octoher 1947.
la resolution sur la Question indonesienne presentee.. par le Sous-Comite nomme par le Conseil
lors de. sa deux cent dix-septieme seance tenue le
31 octobre 1947.
.
.

The PRESIDENT : I feel it is my duty as President of the Security Council to make it perfectly
clear what is before the Council and what is not
before it. When I opened this meeting, I announced that the question before,us was the resolution on' the Indonesian question submitted by
the SUb-Commi.ttee appointed by the Security
Council at its two'hundred and seventeenth meeting on 31 October 1947. There is no other question before the Security Council at this time, and
it is e.ntirely out of order to discuss the question
of general jurisdiction. No one has raised a preliminary issue of general jurisdiction of the Security Council. The remarks of the representative
of Colombia accounted for his position and attitude toward the pending question.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I believe it was
entirely due to a mistake that the President stated
that the resolution before the Council was the one
submitted today by the Sub-Committee appointed
by the Secm;ity Council. May I remind the President that there is another resolution before the
Security Council, submitted oy the Polish delegation on 29 Otcober 1947 at the two .hundred
and fifteenth meeting of the CounciF. In accordance with our rules of procedure, that Polish :-esolution has precedence today over any other resolution. The resolution which the President calls
the Sub-Committee's resolution is of a later date

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (tradzdt de l'anglais) : Je pense que c'est tout a fait par erre~:
que le President a declare que le Conseil etait salSl
de la resolution pres.entee aujourd'hui par le
Sous-Comite nomme par ses soins. Le President
me permet-il de lui rappeler que le Conseil de'
securite est saisi d'une autre resolution, presentee
le 29 octobre 1947 par la delegation de la Pologne
lors de la 21Seme seance du Conseil1 : Conformement a notre reglement interieur, cette resolution
de la d~legation polonaise a aujourd'hui priorite
sur toute autre. La resolution que le President
appelle la resolution du Sous-Comite est plus re-

'See Official Records of thc ScCltrity Council. Second
Year, No. 101.

'Voir les Proces-verbattx officiels d1t COllseil de seenrite, Deuxit~me Annee, No 101.

4

:ass

2737
and is a new resolution, althongh it is so completely reminiscent of the former United States
resolution. ~
As to the question of competence, I fully understand and bow to the ruling of the President...
Th~ PRESIDENT: I must interrupt the representative of Poland. I ask the membeFs of the Council to adhere to my ruling which is so recent that
it cannot have been forgotten: that is, that the remarks should be addressed to the subject that is before the Security Council a~d not to the subject of
general jurisdiction. Furthermore, the representative of Poland has gone far enough to show that
there is an erroneous impression of what I said, at
our two hundred and eighteenth meeting this morning. Th~re was no ruling by the President this
morning on general jurisdiction.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I did not say
anything about general jurisdiction.

cente et nouvelle, bien qu'eIle rappelle a tant d'egards I'ancienne resolution des Etats-Unis~.
Quant a la question de la competence du Conseil; je comprends tres bien le President et me
soumets entierement a sa decision. . . .
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de J anglais): J e dois
interrompre le representant de la Pologne. J e
demande.aux membres du Conseil de se conformer
a ma decision qui est si recente qu'ils ne peuvent
l'avoir oubliee: a savoir, que les observations doivent porter sur le probleme dont est saisi le Conseil de securite et non sur la question de sa competence generale. En outre, le representant de la
Pologne en a assez dit pour montrer que 1'0n a
interprete de maniere erronee les declarations que
j'ai faites au cours de notre deux cent dix-huitieme seance, tenue ce matin. J e n'ai pris, ce matin, aucune decision en ce qui concerne la competence generale.
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de tanglais): Je n'ai pas du tout pade de la question de
la competence generale.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de t anglais): Rien de
ce que j'ai'dit ,ce matin en faisant I'historique de
history of this matter that is at all binding on· the cette question, n'impose une obligation quelconSecurity Council. I think the USSR representative que au Conseil de securite. A mon avis, le repreunderstElod the point correctly and repeated it cor- sentant de I'URSS a parfaitement compris le prorectly when he said that it was not a ruling by bleme et l'a pose a nouveau correctement lorsqu'il
the President but was only an opinion of the a dit qu'il ne s'agi,ssait pas d'une decision presipersam who expressed it.
dentielle, mais seulement d'une opinion personnelle.
Il nous faut nous hater. Nous sommes samedi
Let us expedite the work. This is Saturday afternoon, and if possible, let us finish the work and apres-midi; finissons-en, Ri possible, et contricontribute to the speed of the Security Council by buons a accelerer les travaux. du Conseil de securite en nous conformanta l'usage parIementaire.
adhering to the parliamentary situation.
M'est-il permis d'ajouter que la resolution preMay I say further that of' course the resolution
offered by the representative of Poland will be sentee par le represet'tant de la Pologne sera evitaken up and will be considered. For the infor- demment examinee. Puis~je dire, a l'intention du
mation ohhe representative of Poland, let me say representant de la Pologne, qu'a mon avis
that the view of the President regarding the la question actuelle releve des dispositions de
pending business is that it falls within rule 36 l'article 36 de notre reglement interieur, du fait
of our own rules of, procedure, as the amendment qu'iI s'agit de l'amendement qui s'eloi~e le plus
furthest removed fronl the. original. resolution of- de la resolution initiale presentee par les Etatsfered by the United States. This resolution is a Unis. La resolution actuelle est, en effet, le resulcombination of the efforts of all those delegations tat des efforts combines de toutes lesdeIegations
which have offered amendments to the resolution q1,1i ont presente des amendements a la resolution
of the United States. The major part of the text des Etats-Unis, bien que la plus grande partie du
presented by the Sub-Committee is the original texte presente par le Sous-C~mite ne soit (1utre
text of the United States resolution.
, que le texte initial de la resolution des Etats-Unis.
Therefore, the President rules-naturally, anyJ e decide donc, et naturellement tout membre
member. can challenge that ruling-that the busi- du Conseil P(;l:t contester cette decision, que la
ness before the Security Council is" the resolution question dont eSt' saisi l€ Conseil de securite est
on the Indonesian question submitted by the Sub- la resolution sur la question indonesienne, preCommittee :appointed by the Security Council at sentee par le Sous-Comite nomme par le Conseil
its two hundred and seventeenth meeting, 31 Oc- lors 'de sa 217eme seance tenue le 31 octobre 1947.
tober 1947.
The PRESIDENT: There is nothing in what the

Pr~sident said this morning on the subject of the

Mr. KATZ-s'UCHY (Poland): The interruption
of my statement by the President was probably
due to the fact that my English is not all it should
be and thus he may have misunderstood me. At
the moment of the Pre§ident's interruption, I was
not speaking on any of the morning rulings of the
Pr~Sldent. I was simply mentioning another resolutIOn that has been tabled, which the President somehow forgot to mention when he spoke
of the documents we have before us.
l See Ojfici'al Records of the Security Council, Second
Year. No. 100.

_IJU~_~

.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) : 11 est probable que le President m'a interrompu parce que man anglais n'est pas exactement
ce qu'il devrait etre et qu'il a pu, de ce fait, se
meprendre sur le sens de mes paroles. Au moment
ou j'ai ete interrompu, je ne commentais aucune
des decisions prises ce matin par le President. J e
mentionnais simplement un autre projet de resolution qui a ete depose devant le Conseil ,et que
le President a en quelque sorte omis lorsqu'il a
pade des documents dont le Conseil etait saisi.
1 Voir les Proces-verbalt% officiels dlt ·Collseil de Sec1'rite, Deuxieme Annee, No 100.

,

Quant a. la 'deuxieme partie. de la de~laration
As ·~o the second portion. of \ the President's
statement; I shall have to challenge the ruling du President, i1 va me.faIJoir cQntester la decision
of the President: I do not believe the President can de ce dernier. Je ne cr6iS pas que le President
rule .in that manner, because what is contained puisse prendre une. telle decision parce que le
.in the Sub~Committee's resolution can by no means texte qui figure dans la resolution du Sous-Comite
be regarded as the' amendment furthest removed: ne peut nullement etre considere comme coristi1tis" a complete resolution, the r~sult of· seyeral tuant l'amendement qui s'etoigne le plus du texte
initial. n' s'agit d'une' resolution complete qui est
.amend~ent$· offered by various members of the
Council, who--I inust admit, to my surprise- la somme de, pfusieurs amendements presentes par
came to one conclusion, which conclusion is s'ub- divers membres du Conseil; ceux-ci,-je dois remitted in the form of a new resolution. That reso- connaitre que cela m~ surprend~ont arrives a
lution is not s'-tbmitted by one of the, members One seule et meme conclusion, qui est presentee
of the Security Council, but is submitted by a Sub- maintenant au Consei1 sous la forme d'une nouCommittee appointed by the Security Council on velle resolution: Cette resolution n'est pas pre31 October 1947.
sentee par l'un des membres du Conseil de securite, .maispat un Sous-Comitenomme par le
Conseille 31 octobre 1947.
,
Par consequent, j'estime que 1'on devrait met,Therefore, I consider that the Polish resolution,
as contained in document S/589, should be voted tre aux voix .en premier lieu la resolution polonaise, telle qU'elle figure au document S/589..
upon first.
En ce qui concerne 1'0rdre du jour et les docuWith regard to the agenda and the documents
before us, I believe the item on our agenda is ments qui nous sont soumis, je crois que c'est la
the Indonesian question. I do not intend, I can question iridonesienne qui figure a. notre ordre du
assure you, to re-open the general debate here. jour. Je n'ai pasl'intention, je puis vous le cerI wish merely to restrict myself to the one or two tifier,de rouvrir ici la discussion generale. Je
resolutions on the table. Hmvever, in doing so I m'en tiendrai simplement a. la resolution, ou. aux
have to refer to certain remarks or certain opin- deux resolutions,. dont nous sommes saisis. Touteions which have been expressed on the subject fois, ce faisant'i il me' faut rappeler cert~Lines obduring the past month or during today's meeting. servations oricertains points de vue qui ont ete
exprimesa leur sujet, au cours du mois ecoule
ou au cours de la seance d'aujourd'hui.
I am very glad to notice, as I started to say
J e prends acte avec plq.isir, comme j'ai essaye
before, that the President agrees with those mem- de le dire auparavant, de ce que le President est
bers who consider that the question of competence du meme avis que les membres du Conseil qui
is not being discussed and that that question has estiment que 1'0n ne piscute pas de la question de
been settled.
la competence et que cette question a ete reg1ee.
The PRESIDENT: Just a minute. I am sure the
representative of Poland does not mean to put
words into the mouth of the-President. Now those
last remarks are not according to the facts. The
President has never stated that that question has
been settled.

Le PRiSIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Un instant; je suis sur que le representant de la Pologne
n'a pas l'intention de me faire dire plus que je
n'ai dit. En fait, ces dernieres observations .ne
sont pas conformes
la realite. Je n'ai jamais
dit que la question avait eteregle~.

a

. M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je prie le President de m'excuser, si j'ai
mal saisi sa pensee. Toutefois, le dois ayouer que
c'est ce que j'avais compris.
1 agree with the representative of Colombia,
J e partage la maniere de voir du r~presentant
who felt rather uneasy about the matter because de la Colombie, qui eprouve certains doutes car
he considers that we decided our competence to il estime que nous avons anterieurement decide
deal with the problem before the Security Coun- que nous etion~ competents pour traiter le procil. His opinion is shared by my delegation. The bleme dont est saisi le Conseil de securite-,-et ma
resolution which has been subJJ?itted today by the ~delegationest entierement d'accord avec lui sur
Sub-Committee, however, completely deviates from ce point-tandis que ia resolution qui a "ete preall our previous decisions, including the decision sentee aujourd'hui par le Sous-Comite s'ecarte
taken on lAugust 19471 •
totalement de toutes nos decisions anteriellres, la
decision prise le 1er aotit 19471 comprise.
The Security Council, being the most imporLe Conseil de securite, qui est l'organe le plus
tant organ of the United Nations, adopted' oll. 1 important de l'Organisation des _Nations Unies, a
August 1947 a resolution which called for the adopte le 1er aotit 1947 une resolution par lacessation of hostilities in Indonesia. Three moriths queUe il invitait les parties interessees a mettre
later, in a resolution submitted to the Security fin aux hostilites en Indonesie. Trois mois .apres,
Council, the fact that one or both of the parties dans une resolution presentee au Conseil de secu-1 do not want to enter into that subject again- rite, le fait que l'une des parties ou les deux parhave not complied, for one reason or another, with ties (je ne tiens pas a revenir sur ce sujet) ne se
that resolution, tis mentioned only in the foHowing sont pas conformees, pour une raison ou une aumanner:
, tre, a cette'resolution, n'est releve que dans les
termes suivants:
({Having received and taken note of the report
((A!JIant ete saisi et ayant pris acto du rapport
of the Consular Commission, dated 14 October
de la Commi~sion consulaire, en date du 14 ocMr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland) : I beg to ,apologize
to the President if 1 misunderstood him. 1 must
say, however, that was my understanding.

.

'See Official Records of the SeclIrity'COlttleil, Second
Year. No. 68, 173rd meeting•

'

1 Voir les Proces-verboll.'r officiels dll COllseil de secllrite, Deuxieme Annee, No 68. 173eme seance.

2739
1947, indicating that the Council's resolution
of 1 August 1947 relating to the cessation of
hostilities; has no been fully effective;

tobre 1947, indiquant que la resolution du Conseil du 1er aout 1947, relative a 1:;L cessation des
hostilites, n'a pas ete completement suivie d'effet;
({Having take'h note that, according to the re"Ayant pris acte de ce que ce rapport signale
,port, no attempt was made. '.."
,
que les deux parties n'ont fait aucune tentative...."
J e suis convain~u que c'est porter prejudice a
I believe that it is harmful to the authority of
the Security Council and the United Nations that l'autorite du Conseil de securite ~t a celle des
in the first paragraph of the resolution it· is stated Nations Unies que de declarer dans le premier
that a previous resolution has not been' complied paragraphe d'une resolution qu'une resolution anwith. Moreover, it is not only one'previous resolu- terieure n'a pas ete respectee. En outre, i1 n'y a
tion which has not been complied with, but two. ' pas qu'une resoJution anterieure qui n'ait pas ete
There w~s the resolution of 1 August 1947 and respectee, mais deux. I1 y a eu la resolution du
the resolution of 26 August 1947\ which reminded 1er aout 1947 et celle du 26 aout 19471 ; cette derthe parties of the previous resolution and called niere rappelait aux parties intere~sees ia resoluon them to "adhere strictly" to it'. I believe that tion' prec6dente et les invitait a s'y "conformer
if three months after the first resolution, we limit strictement." Je suis convaincu que, trois mois
obrselves to noting the fact that this resolution has apres la prc;miere resolution, et prenant acte du
not· been adhered to, we shall be moving ift a fait que cette resolution n'a pas ete suivie d'effet,
backward direction and therefore opening the door nous faisons marche arriere et ouvrons la voie a
for a new outburst of violence in Indonesia.
de nouveaux actes de violence en Indonesie.
When the question was brought before the SeQuand' la question a ete soumise au Conseil de
curity Council, in several letters and statements securite, le representant" de l'Indonesie a affirme,
made to tIle Council the representative of Indon- dans plusieurs lettres et daps plusieurs declaraesia asserted that he welcomed the participation tions qu'il a fajtes devant le Conseil, qu'il accueilof the United Nations- in this question. The'same lait favorablement 'l'intervention des Nations
attitude is also noted in the report of the Con- Unies. Le rapport de la Commission consulaire
sular Commission, in 'appendix I, paragraph 33, fait egalement e(at de la meme attitudedans son
describing the political situatio~, where it is stated paragraphe 33, de l'Annexe I, ou est decrite la
of the Indonesians:
situation politique, et qui" declare, a propos des
Indonesiens :
"Their faith in the problem of being settled
"C'est avec simplicite et sans res~rve qu'ils
. by U.N.O. is simple and entire. Many highfont confiance a 1'ONU pour le reglement de
ranking officers and civilian officials have exleurs difficultes. Plw~ieurs officiers de haut
pressed to us the wish for a peaceful settlerang et plusieurs fonctionnaires dvils nous on1:
ment, -and their confidence in the u.N.a. They
exprirne leur desir d'un reglement pacifique et
obviously want peace, but at the present time
leur,foi en l'ONU . I1 est evident qu'ils desirent
they, are not prepared to co-operate with the
la paix, mais a l'heure" actuelle, ils ne sont en
Dutch in any way."
aucune fa<;on disposes a collaborer" avec les
Neerlandais."
Je' crois qu'en discutant et en adoptant aujour- ,
d'hut une resolution telle que celle que nous presente maintenant le Sous-Comite, d'une part, nous
ebranlerions la fOl de ce peuple en l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, et d'autre part, nous reduirions a neant tout ce qui a ete fait apropos du
conflit.
It is most unfortunate that I cannot see that
I1 est tres regrettable 'que je ne puisse voir cette
resolution-in the same way as the representative . resolution sous le meme aspect que le representant
of China sees it. He says that the resolution is a de la Chine. A son avis, la resolution est une preuve
proof of moderation' and conciliation. I could find de moderation et d'esprit de conciliation mais,
in that resolution neither moderation nor cOllcilia~ pour ma part, je n'ai pU'Y trouver ni moderation,
tion towards both parties to the dispute. If there ni esprit de conciliation a l'egard des deux parties
is any conciliation and moderation, it is directed en litige. S'il y a la une manifestation d'esprit
towards only one of the parties, the Government de conciliation et de moderation, cette manifestaof the Netherlands and its forces, which are here tion ne s'adressequ'a l'une des parties, le Gouunder accusation of a breach of the peace.
vernement des Pays-Bas et les forces neerlandaises, qui sont pourtant accuses devant nous
d'avoir porte atteinte a la paix.
One of the actions in the Sub-Committee which
L'une des initiatives prises au sein du Soussurprised me most was the support given to this Comite qui m'a cause le plus de surprise, a ete'le
resolution by the representative of Australia. The soutien apporte par le representant de l'Australi.e
representative of Australia was one of those in a cette resolution. Le representant de l'Australie
the Security Council who for a long time defended est l'un des membres du Conseil de securite qui,
fwlly the right and duty of the Security Council pendant, longtemps, a de£endu integralement le
to und a solution to the problem in the spirit of droit et le devoir du Conseil de trouver une' soluthe Charter and who, at our: two hundred and sev- tion. au probleme conformement a l'esprit de la
I believe that by discussing and passing today
a resolution such as the one submitted by the SubCommitte~, we are on the one hand, shaking their
belief in the United Nations and, on 'the other
hand, erasing everything that has been accomplished on this question.

1 See Official Records 'of the Security Council, Second
, Year, No. 84, 195th meeting.

~~".',.;,.

'Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels dn COllseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 84, 195egte seance.

p

2740

'-

ente~nth meeting, supp~rted a motion for complete withdrawal of forces.

Charte, et qui a appuye, au cours de. la deux cent
dix-septieme seance du Conseil, une motion invitant les deux parties a retirer leurs forces.
It ne me vient pas a. l'esprit un proverbe qui
At the moment! cannot find a proverb with
which to reply to his, but I cannot agree to a half reponde a. celui qu'ila cite,mais je ne suis pas
a loaf is being better than a whole loaf. It all de- d';1ccord sur le fait qu'un merle vaille une grive.
pends upon to whom you are giving the half Tout depend du point de.savoir a qui 1'0n danne
loaf. At the moment it is only a half loaf, but le merle. Pour le moment, i1 ne s'agit que d'un
we are handing it fully and solemnly into the hands merle, mais nous en faisons don sans reserve et
of the forces of the Govemment of the Nether- . avec solennite aux forces du Gouvemement des
lands.
Pays-BaS.
L
Toutes les fois que le representant des PaysIt has somehow always happened that every
time the representative of the Netherlands before Bas aupr~s du Conseil a manifeste un desir, ou
this Council had any wish, or any objection to souleve une objection contre une resolution quelany resolution or to the passage of any resolution, conque ou contre l'adGption d'une resolution
some members were always found to fulfil his quelle qu'elle soit, il s'est pratiquement. toujours
desire by submitting appropri~te resolutions, which trouve-quelque membre pret a satisfaire ce desir,
have usually been passed. The exception is the en presentant des resolutions appropiees que le
Belgian resolution which has been mentioned by Conseil a, en regIe generale, adQptees. It y. a eu
the USSR representative.
une ex~eption. la resolution presentee par le representant de la Belgiq'ue, dont a fait mention le
representant de l'URSS.
Je ne sais pas si la solution du probleme serait
I do not know if a decision to· send the resolution before us, if it is passed, by cable or telegram beaucoup facilitee par la decision de communiquer
will help much in the solution of the problem. It par cable ou par b~legramme aux· parties inteis not a question of the speed with which the reso- ressees la resolution qui nous est soumise, au cas
httion will reach the territories concemed; it is its ou e11e serait adoptee. Il ne s'agit pas de la rapicontent, which does not lead anywhere. The reso- dite avec laquelle la resolution parviendra dans les
lution goes back on the previousi action and, while territoires en question. It s'agit de son contenu,
binding the Indonesian Government, gives a very qui ne nous ouvre aucune issue. La resolution
privileged position to the forces and Govemment revient sur la decision prille anterieurement, et,
"of . the Netherlands. Therefore, I regret that I si eUe impose une obligation au Gouvemement
must state that my delegation will have to vote de I'Indonesie, elle assure aux forces et au Gouagainst this resolution.
vernement des Pays-Bas une' position tres priviIegiee. Aussi, j'ai ·le .regret de devoir annoncer
que ma delegation votera contre cette resolution.
There was another problem brought up at the
Notre ancien Pr~sident a souleve un autre protwo hundred and seventeenth meeting by the bleme lors de la deux cent dix-septieme seance, et
President and again today by' the present Presi- le President actuel a pose a nouveau l~. meme
dent, that is, the question of the Consular Com- probleme aujourd'hl1i, it savoir celui de la Commission. '1 do not thinK that we or the Presi- mission consulaire. Je ne pense pas que 110US puisdent can rule here that the Consular Commission sions, non plus que le President, decider id que
continues. According to the resolutioh adopted by la Commission consulaire poursuivra ses travaux.
the Security Council on 25 August' 1947\ the .En vertu de la resolution adoptee par le Conseil
Consular Commission was defined in the follow·· de securite le 25 aotit 19471 , le mandat de la
ing manner (I am quoting point 5 of the resolu- Commission consulaire a ete defini comme suit,
" tion):
(je cite le point 5 de la resolution) :
((Invite les gouvernements des Etats memURequests the GQvernments members of the
bres du Conseil qui ont des representants consuCouncil who have career consular representatives in Batavia to instruct them to pre~re
laires de carriere a Batavia a "donner pour
jointly for the information and guidance of
instructions aces representants d'elaborer' enthe Security Council reports on the situation
semble, pour informer et eclairer le Conseil de
"in the Republic of Indonesia following the resosecurite, des rapports sur la situation existant
lution of the Council of 1 August 1947, such
dans la Republique d'Indonesie, conformement
reports to cover the observance of ,the ceasea la resolution du'Conseil en date du 1er aotit
fire orders and the conditions prevailing in
1947, ces rapports devant porter sur l'execution
areas under military occupation or from which
des ordres de cesser le feu et sur les conditions
armed forces now in· occupation may be withregnant da~~ les regions occupees militairement
drawn by agreement between the parties".
Oil desquelles pourront etre retirees, par accord
entre ·les parties, des forces armees aetuellement
en occupation."
I believe that the task we gave the Consular
Je' crois q~e la tache qu~ nous avions confiee a
Commission has been fulfilled by their sending us la Commission consulaire a ete remplie, du fait
the report. I regret to say the Security Council que cette derniere nous a adresse son rapport. Je
has not taken any action on that report, and there- regrette de devoir dire que le Conseil de securite
by, much of the Commission'sla:'_ lr has been n'a pris aucune mesure a la suite de ce rapport,
frustrated.
et que, par consequent, la plupart des efforts de la
Commission ont ete faits en pure perte.
While I do not intend to move for a dissoluBien que je n'aie pas I'intention de deposer une
tion of the Commission, I wish to suggest that the motion tendant a la dissolution de la Commission,

,"

~ See Official Records of the Sec1trity Council, Second
Year, No. 83.
"

1 Voir les Proces-verbawr 0 fficiels ill Col/seil d
...e S.eclt-~
ritf, Deuxieme Annee, No 83.
.
.
--

•

2741
problem of the future of this Commission should I je tiens a. indiquer qu'il conviendrait de remettre
be discussed at a later stage, especially when we a plus tard la discussion sur ce qu'elle doit deve'come to a discussion of the letter from the Gov- ni!;, tout au moins jusqu'au moment ou, nous
ernment of Indonesia1 in which a request if -nade aborderons l'examen de la lettre emanant du Gbufor the constitution of a commission of i..:e Se- vernement de l'Indonesie, 1 par laquelle le Gouvercurity Council, and when we decide what body nement republicain demande au Conseil de secu:rite
will take the next steps on behalf of the Se- de constituer une commission, et apres que nous
curity Council.
aurons decide quel autre organisme sera charge
de prendre des mesures ulterieures au nom du
Conseil de securite.
The PRESIDENT: A point of order was raised by
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Le reprethe representative of Poland demanding that a sentant de la Pologne a presente une motion d'orresolution proposed by him, which was tabled, dre en demandant qu'une resolution, proposee par
be presented to the Security Council before the lui, et dont le texte a ete depose, soit soumise au
pending resolution. This point was overruled im·, Conseil .de securite avant la resolution en cours
mediately under rule 30 of the rules of procedure, d'e...'Camen. Cette motion d'ordre a ete rejeh~e imand it now becomes the duty of the Pre~ident, un- mediatement' en vertu de l'artic1e 30 du reglement
der the same rule, to submit his ruling to the Se- interieur, et it m'incombe maintenant, en ma quacurity Counc~l for immediate decision, because lite de President, conformement au meme article,
the representative of Poland has challenged the ..!l'en referer au Conseil de securite pour qu'il
ruling of the President.
prenne immediatement une decision, etant donne
que le representant de la Pologne a conteste la
decision presidentielle.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Sovjet Socialist Republics) : I should like to speak on two questions:
the first concerns the point of order, and the second concerns the Consular Commission.
I think the Polish resolution was Dresented to
"the Security Council before the resolution of the
Sub-Committe was received. The title of the
resolution prepared by the Sub-Committee reads
as follows: "Text of the resolution on the Indonesian question submitted by' the Sub-Committee appointed ,by the Security Council at. its 217th
meeting, 31 October 1947". It is called a resolution,
not an amendment. That is natural. The United
States resolution was not voted at the two hundred and seventeenth meeting, but it was decided
to establish the Sub-Committee in order to prepare a joint resolution, if possible. Such a new
joint resolution-and I stress this wOl!'d "resolutton"- was prepared by the Sub-Committee.
I draw the President's g.ttention to this fact.
Perhaps he will find it possible not to insist on
his ruling, especially in vrew of the fact that no
niatter when 'the Polish resolution is voted on,
the results, as far as I can judge, will prabably be
the same. So what is the difference? Why disrupt
the usual order, the usual procedure? I think we
must take a decision first on the Polish resolution, since it was submitted first to the Security
Council, and then on the resolution from the SubCommittee.
Since the question of the Consular Commission
was touched on in connexion with our discussion
t09ay, I should like to suggest that we take no
~ecision, either positive or negative, on this questIon at this moment. I do not consider the time
appropriate for such a decision.
We received a letter from the Government of
the Indonesian Republic, which was not put on
the agenda. I do not know why, but the fact is that
this letter was not put on the agenda. It probably
will be included in the agenda (If one of the next
meetings of the Council, and will be 'considered,

M. GROMYKO ~Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais prendre la parole sur deux questions: il
s'agit en premier lieu de la motion d'ordre, en
second lieu de la Commission consulaire.
J'estime q~e la resolution de la Pologne a ete
pres~ntee au Conseil de securite avant que celuici n'ait rec;u la resolution du Sous-Comite. Cette
derniere porte pour titre: "Texte de la resolution
sur la question indonesienne presentee par le SousCQmite nomme par le Conseil de securite lors de
sa 217eme seance tenue le 31 octobre 1947". Il
s'agit done, d'apres le titre, d'une resolution et
non d'un' amendement. Et c'est naturel. La rcSsolution des Etats-Unis n'a pas ete mise aux voix
lors de la deux cent dix-septieme seance; on a
decide par contre d'instituer un Sous-Comite qui
serait charge de preparer, si possible, une resolution commune. Le Sous-Comite a prepare cette
nouvelle resolution commune, et j'insiste sur le
mot "resolution".
J'attire l'attention dil President sur ce point.
Peut-etre lui sera-t-il possible de ne pas maintenir sa decision, notamment si l'on tient compte
du fait que, quel que soit le moment ou la resolution polonaise sera mise aux voix, le resultat, .pour
. autant que je puisse en juger, sera le meme. Airisi,
queUe difference cela f~it-il? Pourquoi s'ecarter
de l'ordre habituel, de la procedure habitueIle?
J'estime qu'il' nous faut d'abord prendre une decision sur la resolution polonaise, celle-ci ayant
ete presentee la premiere au Conseil de securite,
et passer ensl1ite a la resolution du Sous-Comite.
Puisque la question de la Commission cbnsulaire a ete abordee a. l'occasion de notre discussion
d'aujol1rd'hui, je voudrais sugg~rer que noUs ne
prenions, pour le moment, aucune decision a son
egard, dans un sens ou dans l'autre. J e ne pense
pas qu'i! soit opportl1n de prendre maintenant une
teUe decisiom
Nous avons rec;u une lettre du Gouvernement
de la Republique d'Indonesie, et I'examen de cette
lettre n'a pas ete inscrit a. l'ordre du jour. ]'ignore
les motifs de cette omission, mais it est un fait,
c'est que l'examen de la lettre ne figure pas a
l'ordre du jour. Il sera probablement inscrit a

l See Official Records of the Security COllncil, Second
1 Voir les Proces-'i!erbawr: officiels du. COllseil de SeC1/.Year, No. 102, 216th meeting.
. 1'ite, Deuxieme Annee, No 102, 216eme seance.

-.-

...k

2742
l'ordre du jour de l'une desprochaines seances du
Conseil et celui-ci examinera alors la lettre; mais
il me semblerait logique d'etudier le sort de la
Commission consu1~re enmerae t~ps que l'on
etudiera la proposition indonesienne tendant a.
creer tine commission duConseil de. securite.
Comme vous vous en souvenez probableme.'1t,
le Gouvernement de I'Indonesie envisage, clans
cette lettre, de confier a.' ladite commission une
double tache: d'abord, cellede surveiller l'evolution g~nerale de la situation en rllldonesile, ensuite
cclle de surveiller et de controler les. operations
de retrait des troupes. Si la resolution <;ommune
est adoptee, on, peut dire que la question du retrait des troupes aura fait. 1'0bjet d'tine deCiSion
negative, mais notre premiere tache demeure
quand meme a accomplir;' je veux parter de la
tache qui _consiste a. observer et a. cori,troler l'evolution generale de la situation en Indonesie. Je
n'ai fait cet expose que dans le senl but de demontrer que l'inscription a. 1'0rdre du jour de
l'examen de la lettre adressee au Conseil par le
Gouvemement de la Republique d'Indonesie et
la discussion de cette lettre sont necessaires, a
condition, bien enteridu, que le representant de la
Republique d'Indonesie nous invite a le faire.

It would be logical to consider the question of

th~ fate of the Consular Commission in connexion
with the consideration of the Indonesian prbp('~al

to establish' a commission of the Security' Council.

As you probably remember, the Indonesian
Government anticipates in this letter a two-fold
task' for such a commission: first, to supervise the
general situation in Indonesia, and second, to supervise and control the process of the withdrawal
of troop':>. One may say that the question of withdrawal of troops is being decided negatively if
this joint resolution is adopted, but our first task
still stands: the control and supervision of the
general situation in Indonesia. I have said this
only to show that inclusion and discussion of the
letter from the Indonesian Republic is necessary,
provided, of COUI1se, that the representativt of the
Indonesian Republic will request us to do so.

M. PAROD! (France): J'avais espere ce matin,
un' peu naivement probablement, que nous allions
aujourd'hui terminer nos debats et arriver a. une
decision. A la fin de la seance de ce matin, nous'
avons ete engages clans une nouvelle discussion,
a. .vrai dire assez contuse, jusqu'au, moment ou
le President a bien vouIu remettre de l'ordre en
rappelailt, d'abord, .que la question de competence
avait ete entierement reservee au cours de nos
debats precedents et, ens~ite, en decidant que nous
ne devions pas oUVrir a. nouveau une discussion
sur ce point. Quanta moi, je suis d'accord sur
ces deux regles que le President a bie~ voulu
formuler.
.
I shall confine myself now to making a brief
J e me bornerai maintenant a presenter une
observatiqn on the procedural question raised courte observation sur la question de procedure
just now by the Polish representative.
soulevee tout a l'heure par le representant de la.
Pologne.
'
At our two hundred and s,eventeenth meeting,
, Durant notre deux cent dix-septieme seance, le
the Polish representative asked that this resolu- representant de la Pologne avait demande que sa
tion should be voted on first. Persomilly, I would resolution fiit mise aux voix la premiere. J;'ersonhave been prepared to agree to this procedure;, but neUement, j'aurais ete dispose a approuver cette
it was decided that the Council should vote on procedu11e. Mais il a ete decide que le Conseil g'en
the resolutions in the order in.which they had been tiendrait a voter sur les resolutions dans l'ordre
submitted. The Polish representative did not insist ou elles avaient etepresentees. Le representant
that a different orderl should be followed. Today de la Pologne n'a pas insiste pour qu'un ordre
we are again asked to vote first on t.hePolish pro- differend ffltsuivi. Aujourd'hui, on nous demande
posal.
de nouveau qu'il soit vote d'abord sur la proposition de la Pologne.
"
I do not, attach very great importance to the
J e n'attache pas une tres grande iml?ortance a
ord~ in which we take resolutions but I think
la malliere dont nous prenons les resolutions, mais
that it is preferable, when a rule has been fixed, je erois preferable, lorsqu'une regIe a ete fixee, de
, to stick to that rule. For this reason of principle, s'en tenir a 'cette regIe. Je voudrais donc que,
I should prefer that' we abide by yesterday's de- pour cette raison de principe, nous nous en tecision on the order of voting.
nions a, la decision prise hier 'quant a l'ordre du
vote..
It is true that we have just been.told that we
Il,est vrai que l'on vient de nous dire que nous
are faced with a new decisiqn; In my opinion that sommes en presence d'une decision nouvelle. A
is a mistake and perhaps the S~b-Committee made. mon avis, ceci est une eri'eur, et peut-etre le Sousrather the same mistake in the text distributed Comite a-t-il un pet! commis cette erreur dans le
this morning, at our two hundred' and eighteenth texte distribue ce matin a. la deux cent dix-huimeeting.
tiemeseance.
What we asked the Sub-Committee to do was'
La tache que nous avions assignee au Sousto consider whether a certain number of amend- Comite etait d'examiner' si un certain nombre
ments to the United States resolution could not c!'amendements a la resolution des Etats-Unis ne
be ~erged in the text of that resolution. Unless 'pouvaient pas, etre fondus dans le texte de cett~
Mr. PAROD! (France) (translate(l. from
French) : I had hoped. thismoming, ~ little naively
perhaps, that we should finish our discussions today and reach a decision. At the end of this
lllorning's meeting we were engaged in a new
discussion, which was, in fact, rather confused,
until the President restored order first, by reminding us that the question of competence had
been entirely reserved in our earlier debates, and
then by ruling that we, should not re-open the discussion on that point. Personally, I agree with
those two rulings given by the President.

I

S-·j------------:;27;;43;-----

----~---

I rim mistaken, the Sub-Committee's task was
not to draft a resolution other tlian that presented
by the United States, but only to incorporate the
amendments into the latter. The fact that these
different texts have now been merge d' into one
does not change the character of the resolution
which is stilI the United States resolution plus
a certain number of amendments.
I therefore think that the nonnal order whiCh
we fiXed yesterday should be followed, and that
we should vote first on the resolution submitted
by'the Sub-Committee this morning, which is really
the United States resolution.
r repeat, I do not think it matters much either
way; but in these affairs of proced ure-wh ich I <lo
not know much about -I think it is preferable to
abide by an accepted decision, even if it is only
to avoid creating a ' certai.n feeling of insecurity
wJ1ich might arise if the reason for the ')rder in
which questions are taken up was no longer clear.
I therefore urge that we abide by the decision
taken yesterday and that we vote on the United'
States resolution 'first.
'1' '

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgiu m) (tra,nslated
, from F1'ench): I asked' to speak a moment ago
when a debate began on the question of competence; but since the Preside nt qas called, upon
me now, I should like to give my full support to
the opinion, formulated by the representative of
France, I think that the best way to cut short this
procedural debate would be to vote at once on the
appeal which has been made against the President's ruling.

resolution. Sauf erreur de, ma part, il ne, s'agissait pas de rediger uneres olution autre que la
resolution des Etats-Unis; l11ais seulement d'y integrer les amendements; le fait d'avoir maintenant
fondu ces divers' textes en un seul ne change pas
le c<J,ractere de la resolution, qui demem e la resolution des Etats-U nis augmentee d'un certain
nombre d'amendements.
Je pense doncq ue l'ordre normal que 11ou5
avions fixe hier doit etre suivi et que nous devons
voter d'abord sur la resolution presentee ce matin
par le Sous-Comite, qui en realite est lareso lution des Etats-U nis.
Je le repete, ceci n'est pas pour moi une qu~s­
tion import ante; mais, en ces matiere~ deproc edure, bit je suis du reste peu habile, j'estime preferable de nous en tenir cl une decision prise, ne futce que pour ne pas nous donner les uns aux
autres un certain sentiment d'insecurite, susceptible de naitre lorsque I'onne sait plus bien pourquoi les questions sont prises dans un ordre plu- '
tot que dans un autre. J'insist e pour que nous
110US en tenions cl la decision prise hier et pour
q~e nous votions d'abord sur la resolution des
Etats-Unis.
M,. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgiq ue): J'avais demande tout cl l'heure la parole, quand un debat
s'est engage sur la question de la 'competence. Mais
puisque le Preside nt me donne mainte nantla parole, 'je voudrais me rallier completement cl I'avis formule par le representant d~ la France. J e
pense que, pour couper court a ce debat 'de procedure; le meiIleur moyen serait de voter" immediatement sur I'appel qui a ete fait contre la decision presidentielle.
'
'
,

Colonel HODGSON (Austr alia) : I desire to supLe colonel HODGSON (Austr alie) (triuiuit de
port the ruling 9f the Preside nt for the followjng tanglai s) : Jetien s cl appuye
rla decision du Presireasons. Yesterday a:fternoon at our two hun- dent pour les motifs
dred and seventeenth meeting there was a mo~ cours de notre deux suivants. Hierap res-mi di at.i'
tion before the Council that the resolutions of the Conseit s'est trouve cent dix-septieme seance, le
United States and Poland should be considered faire examiner, au saisi d'une motion tendan t cl
meme titre, par le Sous-Comite,
by the S'ub-Col11mittee on,an equal basis. That mo- la resolu.tion des Etats-U
nis et celle de la Pologne.
tion was defeated, and the Sub-Committee had be- Cette motion a ete
repouss
ee, et ce matin, ' le
fore it this morning the United States resolution Sous- ':cmite n'avait
cl
examin
er que la resoluonly.
tion des Etats-Unis.
In the second place, the representative of PoEn second lieu, le representant de la Pologne
~and said yesterday that he would accept the rul- a
declare hier qu'il se soumettrait cl la decision
Ing of the President as to the order in which these du Presid ent
resolutions'should be voted. The Preside nt quoted tions seraien sur l'ordre dans lequel ces resolut mises aux voix. Le Preside nt a cirule
of the rules of procedure, and that was te'l'arti cle
du reglement interieui:, et ,le repre-:
accepted by the Polish representative; that ac- sentant polonai
s a donne s.on'ac cord; it desit ~
ceptance, however, he now wishes to reverse.
toutefois maintenant revenir sur cet accord.
So far as the resolution' before the Council is
En ce
concerned, the only reason it was referred to the le Conseilqui concerne lit resolution dont est saisi
, le
Sttb-Committee was that we could not reach agree- renvoyee au seul motif pour lequel elle avait ete
Sous..Comite est que nous n'avions
ment yesterday afternoon on the last paragraph. pu, hier
apres-m
idi, nous entendre sur ie texte
Therefore, the Sub-Committee had before it this dti dernier
paragraphe. Par consequent, le Sousmorning solely the United States resolution. It Comite
avait cl examiner, ee l11atin, uniquement
accepted without question the Chinese amend- la resolut
1
ments to paragraph 3, and, as we anticipated, it discussionsion des Etats-Unis. II a accepte sans
was only the last paragraph which was rewritten. sentes par les amend ements au paragraphe 3 prele representant de la Chinet, et comme
Consequently, the Sub-Committee's draft is es- nous l'avions
sentially and almost wholly the resolution which fait l'objet prevu, seulle dernier paragraphe a
d'une nouvelle redaction. Par conseWas before the Council yesterday afternoon.
quent, il s'agit somme toute, essentieUement' et
presque sans modification, de la resolution dont
etait saisi le Censeil hier apres-midi.
In .the, opinion of my delegation there is no
questlOn whatever that the ruling of the Preside nt queDe l'avis de ma delegation, on ne peut douter
la decision du Preside nt soit correcte. N ous
was correct. We feel there is no substance in the estimon
challenge 'to that ruling, and if every Preside nt tester s qu'il est absolument injusmfie de la conet nous penSQns que, si tous les presidents

32

y'See Official Records of the Sec1trit,J' COl/ncil, Second
ear, No. 102, 216th meeting.

_ ; &7; ' __ .,.

32

1 Voir les Proces-verba1tx offieiefs
dn Consei( de secttrite, Deuxieme Annee, No 102, 216eme seance.

~

ii

;'4

2744

avaient it prendre des' decisions aitssi indiscutables que cellequ~ a ete prise en la circonstance,'
le role du President serait vraiment Utl role facile.
.
. En ce qui concerne l'autre point, si je comprends
bien, une question de fond· a egalement ete soulevee it propos de ce. probleme de procedure, et
ma delegation approuve sans reserve l'interpretation du mandat de la Commission consulaire
donnee hier apres-midi par le President. Le Pr.esident a, en effet, cite la resolution du 25 aout,
·clans laquelle figurent explicitement les mots "des
rapports". Il est question de "rapports," au pluriel, et non d~l rapport sur l'ordre'de cesser le
feu. N ous n'avons jusqu'it present re<;u qu'un seul
rapport-':'au singulier-et, en outre, la resolution
qui nous est soumise porte encore sur l'ordre de
cesser le feu et sur les mesures a prendre pour le
faire executer. Par consequent, le role de la Comnlission n'est de toute evidence pas termine, et la
liquidation de cet organisme n'est pas a envisager.
En outre, nous lui canfions, par l'avant-clemier
paragraphe de la resolution dont nous sommes
saisis, des attributions cl'un caractere plus general; c'est-a-dire des attributions qui ne consistent pas seulement a enqueter et fa:ire rapport sur
l'execution de l'ordre de cesser le feu, mais a preter, d'une maniere generale, assistance a la Commission dehons offices pour l'accomplissement
de l'ensemble de ses travaux, en d'autres termes,
a lui preter egale!11ent assistance pour le reglement
definitif du probleme.
Pour ces divers (motifs, il nous est impossible
d'accepter l'interpretation que vient de donner le
representant de la Pologne. Toutefois, nous ne
voyons aUCUlle objection a faire figurer, clans le
premier paragraphe de la resolution que nous examinons, les mots "les resolutions. du Conseil du
ler' aout et du 26 aout 1947", comme l'a propose
le represe~tant de la Pologne, et nous estimons
qu'il serait correct de le faire, etant donne que
nous sommes en presence de deux resolutions
portant sur le meme st..]et.
J e voudrais ajouter seulement que, selon toute
probabilite, la difficulte resulte d'une negligence
ou plutot du manque de temps dont a souffert ce
matin le Sous-Comite, parce que nous n'avons pas
eu la possibilil.e de voir ce document dactylographie, ni le titre qui lui avait ete donne, avant
la reunion du Conseil. Nous n'avions certainement pas l'intention de considerer le document en
question comme representant une resolution nouvelle. Le Conseil constatera egalement, en voyant
le titre du document 5/594, que ce titre contient encore une autr~ inexactitude parce qu'il parte de "~e­
solution", alors qu'aucun sous-comite ne peut ni
'presenter, ni voter une resolution; talldis qu'il est
evident que si le Sous-Comite avait eu l'intention.
de preparer un texte nouveau,. il l'aurait intitule
"projet de resolution".

had to make a ruling as obvious as the ruling made
by the President on this occasion, then the position of the President would indeed be an easy one.
. "As to the other point, if I am in order, a question of substance has also been raised in this
matter of procedure, and my delegation agrees
entirely with the interpretation given by the President yesterday afternoon in regard to the Consular Commission, because he quoted the resolution of 25· August which specifically uses the term
"reports". It is a question of "reports" in the
plur.al-not a report on the cease-fire order. So
far we have only received one report-in the
singular-and, furthermore, this resolution before
us still deals with the cease-fire order and how
it can be given effect. Therefore the Commission's
role is obviously continuing, and -that body does
not come to ari end.
Moreover, in the next to the last paragraph of
the resolution before us, 'we give the Commission
a more general function-namely, a function not
only in connexion with observing and reporting
on the cea,se-fire order but one of general assistance to the. Committee of Good Offices in their
general work, that is, in the long-term settlement
as well.

For these reasons we cannot possibly accept
the interpretation just given by the representative
of Poland. How~ver, we should have no objection
to including in the first paragraph of the resolution before us the words "Council's resolutions of
1 August and '26 August", as suggested by the
Polish representative; and we think that would
be correct, because there were two resolutions
which .dealt with the same subject.
I should just like to add that probably this
present trouble was caused through carelessness
or, shall I say, lack of ,time on the part of the
Sub-Committee this morning, because we never
had a cnance to see this document typed out and
the heading given to it before the meeting of the
Council. It was certainly not our intention to re. gard this,' in point of time, as a new resolution.
The Council will also see that the heading of document 5/594 is still not correct, because it speaks
of "resolution", which.-no Sub-Committee can put
forward or carry; whereas, it is obvious that if
the Sub-Committee had intended it to be a new
resolution, it would have used the words "draft
resolution".
4

Sir Alexander CAIiOGAN (United Kingdom) : I
should like to say just a word on the question of
procedure, on which the President's ruling has
been challenged.
I~ seems to me that the matter. is absolutely
clear. No one has contested that the original
United States proposal was put", in before the
Polish proposal. When we 'came to discuss the
United States proposal, we f01!nd a number of
amendments to it. Purely as· a matter of convenience, the President himself. proposed that the
United States text and the amendments to it
sh(!)uld be remitted to a sub-committee to see

•

I

. Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je voudrais dire un mot seulement sur la question de procedure a propos de
laquelle la decision du President a ete contestee.
Le probleme me semble absolument clair. Personne n'a conteste que la proposition initiale des
Etats-Unis ait ete presentee avant la proposition
de la delegation polonaise. Quand nouS avons
aborde la diScussion de la proposition des EtatsUnis, nous nous sommes trouves en presence d'un
certain nombre d'amendements a cette resolution.
Pour des raisons pratiques uniquement, le President a lui-meme propose que le: texte des Etats-

~ ~
....•

•

2745
whether an agreement could be reached. I fina,in Unis et les amendements soient renvoyes a tin
referring to the verbatim record of the proceedings sous-comite afin que celui-ci examine les possiof our two hundred and seventeenth meeting, that, bilites d'aboutir a un accord. J e constate en lisant
after some discussion, I said the following: "I le compte rendu stenographique des debats de
just wish'to say something to clarify the situation. notre deux cent dix-septieme seance, qu'apres avoir
\Ve are, at this riloment, discussing this proposal discute la guestion je me suis exprime comme suit:
to set up a sub-committee to try to unify these "Je voudrais simplement ajouter quelques mots
amendments." I subsequently proposed the ex- afin cl'eclaircir la situation. Nous discutom: en ce
tension of the terms of reference, which was, de- moment la proposition tendant a instituer un SOtlSfeated, and after that, I said: "We are left there- comite charge de concilier ces amendements".
fore, with a Sub-Committee to examine the United J'ai propose ensuite d'elargir le mandat du SousStates draft resolution and the amendments which Comite, et cette proposition a ete repoussee; aprf>s
have been moved to it." This was purely a matter quoi j'ai declare: "Il nous reste donc un Sous-Coof convenience, and, because we adopted that mite charge d'examiner le projet de resolution des
mechanical procedure, I do not think tliat deprives Etats-Unis ainsi que les amendements dont it a fait
the United States proposal of its proper priority. l'objet." Il s'agissait donc d'une simple question
I think a lot of trouble has arisen, as pointed out de methode pratique, et je ne pense pas que le fait
by the representative of Australia, from the' head- , d'avoir adopte cette procedure prive la'prop-osition
ing of the text submitted by the Sub-Committee.
des Etats-Unis de la priorite qui lui revient. Je
pense que beaucoup de difficult,es proviennent,
comme l'a fait remarquer le representant de l'Australie, du titre qui a ete donne au texte soumis
par le Sous-Comite.
The 'PRESIDENT: Before calling upon the representative of Poland, I wish to state the parlia~ent-'
ary situation. I am afraid there may be a misunderstanding. No matter what decision should be
taken upon the resolution before us, it is my intention to put the resolution offered by Poland.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'miglais) : Avant de
donner la parole au representant de la Pologne,
je voudrais indiquer ou nous en sommes du point
de vue de la procedure. J e crains que nous nous
trouvions en presence d'u!! malentendu. QueUe
que soit la decision que prendra leConseil ence
qui concerne la resolution dont il est saisi, j'ai
l'intention de mettre egalement aux voix la reso- .
lution proposee par la Polbgne.

Mr. KATZ-SUpIY (Poland): I wish to thank
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (trCuluit de l'anthe President, first of all, for his last remark and glais) : Je tiens tout d'abord a remercier le Prefor the assurance he has given me. I must ex- sident des dernieres paroles qu'il a. prorioncees
pres,s quite clearly that I never had the slightest et de Fassurance qu'il me donne. Je dois preci-'
doubt that the President would put my resolution ser que je n'ai jamais doute le moins du monde,
to a vote. I did not expect that my appeal to the ,que le President mettrait ma resolution aux voix.
Council to rever:;e the President's ruling would Je ne prevoyais pas que l'ap~'e1 que j'ai adresse
cause such a prolonged discussion, but I must au Conseil en' 'lui demandant de changer la destate that even the prolonged discussion and the cision du President donnerait lieu _a une discusmany arguments presented did not convince me s~on aussi prolongee, mais je dois dire ici que
that I was wrong. I state, at this point that it is meme cette discussion prolongee et les" nombreux;
not essential to me whether the Polish resolution argtlments qui ont ete invoques ne m'ont pas peris voted upon first or whether it is voted upon suade que j'avais tort. J e declare maintenant qu'il
second.
'
.
m'est indifferent que 1'0n vote sur la resolution polonaise en premier lieu ou en second lieu.
Sir Alexander Cadogan~ who presided over our
Sir Alexander Cadogan, qui a, preside nos reu.:.
meetings last montv with great ability and im- nions le mois dernier avec une grande maitrise et
partiality, was prepared yesterday, although with -beaucoup d'impartialite, etait dispose hier, quoi":
a certain reluctance, to put my resolution to a queavec une certaine repugnance, a' mettre ma
voty first. When I said that I', fully adhered to resolution aux voix la premiere. Quand j'ai dit
!ne rulings of the President, I meant rulings with- ' que je me soumettais entierement aux decisions
111 rule 32. I am concerned only with the question
du President, je pensais aux decisions conformes
of the rules of procedure, and it does not matter a l'article 32. Je ne m'attache qu'au respect dti
whether my resolution is voted on fir~t or second. reglementinb~rieur et le moment ou ma resoluBut according to rule 32, I think the Council tion sera mise aux voix. importe peu. Mais, en
would not be in order if it reversed the procedure tenant compte des dispositions de l'article 32, je
I .suggested.
pense que le Conseil commettrait une irregularite s'il adoptait une procedure contraire a celle
que j'ai indiquee.
I do not .un~erstand the Australian representaJ e ne comprends pas l'observation du repretive's remark about "draft resolution". I' think sentant de l'Australie apropos du "projet de ree.very. resolution is a draft resolution up to tqe solution". J e pense que toute resolution est un pro- time It comes to a vote: I could quite freely make jet de resolution jusqu'au moment ou elle est votee.
any amendments I wished fo make to that resolu- J'aurais -toute latitude pour presenter tous les
tion, and the Council would have to discuss them. amendements qu'il me plairait a cette resolutiori et
The fact that the word "draft" was omitted be- le Conseil devrait les discuter. L'omission du mot
~ore the word "resolution" here is simply a typ- ;'projet" avant le mot "resolution" n'est, dans le
I~g error. I would agree to drop the entire ques- cas actuel, qu'une erreur de frappe. Je renoncet~on ~~ the one condition "that we caU thisresolll- rais volontiers a poursuivre cette discussion, a
tion, Resolution on the Indonesian question sub- condition que 1'on intitulat cette resolution: "Re-

...

;--

s",*

2746
solution sur la question indonesienne presentee par
la delegation des Etats-Unis et amendee par d'autres delegations". Dans cecas, je n'aurais aucune
objection ~. formuler. La s~ule ,chose a laqueUe je
tienne c'est it l'application, dans ce cas, des dispo-.
sitions de l'article 32.
, Le PRESIDENT (tradttit de l'anglais) : Quelqu'un
The PRESIDENT: Is there any objection to that
amendment?
a-t-il une objection cl formuler contre cet amendement?
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (tradl,~it de 1'a.l1Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): It is not an
amendment; it isa suggestion to the President. glais) : It ne s'agit pas d'un amendement mais d'utie suggestion que je soumets au President.
Le PRESIDE~ (traduit de 1'anglais): LaissezThe PRESIDENT: Please allow me time to put
it in proper form. I can assure .the representative moi le temps s'il vous plait de lui donner la form~
qui convient. Je puis assurer le representant de la
of Poland that his wish will be carried out.
Pologne que l'on satisfera it sa demande.
I
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (tradttit de l'a·nMr. KATZ-SUCHY. (Poland): It is not an
amendment. I cannot put any amendment to this glais): It ne s'agit pas d'un amendement. Je ne
resolution because I oppose the entire resolution, . puis proposer aucun amendement it cette resolution, parce que je m'oppose a l'ensemble de la reincluding the title.
.
solution, titre compris.
Le PRESIDENT (trflduitde 1'anglais) ; J'affirine
The PRESIDENT: ~ assure the representative'of
Poland that the P.resident will protect him in any au representant de la Pologne que j'assurerai le
position he takes. I accept, as President, the sjtg- respect de ses droits, queUe que soit la position
gestion of the' representative of Poland and make qu'il adopte:,J'accepte, en ma qtialite de President,
the proposal myself, that the title of document la suggestion du representant de la Pologne, et je
S/594 be. as follows: "Text of the resolution on· propose moi-meme de modifier comme suit le tithe Indonesiap question submitted by the United tre du document S/594: "Texte de la resolution
States and amended by the Sub-Committee ap- sur la question .indonesienne presentee par les
pointed by the Security Council at its 217th meet- Etats-Unis et amertdee par le Sous-Comite noming, 31 October 1947".
me par le Cc!nseil de securite lors de sa 217eme
seance tenue le 31 octobre 1947".
Puisque cette proposition ne souleve· aucune
As there is no objection to this proposal, it is
accepted.
objection, elle est adoptee.
'M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de 1'anMr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I have one small
remark to make which 'has nothing to do with the glais) : Je voudrais formuler une petite observaquestion we have been discussing. The represen- tion qui n'a aucun .rapport avec la question que
tative of Australia previously asked that after the nous venons de discuter. Le representant de l'Ausdate "1 At,tgust 1947" in the first paragraph, the tralie a demande, tout a l'heure, que 1'0n ajoute
words "and 26 August 1947" be added, stating that au premier paragraphe de la resolution, apres la
this request was made on my sugg~stion. I wish date "du ler aotit 1947" les mots "et du 26 aout
to state that I never suggested any addition to this 1947", indiquant que cette demande etait formulee
resolution. I simply stated that that· resolution sur ma suggestion. Je tiens a declarer que je n'ai
failed to take any action on the Council's resolu- jamais sug-gere aucune addition a cette resolution.
tion of 1 August 1947, after stating that the said J'ai simplement indique que ladite resolution ne
prevoyait aucune mesure en ce qui' concemeta
resolution had not been fully effective.
resolution du Conseil en date du ler aotit 1947,
./
apres avoir declare que ladite resolution n'avait
pas ete completement suivie d'effet.
Le PRESIDENT (tradu-it de 'l'an.glais) : Void Oll
The PRESIDENT: The parliamentary situation
is this: the question now pending is the resolution en sont les debats: la question actuellement en
cours d'examen est la resolution du Sous-Comite
from the Sub-Committee that is before us.
dont nous sommes saisis.
M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'a1t,qlais): Je
Mr. LOPEz(Colombia) : I ~nd that I have unwitttngly contributed to the delay in taking a de- constate que j'ai involontairement contribue au
cision on this resolution. I find that I have not retard que l'on a mis a prendre une decision sur
been clear in my thinking or in my expressioq. cette resolution. J e constate que soit ma pensee, soit
Therefore, I should like to make a few additional la maniere dont .ie l'ai eXprimee, ont manque de
remarks.
nettete. Je voudrais, par ~onsequent,' ajouter quelques observations a ce que j'ai deja dit. .
It n'entrait pas dans mes intentions de rouvrir
It was not my intention to reopen the discuscussion on the competence of the Council; So far la discussion sur la competence du Conseit En ce
as .I am concerned, that was settled some time qui me concerne, cette question a ete· reglee it y
ago. I may be wrong, but I have never doubted -a. quelque temp's.. It se peut que j'aie tort, mais la
that the Council is competent to deal with this competence du Conseil pour traiter cette question
question. What I said was that if the Council were n'a jamais fait de doute pour moi. Ce que j'ai dit,
to accept this proposal as it stands, it would· be, c'est que, si le Conseil adoptait cette proposition
accepting, by implication, the views of those who dans sa forme act\lelle, il se rallierait implicitement
have brought into question the competence of au. point de vue de ceux qui ont mis en doute Sa
competence. Voila, je crois, ce que j'ai declare.,
the Council. I think that is what I said.
J e comprends .maintenant que j'aurais dti dIre
r now realize that I should have said that we
could not accept the proposal as it stands, unless que nous ne pouvions pas adopter la proposition
mitted by the delegation of the United States and
amended by qther delegations". I would have no
other object~on in that case. My only concern is
that rule 32 should be applied in this case.

ttf'

• •.•- ...---------.----2-7-47--·~--~-~'
we accepted that implication. I am unable to un- dans sa forme actuelle a. moins d'en accepter en
derstand how we c~1.11 simply say that we take note meme temps tout ce qu'elle implique.. Je ne v?is
tnac the l'esolULions or tne ;:,ecurity 'Council have pas comment nous pouvons nous contet;1ter de dIre
not been complied wit4, and be content to do only que nous prenons acte 'de ce que les resolutions
that. I believe if we take that position, the logical du Conseil de securite n'ont pas ete suivies d'effet et
thing would be to do .what the Polish representa- 110US contenter de ce geste. Je suis persuade que
tive proposed-that IS, go on to say that the si nous constations ce manquement, la consequence
Council calls the attention of the Government of logique en serait de faire ce qu'a propose le reprethe Netherlands.to the fact that the failure to com- sentant de la Pologne, c'est-a.-dire de declarer
ply with the provisional measures shall, under ensuite que le Conseil attire I'attention du GouverArticle 40 of the Charter, be taken into account nement des Pays-Bas sur le fait que le Conseil de
by the Security Council, and so on.
securite tiendra compte, en vertu de l'Article 40
de la Charte, .de la non execution de ces mesures
provisoires, et ainsi de suite.
Speaking more concretely, my idea is that this
En termes plus explicites, je suis d'avis' que
resolution would be satisfactory if we left our part cette resolution serait formulee en termes satisfai-,
of th~ first paragraph and all of the second para- sants si nous supprimions une partie du premier
paragraphe et la totalite du second, et la redigions
graph, and have it read a~ follows:
comme suit:
{{The Security Council,
, .
{(Le Conseil de securite,
{{Having received and taken note of the report·
{(Ayant ete saisi et. ayant pris acte du rapport
of the Consular Commission dated 14 October de la Commission consulaire en date du 14'octobre
1947;
.
1947;
Calls upon the parties concerned forthwith to
{{Invite les parties interessees a. se consulter
consult with each other ..." and so on.
immediatement. . .. " et ainsi de suite.
We would leave out in the first paragraph of
Il s'agirait done d'omettre, dans le premier pathe resolution, "indicating that the Council's reso- ragraphe de la resolution, les mots "indiquant que
ltiti011 of 1 August 1947, relating to the cessation la resolution du Conseil du ler aout 1947, relative
of. hostilities, has not been fully effective", and it la cessation des hostilites, n'a pas He compleleave out the whole second paragraph, ({having tement suivie d'effet", et la totalite du deuxieme
taken note that, according to the report, no at- paragraphe, "Ayant pris acte de ce que ce rapport·
• tempt was made by either side to come to an agree- signale que les deux parties n'ont fait aucnne ten-J
ment with ·the other about the means of giving tative pour conclure .un accord sur les. moyens
effect to that resolution".
.
de donner effet a. cette resolution".
J e pretends que nous ne 'pouvons nous conMy contention is that we cannot be content to
make that statement, without doing something tenter de faire cette declaration sans prendre auabout it. Of course, if a majority of the Security cune mesure a. cet egard. Evidemment, si la maCouncil thinks otherwise, and is satisfied to note jorite du Conseil de securite'est d'un autre avis, et
that the recommendations of the Council have not se contente de prendre acte de ce que les recomheen l:omplied with, and does not want to do any- mandations du Conseil n'ont pas ete suivies d'.effet,
thing about it, I bow to that situation and will et ne desire prendre aucune mesure a cet egard,
simply say that I regret very much that the Se- je m'incline devant cet etat de choses, et je me
curity Council takes that position.
contenterai' d'exprimer mes tres vifs regrets de .
voir le Conseil de securite adopter cette attitude.
Si nous supprimons les parties de la resolution
If we leave out the portions of the resolution
which I have already indicated, I wish to state que j'ai deja. indiquees ci-dessus, 'je signale que la .
that the resolution could be further amended by an rescilution pourrait etre encore modifiee en ajouaddition at the end of the penultimate paragraph, tant, a. la fin de l'avant-dernier paragraphe, la
to read as follows: "which the Security Council phrase suivante: "it laquelle le Conseil de securite
expects to see fully and faithfully complied with espere voir le Gottvernement' des Pay-Bas et le
by the Netherlands Government and the Govern- Gouvernement de la Repuhlique d'Indonesie se
ment of the Republic of Indonesia".
confortl1er lovalement et sans reserve"..
If the Security Council should agree to strike . Si le Conseil de securite accepte de' supprimer
out 'the part of the fir~t paragraph, which I indi- la partie du premier paragraphe que j'ai indiquee,
cated as well as the whole of the second paragraph de supprimer tout le second paragraphe et d'inand insert the addition that I just mentioned, I serer les quelques mots nouveaux que je viens d'in-,
s~ould be extremely glad to vote for this resolu- diql,ler, je voterai de grand coeur en fayeur de cetbono
te resolution. .
.
':
\

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French) : I admit that I find it a little difficult to
~nderstand the Colombian delegation's observatIons. I think that is because·I do not read into the
second paragraph of the text to which he objects
the intentions his delegation sees there.
I cannot see how the second paragraph would
settle the question of competence one way or the
other. Having said that, although I am a little
embarrassed at my failure to understand, I think
t~a~, so far as I am concerned, the two suggestions
w~lch the· Colombian representative has made are
qUJte acceptable; I cannot see that they alter the
sense of the text.

~JII@.'~ :..,' '~." ,.

M. PARODI (France): J'avoue avoir un 'peu de
peine a comprendre les observations presentees
par la delegation de la Colombie. Je pense que
cela tient a ce que je ne vois pas, dans le deuxierite
alinea du texte incrimine, les intentions qu'elle
y voit eUe-meme.
Je n'arrive pas a. comprendre en quoi le deuxieme alinea trancherait d'une maniere quelconque,
dans un sens ou dans l'autre, la question de compe,;.
tence. Cela dit, hien que le fait de ne pas comprendre me gene un peu, je crois qu'en ce qui me
concerne, les deux suggestions faites par le representant de la Colombie sont par.faitement acceptahIes: je ne vois pas qu'elles changent le sens du
texte.
..

2748·

I should like' it to be fully understood, how- . J e voudrais·seulement. qu'il soit bien entendu
ever, that we keep to the position which thePresi- que nous restons sur la position deja indiquee par
dent has already indicated and that the question. le President, et que la question de competence resof competence remains entirely reserved. On this te entierement reservee. Moyennant quoi j'accepte
condition I willingly accept, for my part, the sug- . volontiers, en ce qui me concenie, les suggestions
gestions before us. But it must be understood, I qui nous sont faites~ Mais il reste bien entendu
, repeat,' that the question of competence is re- je le repete, que la question de competence est
served.
.
reservee.
.
Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French) : The amendment proposed by th~
Colombian representative is not, in itself, open to
any serious objections, although, for my part; I
,do not see that it is either opportune or necessary.
However, since the Colombian representative in
forinulating his amendment linked it to the question of competence, I am obliged to repeat, in my
turn, the express reservations which the representative of France has just made.
At the beginning of the meeting I asked to
speak because of the remarks made by the USSR
representative and the 'conclusions which he drew
from the fact that on 26 August last the Security
Council rejected a' Belgian proposal that the International Court of Justice should be asked to
give an opinion on the question of competence.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): L'amendement propose par le representant de la Colombie
n'appelle pas, en soi, de serieuses objections, quoique, pour ma part, je n'en aperc;oive ni l'opportunite ni la nece~e. Toutefois, comme le representant de la Colombie a formule son amendernent
en le liant a la question de la competence, je me
vois oblige de reiterer a mon tour les expresses
reserves que le represen~ant de ·la France a faites
tout a l'heure.
J'avais, au debut de la seance, demande la parole a la suite de remarques presentees par le representant de l'URSS et des conclusions qu'il avait
tirees du fait qu'une propoeition de la' Belgique
avait ete rejetee par le Conseil de seG~rite le 26
aout dernier, proposition tendant a demander l'avis de la Cmir intemationale de Justice sur la
question de competence.
.
In rejecting thi~ proposal, the Council decided
En rejetant cette proposition, le Conseil a seule.:
only whether the Court's opinion should be asked ment tranche laqu~stion de savoir s'il y avait lieu
on this subject: it did not decide'the actual ques- de demander a ce~ujet l'avis de la Cour. Mais
tion of conipetence. On the contrary, it was ex- le Conseil n'a nullerpent tranche la question de la
pressly stated in the Security Council on that oc- competence elle-meme. Au contraire, il fut excasion-a statement which has been repeated many pressement declare an Conseil de secui."ite a cette
times, and of which the President has reminded occasion--declaration maintes fois reiteree, comus-that the question of competence remained me l'a rappele lui-meme le President-que la
open and was reserved.
question de competence restait ouverte et reservee.
As far as the Belgian delegation is concerned,
En ce qui concerne la delegation belge, elle ne
it could consent to the resolution only on the ex- poitrrait donner son consentement a ·la ~esolution
press condition that the competence of the Se- que sous la conditionexpresse que la competence
curity Council should be reserved and should in du Conseil de securite demeure reservee et ne soit
no way be determined by this resolution, any en rien tranchee par cette resolution, pas plus Ql1'elmore than by the other resolutions which the . le ne le fUt par aucune des resolutions que le ConCouncil has so far adopted in this matter.
seiI a adoptees jusqu'a maintenant dans cette af. faire.

The PRESIDENT: It seems almost unnecessary
for the President to rep'eat that the competence or
jurisdiction of the Security Council is not in queg--·
tion; it is .not before us. The sole question before
us is the resolution to which I have reterred time
and time again. Whether we strike out those words
and add the ones suggested, or whether that is
not dorie, there can be no legal inference with respect to the competence of the Security Council.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Il me semble presque inutile de repeter que la question de la
competence, ou de la juridiction, du Conseil de
securite ne se pose pas; nous n'e.n sommes pas
saisis. Le' seul point que nous ayons a examiner
est la resolution dont j'ai fait mention a. de nombreuses reprises. Le iait de supprimer ou non les
termes signales et d'ajouter ou non ceux qui nous
ont ete proposes, ne peut avoir juridiquement d'influence sur la question et la competence du Conseil de securite.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia) : I merely wish to
say that my delegation appreciates the idea con- l'anglais) : J e me contenterai de declarer que ma
tained in the remarks of the representative of Co- delegation n'est pas indifferente a l'idee contenue
lombia-that is, why mention omissions into our·· dans les observations du representant de la Copreamble and tnen do nothing about those omis- lombie; pourquoi, en effet, parler expressement
sions? We welcome the proposed amendments of de manquements dans notre preambule et ne prenthe representative of Colombia and we shall sup- dre ensuite aucune mesure a l'egard de ces manquements? N ous accueillons favorablement les
port them.
amendements proposes par le representant de la
Colombie et nous les appuierons. \

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated' from
French) .: I am still a little troubled at my inability to understand toe present discussion more
clearly. The second paragraph of the resolution
.states that ". . .no attempt was made by either
side to come to an agreement with the other about

M. PARODI (France) : Je continue a etre un ~u
inquiet de ne pas y voir plus clair dans la diSCUSSIOn
actuelle. Le deuxieme alinea de la resolution constate que ". . . les deux parties n'ont fait aucune
tentative pour conclure un accord sur les moyens
de donner effet
cette resolution". Et toute

a

lirftI

•

2749
the means of giving effect to that resolution", and
the whble of the rest of the resolution draws
conclusions from this statement, particularly by
'inviting the pa~s to consult witl). each other.
Hence, I do not quite understand the observation
which has been made and which has just been
supported.

suite de la resolution tire des consequences de
cette constatation, en particulier en invitant les
parties a se consulter. J e ne comprends dOl\'c pas
bien l' observation qui a ete presentee et qui vient
d'Hre appuyee.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): I think it is highly
M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
necessary to insist on my point. I do not want to J e pense qu'il est absolumeht· indispensable que
have this admission ip.cluded in the resolution j'insiste sur ce que j'ai dit; je ne veuxpas que 1'on
without doing something about it. I believe that constate, dans la resolution, un manquement, sans
once we accept the fact that a resolution of the faire quoi que ce soit pour y remedier. Je SlUS conSecurity Council has not been complied with, we vaincu que du moment ou nous avons admis qu'une
should do something about it. That is my point. . resolution du Conseil desecurite n'a pas ete suivie d'effet, il nous fautagir. Telle est ma maniere
de voir.
I am not saying that it is up to one side or two
J e ne dis pas que l'une des parties ou les Ijeux
sides. I know that both sides have failed to com- parties soient coupables: J e sais qu'artcune des deux
ply fully with the resolution of the Security Coun- parties ne s'est conformee entierement a la resocil. But my point is that once we make a clear lution du. Conseil de securite, mais j'estime que,
statement to that effect, the Security Council du moment que nous precisons ce point, l~ Conshould do something about it. That is why I pro- seil de securite doit prendre des mesures en conposed that this part should be omitted, so as to sequence. C'~st pourquoi je propose de supprim.er
facilitate matters and see if we could come to a cette partie de la resolution de. maniere a faciliter
decision this afternoon.
les choses et· essayer de prendre une decision cet
apres-midi. .
:NJr.• PAROD! (France) (translated from
French) : The point which still does not seem to
me to be clarified is this: it is quite true that in
its second paragraph the resolution states that
something has not been done; but the purpose of
all the rest of the resolution and, in particular, the
paragraph which immediately follows, is to invite
the parties to do what the second paragraph says
they have not done. It seems to me- that, in this
form, the resolution is quite satisfactory..

M. PARODI (France) : Voici, d'une'maniere tres
precise, le point qui pour moi reste en suspens: il
est exact que, clans son deuxieme paragraphe, la
resolution constate que quelque chose n'a PCl;s ete
fait. Mais toute la suite de la resolution, notamment
le paragraphe qpi suit immediatement, est fait pour
inviter les parties a accomplir ce que le deuxieme
alinea constate qu'elles n'ont pas accompli. 11 me
semble que, sous cette forme; la resolution est
tres satisfaisante.

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (tradu..it de l'anglais):
Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): I regret to take more
d the Council's time, but it seems clear to me--I .J e regrette de devoir retenir encore 1'attention du
fail to grasp what the French representative meant Conseil; mais il me semble evident (et j'avoue ne
-that the Council, in view of the report, can pas saisir ce qu'a voulu dire le representant d~ la
call 'upon the parties to consult with each other, France) que le Conseil peut, en raison des conwithout saying why it calls upon them to consult clusionsdu rapport, inviter les parties inh:\ressees a
with each other. It is not necessary to say that we se concerter sans indiquer' les mi)tifs qui l'incitent
invite them to consult with each other because they a formuler cette invitation. !l n'est pas necessaire
have failed to do so before. I do not see the point. de declarer que nous les inviti)ns se concerter
The Council can call upon' them to consult with parce qu'elles se sont abstenues de le faire juseach other, because they have failed to do so 'or qu'ici. Je ne saisis pas la difficulte. Le Conseil peut
without their havting failed to do so.
inviter les parties a se concerter, qu'elles se"soient
9U non abstenu de le faire.

a.

The PRESIDENT: The situation is such that the
President is obliged to present the amendments
proposed by the representat,ive of Colombia tl? the
vote.
A vote was taken by show ofhands. There were
5 votes in favour, none against and 6 abstentions.
The amendments were not adopted, having failed
to obtain the afJirn.tative votes of seven members.
Votes for: Australia Brazil, China, Colombia,
Syria.
.

Abst~;ttions: Belgium, France, Poland, Uni~n
of ~ovlet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
Umted States of Ametica.
.

.

Le PRESIDENT (iraduit de l'anglais) : Dans ces'
conditions, le President se voit force de mettre
au...'C voix les amendements proposes par le representant de la Colombie.
, Il est procede au vote cl main levee. Il y a 5 voix
pour, aucune contre et 6 abstentions. N J ayant pas
obtmu le vote afJirmatif de sept membres les
amendements ne sont pas adoptes.
J

Votent pour: Australie, Bresil, Chine, Colombie, Syrie.
Abstentions: Belgique, France, Pologne, Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, RoyaumeDni, Etats-Unis d'Amedque.

The PRESIDENT: If the;e is no further debate,
We shall now vote on the resolution itself.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : S'il n'y a
pas d'autres observations, nous allons ~aintenant
voter sur la resolution elle-meme.

Mr. LOPEZ (ColO1ubia): I asl( that my proposed amendments be voted on paragraph by paragraph.

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je
demande que les amendements proposes par moi
soient mis _aux voix paragraphe par paragraphe.

14

$

·2750
The PRESIDENT: I think the. difficulty presented
by that request is that we' have already voted on
the amendments. In order to be effective, the right
to have a resolution voted o~ paragraph by paragraph should be asserted before the resolution
has been voted on as a whole. However, we can
manag~ it so that the representative of Colombia
may have this voted on paragraph by paragraph.
r am going to submit a request, which I hope will
be accepted unanimously.

Le P:RESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : ]e pense
que la difficulte presentee par cette requete reside
dans le fait que !l0US nous. sommes deja prononces
sur les amendements. POUl; qu'il puisse etre reconnu, le droit de demander qu'une resolution· soit
Yotee paragraphe par paragraphe devrait etre revendique avant que I'on ait vote sur I'ensemble de
la resolution. Toutefois, nous pouvons faire en
sorte de voter paragraphe par paragraphe sur les
amendements du representant de la Colombie.
Je vais presenter one requete qui, je I'espere, sera
acceptee a I'unanimite.
Is there any objection to reconsidering the vote , Y a-t-il une objection quelconque a ce que I'on
by which the amendments of the representative . ~onsidere comm,e non ayenu le. scrutin pari lequel
of Colombia were just now rejected?
. I amendement du" representant>. de la Colombie
vient d'etre rep'ousse?

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia). I submit, very respectfully, that according to our rules...

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de t'anglais):
Je demande, tres respectueusement, que conformement a notre reglement ...
~

.

The PRESIDENT: Does the representative of Colombia' understand what the nature of this effort
is? I am trying to find an opportunity for him
to have this considered paragraph by paragraph.
I have heard no objection. Certainly the representative of Colombia is not going to object to
this unanimous consent.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Le representant de la Colombie comprend-il ce a quoi je
veux en venir? J'essaye de trouver un moyen de
faire examiner ces. amendements paragraphe par
paragraphe. Je n'ai entendu formuler aucune
objection. I1 est certain que le representant de la
Colomllie ne va pas elever d'objection contre' cet
assentimerrtunanime.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): With the President's
permission, I was going to withd~w my request,
so that the Council may lose no time.

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
J'allais, ilvec la p~rmission du President, retirer
lOa demande de maniere a eviter au Conseil une
perte de temps.
.

The PRESIDENT: This is entirely within the
judgement of the representative of Colombia, and,
of course, the request is withdrawn.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Ceci depend entierement du representant' de la Colombie
et, dans cesconditions, evidemment, 'la demande
est retiree.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia) : I thank the President:
We are in such haste that I am prepared to withdraw my request.

Je remercie le President. Nous sommes si presses

The PRESIDENT: I am going to: submit to the
vote. the resolution on the Indonesian question
proposed by the United States, and amended by
the Sub-Committee appointed by the Security
Council at its two hundred and seventeenth meeting on 31 October 1947..
A vote was taken by show of hands. The resollttion was qdopted by 7 votes to one, With 3 abstentions.
)
Votes for: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
. France, United Kingdom, United States of America.
Vote against: Poland.
Abstentions: Colombia, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.
The PRESIDENT: The next matter is the resolution proposed by the representative of Poland.

M. L6PRz (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):

que je suis dispose a retirer ma demande.

. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): J e vais
mettre aux voix la resolution sur la question indonesienne ,qui a ete proposee par les; Etats-Unis
et amendee par le Sous-Comite nomme par le
Consei1lors de sa deux cent dix-septieme seance
tenue le 31 octobre 1947.
II est procede att vote a main levee. Rar 7 voi~
contre une, avec 3 abstentions, la resolution est
adoptee.
Votent 'P01tr: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, France, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Vote contre: PolQgne.
S'abstiennent:· Colombie, Syrie, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
Le PRESIDENT (tradttit de l'anglais): Nous
pas~ons maintenant a la resolution proposee ~ le
representant de la Pologne.
;

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de ranM:r. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland) : Before the President puts that resolution to the vote, I should like glais) : Avant q~e le President ne mette cette d
to add just a few words, .and I assure the Council solution aux voix, m'est-il permis d'ajouier seule~hat I shall be very, very brief. I simply want to ex- _ment quelques mats, et j'assure le Conseil que je
plain that, in view of the fact that a resolution serai vraiment tres bref.. J e tiens simplement a
was previously adopted, which had been submitted expliquer qu'en raison du fait qu'une resolution a
by the United States delegation and amended by ete adoptee anterieurement, resolution proposee
the Sub-Committee, certain representatives here par la delegation des Etats-Unis et amendee rar
who have expressed. themselves in favout of many le Sous-Comite, certains representants id preof the points contained in the Polish resolution sents qui avaient exprime une opinion favorable
sur nombre de points contenus dans la resolution
may consider it unnecessary to vote on it.
de la Pologne pourraient juger inutile de praceder a un vote a son sujet.
.~
L

2751

Je tiens a faire observer que la resolution de
la Pologne n'est pas en contradiction avec celle
qui vient d'etre adoptee. Tout ati contraire. C'est
un nouveau pas en avant, par rapport 11 cette resolution, un pas que devrait faire le Conseil sans attendre les' consequences facheuses que la resolution va provoquer (:1'1 IndQnesie.
Aussi demanderai-je au President de mettre
maintenant cette resolution aux voix, et je fais
remarquer qu'eIle n'est pas en contradiction avec
la resolution anterieurement adoptee.

I wish to point out that the Polish resolution
is no contradiction of the resolution which has just
been adopted. It is quite the opposite. It is a further step by the Council on that resolution, without waiting for the ill effects which the resolution
will bring in Indonesia.
I should therefore like to ask the President to
take the vote on this resolution now, and I point
out that it is no contradiction of the resolution
.previously adopted. ,
Thl': PRESIDENT: There being no objection, I
shall put the proposal to the vote. The proposal
is a draft resolution on the IndoJ;1esian question
submitted by the representative of Poland, at the
two hundred and fifteenth meeting of the Security
Council, document S/589.

!

A vote was taken by show of hands. The resohttion was rejected by 4 votes to 2, with 5 abstentions.
Votes for: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
Votes against: Belgium, Franc~, United Kingdom, United States of America.

Le PRESII>ENT (tradttit de l'anglais): Aucune
objection n'ayant ete formulee, je mettrai aux
voix la proposition. II s'agit d'un projet de reso-'
lution sur la question indonesienne presente par
le representant de la Pologne lors de la deux cent
quinzieme seance du Conseil de securite, document
S/589.
II est procede au voted. main levee. Par 4 voix
contre 2, avec 5 abstentions, la resolution est rejetee.
V otent pour: Pologne, Union des RepubIiques
socialistrs sovietiques.
.
V otent contre: Belgique, France, RoyaumeUni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Abstentions: Australia, Brazil, China, Colombia, Syria.

S'abstiennent: Australie, Bresil, Chine, Colombie, Syrie.
.

The PRESIDENT: There being no further business, the meeting is adjourned.

Le PRESIDENT (tradttit de l'anglais) : Comme it
n'y a aucune autre question inscrite. a l'ordre du •
. jour, la seance est levee.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

La seance est levee a17 h. 25•

.

..•
:

•

~rlL.IiiiS AGENTS OF THE UNITSD NATIONS PUBLICATION

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIREs
AUSTRALlA-AUS\9CALlE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14·22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES
BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Libreria Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ
CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILE-CHILI
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Pieas Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Libreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA· .
COSTA RICA-COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE
CUBA
La Casa BelgaRene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1
.
DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard
N~rregade6
K~BENHAVN

DOMINICAN ;lEPUBLlC-REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Libreria DOI:"Jnicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartarlo 656
CWDAD TRUJILLO
ECUADOR-EQUATE~R
Muiioz Hermanos y C;a.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUAYAQUIL
EGYPT-EGYPTE
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
~
CAmo
ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de publicite
P.O.Box8
.•
Amns·ABEBA

PrimCld in the U.~.A.

FINLAND-FINLANDE
AkateeIoinen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
fIANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Souftlot
PARIS, Ve
GREECE-GREC!
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHE.NES
GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
,
Goubaud & Cia. Lids.
Sucesor
Sa Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

PERU-PEROU
Libreria internacionaI del Peru.
S.A.
Ca&1ls 1417
LIw.
PHILiPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL
_, POLAND-POLOGNE
~
Spotdzi1llna Wydawnicza
"Czyte!nik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111·B
PORT·AU·PRINCE
ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlu..tl Sigfusar Eymund80nnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJA.VIK
INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI
IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The BookshQP
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-LIBAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG
NETHER!ANDS-PAYSwBAS
N. V. Martinus NijhofI
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAvENHAGE
NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE·ZELANDE
Cordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
W~.LLINGTON

United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.
NORWAY-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO
Price in the U.S.A. : 30 cents

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.·B.·C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
HofbokbandeI
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
S'YRIA-SYRIE
Librairie universelle
~'AMAS

TURKEY-TURQUIE
Ubrairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU·IsTANBUL
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD.AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik 8ts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAl'ETOWN
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTER,
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BmMINGHAlII
and BRISTOL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
Nsw YORK 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Oficina de Representacion de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. I
MONTEVIDEO
VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Piiiango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BooGWW
~&
