General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

14

achieved, to exert renewed efforts to establish a zone of
peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East Asia;
15. Expresses the hope that, following a comprehensive
political solution, an intergovernmental committee will be
established to consider a programme of assistance to Kampuchea for the reconstruction of its economy and for the
economic and social development of all States of the region;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled · 'The situation in
Kampuchea''.
40th plenary meeting
21 October I 98 I

'36/6. Draft World Charter for Nature
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the draft World Charter for Nature, 11
Recalling its resolution 35/7 of 30 October 1980,
Aware of the crucial importance attached by the international community to the promotion and development of
co-operation aimed at protecting and safeguarding the balance and quality of nature,
Also aware that life on earth is part of nature and depends
on the uninterrupted functioning of natural systems,
Noting resolution CM/Res.852 (XXXVII) adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
at its thirty-seventh ordinary session, held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 June 1981 , 12
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,
which contains a revised version of the draft World Charter
for Nature prepared on the basis of views and observations
communicated by Member States in accordance with General Assembly resolution 35/7;
2. Invites Member States which have not yet done so
to communicate their views and observations to the Secretary-General;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the United Nations Environment Programme and the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, to complete if necessary, on the basis of observations
received from Member States, the revision of the draft
World Charter for Nature and to submit a supplementary
report ,o the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit to Member
States the text of the report of the Ad Hoe Group of Experts
on the Draft World Charter for Nature, 1~ containing the
revised version of the draft Charter, as well as any further
observations by States, with a view to appropriate consideration at the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly;
_5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled ''Consideration and
adoption of the revised draft World Charter for Nature:
report of the Secretary-General" .
41st plenary meeting
27 October /98/
'36/7. Historical responsibility of States for the preservation of nature for present and future
generations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/8 of 30 October 19!<0.
11

12
13

N36/539.
See N36/534, annex I.
N36/539, annex I.

Noting that the continuation and intensification of the
arms race are adversely affecting the human environment
and damaging the vegetable and animal world,
Attaching great importance to the development of planned
and constructive international co-operation in solving the
problems of preserving nature.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
historical responsibility of States for the preservation of
nature for present and future generations, 14
I. Requests the Secretary-General, with the co-operation of the United Nations Environment Programme and on
the basis of the studies now in progress and the views expressed by States on this subject, to complete the preparation
of a report containing recommendations for the adoption by
States of specific ohligations and measures relating to the
protection of nature from the pernicious effects of the arms
race, and to the limitation and prohibition of the types of
military activity which present the greatest danger for nature;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit the
report referred to in paragraph I above to the General Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament.
41st plenary meeting
27 October /98/

36/23.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the state of co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, 1'
Recalling its resolutions 3369 (XXX) of IO October 1975
and 35/36 of I 4 November 1980.
Noting with satisfaction the development of co-operation
hetween the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.
Noting further the establishment of relations of cooperation hetween the specialized agencies and other bodies
of the United Nations system and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.
Taking into account the desire of both organizations to
contribute to the search for solutions to global problems.
such as questions relating to international peace and security, disarmament. self-determination. decolonization. fundamental human rights and the establishment of a new
international economic order.
Noting the participation of the Secretary-General in the
work of the Third Islamic Summit Conference of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, held at Mecca-Taif
from 25 to 28 January 1981, 16
Noting the effective participation of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference in the work of the United Nations.
Convinced of the need to strengthen the co-operation hetween the United Nations. the specialized agencies and other
bodies of the United Nations system and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of co-operation between the
United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference;
2. Urges the two organizations to intensify co-operation
in their common search for solutions to global problems.
such as questions relating to international peace and security. disarmament. self-determination. decolonization. fun14
A/36/532 and Con
"A/36/384.
"' See An61138.
