UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/31
6 November 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3940th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 November 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Guinea-Bissau", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the agreement reached on
1 November 1998, in Abuja, between the Government of Guinea-Bissau and the
Self-Proclaimed Military Junta during the 21st Summit of the Authority of
the Heads of State of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) (S/1998/1028, annex). In this context, the Council commends the
mediation efforts of ECOWAS and of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), and their respective Chairmen, and recognizes the role of
other leaders, in particular the preponderant role of the President of the
Gambia, in the negotiations that led to that agreement.
"The Security Council affirms its firm commitment to preserve the
unity, sovereignty, constitutional order and territorial integrity of
Guinea-Bissau.
"The Security Council considers the agreement to be a positive step
towards national reconciliation and lasting peace in Guinea-Bissau. The
Council calls upon the Government and the Self-Proclaimed Military Junta to
respect fully their obligations under the Abuja Agreement and the Praia
Agreement of 26 August 1998 (S/1998/825). The Council welcomes, in
particular, the decision immediately to put in place a Government of
National Unity and to hold general and presidential elections not later
than the end of March 1999.
"The Security Council takes note of the agreement regarding the
withdrawal from Guinea-Bissau of all foreign troops and of the simultaneous
deployment of the interposition force from the Military Observer Group of
ECOWAS (ECOMOG), which will take over from the withdrawn forces. The
Council calls upon all States to provide voluntarily technical, financial
and logistical support to assist ECOMOG to carry out its mission.
"The Security Council appeals to States and organizations concerned to
provide urgent humanitarian assistance to displaced persons and refugees.
98-34154 (E)

061198

/...

S/PRST/1998/31
English
Page 2

It calls upon the Government and the Self-Proclaimed Military Junta to
continue to respect relevant provisions of international law, including
humanitarian law, and to ensure safe and unimpeded access by international
humanitarian organizations to persons in need of assistance as a result of
the conflict. In this regard, it welcomes the decision to open the
international airport and the sea-port at Bissau.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
