A /68/PV.59

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

59th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 4 December 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/68/L.20)
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 9 to take action
on a draft resolution entitled “Graduation of countries
from the least developed country category”, issued
as document A/68/L.20. Members will recall that
the Assembly had a debate on agenda item 9, jointly
with agenda item 14, at its 50th plenary meeting, on
11 November (see A/68/PV.50).
I give the floor to the representative of Fiji, to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to introduce
draft resolution A/68/L.20.
Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): 1 have the honour and the
pleasure to introduce, on behalf of the Group of 77
(G-77) and China, draft resolution A/68/L.20, entitled
“Graduation of countries from the least developed
country category”. The Group of 77 would like to thank
all delegations for their constructive contribution to
this draft resolution.
For
both
countries
involved
in
the
resolution — Equatorial Guinea and the Republic of
Vanuatu — graduation from least developed country
status is an historic achievement. It is the fruition of
many years of strong growth and national progress.
It is also the welcome evolution of those nations to
middle-income countries. Those dynamic, young and

competitive economies are ready for the challenges
ahead. They will take the next steps with the aid of
their multilateral development partners and through the
oversight of the United Nations system.
The smooth transition process, guided by the
G-77 last year, set provisions that mandate oversight
by the United Nations, not only in the preparatory
period leading up to graduation, but also during the
smooth transition process that follows. Nations that
are graduating will no longer be left to their own
devices but will instead be encouraged to engage with
the evaluation systems that will guide them through
the formative years of that transition. The transition
plans of those countries will be evaluated, assisted and
eventually well implemented.
Development and trading partners are encouraged
to work hand in hand with graduating countries and
to develop bilateral and multilateral relationships
through a consultative mechanism, established by the
graduating country, to ensure the effective integration
of those nations into the world economy.
In closing, let me underscore that for small nations
there will always be vulnerabilities to external shocks,
global crises and unforeseen adversities. Yet, it is with
full faith in the promise of these two nations that we are
honoured to welcome them in the step they are taking
today into the community of developing countries.
The Group of 77 and China looks forward to the
adoption of the draft resolution by consensus.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-59145 (E)

*1359145*

A/68/PV.59

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.20, entitled
“Graduation of countries from the least developed
country category”. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.20?
Draft resolution A/68/L.20 was adopted (resolution
68/18).
The President: I now call on those representatives
who wish to make statements concerning the resolution
just adopted.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): From the approval in 1990 of the Paris
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the 1990s through to the adoption in 2001 of the
Brussels Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2001-2010, the objectives
established at those conferences to improve the social
and economic situation of the least developed countries
(LDCs) have not yet been achieved.
The process of globalization has left LDCs behind
and has increased their marginalization. For their part,
most LDCs have undertaken progammes for economic
reform and for the elimination of poverty, and for the
overall success of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs).
The international community should always bear
in mind the fact that the least developed countries
constitute the weakest and poorest segment of this
community. The economic and social development of
those countries represents an enormous challenge for
them and for their partners in development. Extreme
poverty, the structural weakness of their economics and
the related lack of capacity for growth and development
are all serious problems for those countries, to which
we often must add adverse geographic factors that
impair their efforts to improve the quality of life for
their peoples.
In the face of those factors of vulnerability and
those difficulties, the necessary international support
has been insufficient, despite commitments made to
earmark a minimum percentage of their gross domestic
product to the development of those countries. To
overcome those conditions, a commitment is needed
to provide greater and more effective international
support to LDCs. To that end, sustainable development
strategies applicable to the least developed countries
should try to correct vulnerabilities, taking into account

2/21

04/12/2013

the special needs, specific problems and the potential of
each country.
Since the Group of Least Developed Countries
was set up in 1971, only a very few countries have
graduated — Botswana in 1994, Cape Verde in 2007
and the Maldives in 2011, and today, Vanuatu and
Equatorial Guinea. That situation leads us to profound
reflection on the criteria that were established for
the inclusion and graduation of the least developed
countries. One such thought is that when those
conditions were established, the LDCs had no say in
their formulation, which makes for a certain reticence
on the part of the least developed countries with regard
to graduating from the category, due to the existence of
a disparity between the established criteria and the real
conditions in the countries.
We believe that the least developed countries are
synonymous with poor countries, and no Government
would be proud of being eternally poor. All of the LDCs
are making every effort to emerge from that category.
The only reason for the existence of the group today
has been a lack of solidarity and substantive support for
those countries.
More than 40 years have not been sufficient to help
those countries rise out of poverty. For all the foregoing
reasons, the delegation of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea believes that the Istanbul Programme of Action,
which included a new element that was lacking in
previous programmes, presents a new opportunity for
there never to be a single country in that group again.
The identification within the Istanbul Programme of
Action of the need for national Governments to take the
lead in their own development processes, rather than
letting donors be in charge as was the case before, is a
new value added to the Programme.
Equatorial Guinea decided to take the initiative
and assume responsibility for its own development,
thanks to the providence of nature. Oil was discovered
in 1994, and the first national economic conference
was organized, with the participation of all levels of
society, to identify priority areas of investment of oil
profits. The conclusions of that conference were then
collected and reflected in the medium-term economic
strategy and became the foundation of financing for
large infrastructure works throughout the country.
Ten years later, in 2007, we held a second national
economic conference, at which we developed another
medium-term economic plan that yielded the hoped-

13-59145

04/12/2013

for results — airports, ports, modern buildings, social
housing, roads, bridges, schools, modern hospitals and
so on were built to connect all parts of the country.
The legacy of the second economic conference was
the socioeconomic programme entitled Horizon 2020,
the goal of which was to achieve social cohesion and
diversification of sources of economic growth in the
country.
The first result of the strategy was the first National
Industrialization Conference of Equatorial Guinea,
known as PEGI 2020, which identified priorities
for industrialization of the country. A second result
involved setting up one of the electric plants of the
central subregion, the Djiploho hydroelectric plant,
which will not only ensure better supply of energy for
the industries created but will also provide electricity
for people throughout the country as well as an
opportunity to share electric power with neighbouring
countries.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, with its policies
of health care for all, education for all, electricity for all,
food for all and housing for all, is making ongoing efforts
to make the country an emerging country by the year
2020 and thereby comply with the recommendations of
the Istanbul Programme of Action. The graduation plan
should be reinforced through international cooperation
agreements, especially South-South cooperation, with
countries that have the same problems and establish
strategic alliances for development at the bilateral and
multilateral level.
Equatorial Guinea has demonstrated and is
demonstrating international solidarity by supporting
countries that have suffered natural and man-made
disasters and has co-sponsored such international
humanitarian actions as the endowment of the
UNESCO-Equatorial Guinea International Prize for
Research in the Life Sciences with $3 million and the
pledge of the President of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea to contribute $30 million to create a trust fund
for food security in Africa in cooperation with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
In addition to those cutting-edge activities being
undertaken by Equatorial Guinea, a report of the World
Health Organization, the 2012 Africa Health Financing
Scorecard, classified the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
as a country that is leading investment in health care on
the African continent on a per capita basis, with a per
capita investment of $612. Along those lines, the African

A/68/PV.59

Economic Outlook Report, which is published annually
by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), places Equatorial Guinea as the
first destination for foreign investment in Africa. The
study — conducted upon the initiative of the OECD,
the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa,
the United Nations Development Programme and
a network of research centres and groups of African
experts — evaluates the national economic and social
development plan, Horizon 2020, the goal of which is
to diversify the economy and thus alleviate Equatorial
Guinea’s dependence on oil and income derived it,
which accounts for 78 per cent of gross domestic
product.
Notwithstanding all this, the Government of
Equatorial Guinea has requested and reiterated at
several meetings, particularly the Conference on the
Least Developed Countries in Istanbul and successive
meetings, and in the statement of our President at
the general debate of the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly (see A/68/PV.13), that the definitive
graduation of Equatorial Guinea from the least
developed country category be set for 2020, the year of
the final evaluation of the Horizon 2020 Action Plan for
Equatorial Guinea and related plans.
Despite all of these issues, we have just adopted
resolution 68/18 to graduate the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, with a transition period of three years and
an exceptional additional period of six months. In
other words, effective graduation will take place
in June 2017. For that reason, and with a view to
guaranteeing the success of that soft transition, which
will not alter or have a negative impact on the current
process of development in Equatorial Guinea, it is
absolutely necessary that, pursuant to paragraph 3 of
the resolution just adopted, the United Nations system
and other development partners support my country as
soon as possible by drafting an assistance programme
that, if it is to succeed, must take into account the
unique characteristics of Equatorial Guinea. To that
end, a multisectoral mission of the United Nations
system should visit Equatorial Guinea with the main
objective of deeply evaluating, in conjunction with
the Government, the general context of our country,
obviously taking due account of issues or strategic
aspects related to the country’s aforementioned
vulnerabilities, many of which are linked to the world
crises of the last few years.

13-591453/21

A/68/PV.59

04/12/2013

The success of the graduation process for the group
of least developed countries should be measured not
only by the number of countries that graduate but by
the sustainability of the development that they achieve
and the consolidation of their economies so as not to
fall back into that category.

context and undermine the much hoped-for graduation
of a large number of our countries.

Mr. Houde (Benin) (spoke in French): The adoption
today, 4 December 2013, of resolution 68/18, on the
graduation of Equatorial Guinea and Vanuatu, is clearly
a symbolic act, but it also has major implications for the
group of 49 least developed countries (LDCs) that are
Members of the United Nations. Indeed, the decision
that we have just taken is the outcome and crowning
achievement of a long process of negotiations involving
several actors. Benin, as Chair of the Coordination
Bureau for the LDC Group, would therefore like
to thank, on behalf of the Group, the President of
the Economic and Social Commission, Mr. Néstor
Osorio, the Chair of the Group of 77 and China, and
the members of that Group, particularly the facilitator
States — Mexico, Turkey and the Maldives — which
played a coordinating role. Our thanks also go to our
development partners, who, in the course of difficult
negotiations, showed understanding and flexibility.

Reports of the Fifth Committee

We offer our sincere congratulations to Equatorial
Guinea and Vanuatu, which in the current sombre
economic context have courageously committed to the
road to the transition towards being middle-income
countries. It is not easy for a country to take such a
decision or to make such a commitment when its
economy is largely dependent on a single resource, be it
oil or something else, and when it is a small island State.
That is why the group of LDCs wishes to underscore
once again the need for our development partners to
continue to support these countries more than ever
during the transitional phase.
Furthermore, the adoption of resolution 68/18
demonstrates unequivocally the desire of LDCs to
achieve the goals agreed in the Istanbul Programme
of Action of May 2011, including, inter alia, the
graduation of half the members of the group to
middle-income-country status by 2020. However,
if those goals are to be achieved, the commitments
undertaken by partners towards the LDCs must be
upheld. There can be no doubt that the failure of our
bilateral and multilateral development partners to
honour their commitments would undo the efforts being
made by our States in the current difficult economic

4/21

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 9.

The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 131, 132, 135 and 142.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee”.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.

13-59145

04/12/2013

Agenda item 131
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/610)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/19).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 131.
Agenda item 135
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/611)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/20).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
135.
Agenda items 132 and 142
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/612)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Report on the
activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/21).

A/68/PV.59

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda items 132 and
142.
Agenda items 121 and 122
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The President: I should like to make a statement in
connection with this joint debate on agenda items 121
and 122.
Many representatives will recall my statement of
14 June (see A/67/PV.87), when I observed the need for
any organization to change or adapt or it will simply
lose its relevance. The agenda item under consideration
today, “Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly”, provides us with an opportunity to examine
the work of this body and seek ways in which we can
collectively strengthen it so as to make it absolutely
relevant to the entire United Nations system. It is an
opportunity that should not be missed.
At the outset, I would like to acknowledge with
appreciation all of the work which has taken place to
date, as reflected most recently in resolution 67/297 of
29 August 2013 and the related report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly at the sixty-seventh session,
contained in document A/67/936. In that regard, I would
like to commend Ambassador Mootaz Khalil of Egypt
for his dedicated service during the previous session.
As communicated in a letter dated 14 November
2013, I have appointed Ambassadors Ružička and
Sinhaseni as co-Chairs for this session’s consultations
on this important agenda item. As they begin their
work at the conclusion of our consideration here today,
I encourage each representative to be open, transparent
and most of all, efficient, and I ask delegations to fully
support them so as to ensure an ambitious outcome.
Resolution 67/297 gives members of the Working
Group a number of specific mandates, ranging from the
role of the General Assembly and its authority to working
methods, and from the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General and other executive heads to
strengthening the institutional memory of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly. While we
have already begun to see significant changes in place,
the non-implementation of resolutions of the General

13-591455/21

A/68/PV.59

Assembly, including those related to the revitalization
of its work, continues to be a matter of concern for
Member States, which have an important role and
responsibility to play in that respect. I have every
confidence in the commitment of the two facilitators
to ensuring that the debate in the Ad Hoc Working
Group is approached in a thoughtful and investigative
spirit, mindful that the very relevance of the Assembly
depends upon it.
Resolution
67/297
also
assigns
specific
responsibilities to the presidency of the Assembly.
I assure Member States that I am mindful of those
responsibilities and that I intend to fully comply with
them both in letter and in spirit. Members may already
have noticed my zeal with regard to the use of our
time, the relationship with the General Committee
and interactions with the presidents of the other major
organs, to name but a few areas.
The issue of the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly has long been before this body.
While some people would say that progress has not
been fast enough, we here in this Hall know that the
General Assembly is at the very heart of the United
Nations — what it stands for and what it was created to
do. With that in mind, I hope that members will allow
me a moment to extol some of its virtues.
This body’s pre-eminent place among international
policy forums is perhaps best demonstrated by the
annual general debate and the high-level participation
by Member States. This year, we heard statements by
more than 110 Heads of State and Government. No
other body on this planet attracts the same level of
representation or benefits from the same legitimacy.
We can also consider the concrete achievements
that we have already seen during the current session.
I will mention the adoption of a resolution on the
strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
(resolution 68/1); the inauguration of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development; the first
high-level meeting on nuclear disarmament (see A/68/
PV.11); and the outcome document that sets us on a path
to create a universal and shared development agenda
post-2015 (resolution 68/6), to name a few.
From a broader perspective, the General Assembly
takes on issues that affect us all. It ties us together
with the thread of universality. The issues before us
so often affect our Member States, both big and small,
developing and developed, North and South. The scope

6/21

04/12/2013

of what we cover is extremely comprehensive and
far-reaching — from peace and security, sustainable
development, economic and social development, human
rights and humanitarian assistance to international law,
organized crime and terrorism, among other issues.
When we come together to adopt a resolution, such as
the United Nations Millennium Declaration (resolution
55/2), the work of the General Assembly not only carries
moral weight, but also has the power to influence the
course of global and national policies. Effectively, it
changes the world.
Such an opportunity is before us once again with
the mapping of the post-2015 development agenda.
With that in mind, I have announced the convening of
three high-level thematic debates and three high-level
events on a range of issues of immediate relevance and
direct importance to setting the stage for the post-2015
development agenda. In that regard, I am pleased to
inform members that I will be formally communicating
the 2014 timetable for those events and debates to
Member States in the next few days.
As we move forward, let us remain mindful that our
true goal is to change not only the General Assembly
but also the world in which we live. However, we must
begin right here today with the work that is before us
and by fulfilling the commitments that we have already
made.
Mr. Djacta (Algeria): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
At the outset, allow me to express the gratitude
of the members of NAM to Ambassador Mootaz
Ahmadein Khalil, Permanent Representative of Egypt,
for his tireless efforts and excellent work in chairing
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly during the sixty-seventh
session. I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Mr. František Ružička, Permanent
Representative of Slovakia, and Mr. Norachit
Sinhaseni, Permanent Representative of Thailand, on
their appointment as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group during the sixty-eighth session and to wish them
every success in discharging their duties.
NAM welcomes the adoption of resolution 67/297
in August, by which the General Assembly established
the Ad Hoc Working Group to discuss issues related to
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
during the sixty-eighth session.

13-59145

04/12/2013

The Non-Aligned Movement underlines that the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
is a political process rather than a procedural matter,
aimed mainly at strengthening the role of the General
Assembly as the chief deliberative policymaking and
representative organ of the United Nations in the wider
United Nations system. That process should therefore
be conducted in an inclusive, transparent and efficient
manner. For that reason, the Movement reiterates the
importance of the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly as an item that deserves consideration
on an equal footing with the other reform processes and
important topics on the General Assembly’s agenda.
I would like to take this opportunity to state
that NAM emphasizes the need to fully respect the
functions and powers of each principal organ of the
United Nations, in particular the General Assembly,
and to maintain the balance among those organs within
their respective Charter-based functions and powers. In
that regard, the Security Council must fully observe all
Charter provisions and all General Assembly resolutions
that clarify its relationship with the Assembly and the
other principal organs.
In that context, NAM reiterates its concern, raised
during previous sessions, over the continuous attempt
by the Security Council to encroach on the powers
and prerogatives of the General Assembly. Article 24,
paragraph 1, of the Charter does not in fact endow the
Security Council with the competence to address issues
that fall within the functions and powers of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. In the
same vein, NAM reiterates its request to the Security
Council to submit a more explanatory, comprehensive
and analytical annual report to the General Assembly,
assessing the work of the Council, including those cases
in which the Council has failed to act.
Furthermore, in previous resolutions — resolutions
58/126, 59/313 and 60/286 — the General Assembly
invited the Security Council to submit periodically,
in accordance with Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter,
special subject-oriented reports to the General
Assembly for its consideration on issues of current
international concern. Since the adoption of resolution
58/126, no special, subject-oriented reports have been
formally submitted to the General Assembly. Special
subjects are, to some extent, covered only by the
monthly assessments provided by the Presidents of the
Security Council.

A/68/PV.59

Moreover, NAM is convinced that the activities
of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization will contribute greatly to the whole
process of revitalization. In that context, NAM supports
in particular the two proposals discussed by the Special
Committee: first, the creation of an open-ended
working group to study the proper implementation of
the Charter of the United Nations with respect to the
functional relationship of its organs; and secondly, the
working paper on the strengthening of the role of the
Organization and enhancing its effectiveness.
We reaffirm the role and authority of the General
Assembly, including regarding questions related
to international peace and security, as well as its
intergovernmental, inclusive and democratic character,
which have immensely contributed to promoting the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the goals of the Organization. The group also
reaffirms the intergovernmental nature of the United
Nations, as such, and draws attention to the necessity
of consulting with Members States on initiatives and
activities undertaken within the Organization and the
right of all Member States to express their position
before the General Assembly at any time they wish to
do so.
The General Assembly, as the policy-making organ
of the Organization, has the authority and the essential
role of drawing up the framework, establishing the
principles and identifying the objectives of the wider
United Nations system and its numerous organs,
agencies and programmes. Furthermore, the Assembly
should maintain its position as the principal organ in
reviewing the work of all of its subsidiary organs and
bodies.
The General Assembly should also maintain its
role and mandate in setting the priorities of the United
Nations in the consideration of all budgetary and
administrative issues and reforms, including its absolute
authority to allocate and reallocate financial and human
resources, and in the appointment of senior Secretariat
officials, in accordance with the Charter and relevant
Assembly resolutions. In that regard, the prerogatives
of the General Assembly as the chief oversight organ
of the Organization, including on management and
procurement for peacekeeping operations, must be
respected.
NAM, while expressing its readiness to continue
to support all ongoing efforts to strengthen the central

13-591457/21

A/68/PV.59

role and authority of the Assembly, wishes to state that
it will oppose any approach seeking to undermine or
minimize the achievements of the General Assembly,
diminish its current role and functioning, or raise
questions about its relevance and credibility.
It is clear that while the prerogatives of the
presidency of the General Assembly have not changed,
its role and activities have evolved over the past years
in adapting to the growing activities, conferences and
initiatives of the Assembly, performing official protocol
functions, representing the Assembly throughout the
world, and making the work of the Assembly better
known and more visible.
The activities of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly have therefore increased drastically
over the years and the Assembly’s agenda and,
consequently, that of its President include a tremendous
number of issues. The expanded activities of the General
Assembly — including the yearly adoption of more or
less 300 resolutions and decisions and the establishment
of working groups and facilitators to convene meetings
and consultations throughout the year — have led to
the necessary presence or active participation of the
President during the entire session. Moreover, the
workload of the General Assembly is no longer limited
to its main session, but rather covers the whole period
from the opening of the session in September to its
closing. Those increasing and tremendous activities
should, of course, be matched with all the necessary
resources, human and financial.
The Movement emphasizes the importance
of ensuring the effectiveness of the Office of the
President, including by strengthening its institutional
memory. While noting with appreciation the progress
already achieved in that regard, we are of the view that
particular effort should be devoted to implementing
existing resolutions on the matter and identifying,
during the upcoming discussions of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly, ways and means to pursue that
objective progressively and with determination.
Among other prerogatives and mandates of the
General Assembly is the selection and appointment
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. It is a
question that NAM considers to be of utmost importance.
In that context, the selection of the Secretary-General
must reflect greater transparency and inclusivity in
terms of all Member States. We recall that, to date, no

8/21

04/12/2013

consultations on the appointment of a new SecretaryGeneral have taken place, as reflected in the updated
inventory chart indicated in the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group (A/67/936, annex I).
The Movement therefore emphasizes the need for
the General Assembly’s participation in the selection
and appointment of future Secretaries-General to be
more active, effective and efficient, in conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations and in accordance
with the provisions of resolutions 51/241, 60/286,
64/301, 66/294 and 67/297. In that regard, the Movement
stresses the importance of the full implementation of
the aforementioned resolutions to the imminent process
of the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral.
The Movement recalls the decision taken in
paragraph 3 of resolution 67/297, requesting that the
Ad Hoc Working Group continue the comprehensive
review of the inventory of the status of implementation
of the resolutions on the revitalization of the General
Assembly and to issue an updated version, as well as the
request to the Secretary-General to submit an update on
the related provisions that have not been implemented,
with an indication of the constraints and reasons behind
any lack of implementation. Furthermore, the group
believes firmly, as outlined in paragraph 5 of resolution
67/297,
“that non-implementation of General Assembly
resolutions, including those related to the
revitalization of its work, may diminish the role,
authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the
Assembly”,
and that Member States are primarily responsible for
their implementation.
Political will is indeed key to ensuring the effective
implementation of the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly. In that regard, NAM welcomes the
decision to issue, at the sixty-eighth session, the updated
inventory chart of General Assembly resolutions on
revitalization, to be annexed to the report of the Ad
Hoc Working Group. That update will provide Member
States with the opportunity to assess progress achieved
in the implementation of resolutions since the sixtythird session.
In conclusion, NAM reaffirms that a reinvigorated
General Assembly, in an environment of greater
responsiveness and fully exerting its role and authority,

13-59145

04/12/2013

would significantly contribute to strengthening the
wider United Nations system, improved international
governance and enhanced multilateralism.
The President: I call on the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European
Free Trade Area country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, align
themselves with this statement.
I would like to warmly thank the previous Chair
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the General Assembly, the Permanent Representative
of Egypt, for the excellent work done. I would also
like to thank you, Sir, for appointing the Permanent
Representatives of Slovakia and Thailand to serve as
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group. We wish them
success and express our full support for their efforts.
The European Union and its member States are
strongly attached to effective multilateralism, with the
United Nations at its core. The strengthening the United
Nations based on effective and sustainable funding
in line with real capacity to pay, and increasing the
efficiency of its functioning, on which there is scope
to do more, remain our top priorities. In that context,
we continue to be committed to revitalization and to
supporting efforts aimed at strengthening the role and
authority of the General Assembly, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions.
Indeed, we hope that the General Assembly, as the only
intergovernmental body with universal membership,
and given its broad mandate and far-reaching
responsibilities, is able to take up the challenges of
reconciling legitimacy and efficiency in a context of
emerging global challenges.
We believe that revitalization can be ensured only
when the General Assembly takes relevant action
on issues of common concern to the international
community and produces results. By doing so, it lives
up to its role as one of the principal organs of the United
Nations.
The European Union and its member States welcome
the adoption of resolution 67/297, whose important

A/68/PV.59

provisions include the call to involve civil society as
an interactive partner of the General Assembly, where
appropriate, and to explore the possibility of electing
non-permanent members of the Security Council and
members of the Economic and Social Council before
October of each year. In addition, we would like to stress
the importance of implementing all the Assembly’s
resolutions, including those on the revitalization of its
work, and note its impact on the authority, effectiveness
and efficiency of the General Assembly.
The revitalization of the Assembly’s work is clearly
interlinked with the overall reform of the United
Nations. We welcome the rotation mechanism for the
Chairs of the Main Committees for the next five years
and commend the efforts of the President of the General
Assembly to that end. We hope for further discussion in
the Ad Hoc Working Group so that the mechanism and
other issues can be addressed in an in-depth manner.
The revitalization process of the General Assembly
has already led to positive developments, including
the introduction of thematic debates, which facilitate
more in-depth discussions on current issues of critical
importance to the international community. The
European Union and its member States especially value
the interactive character of thematic debates, which
allows the closer engagement of the Assembly with
other stakeholders, including international and regional
organizations and groups outside the United Nations
system. We look forward to the continuation of that
practice and invite the President of the General Assembly
to consult with Member States on the possibilities,
where appropriate, of engaging a broad range of
stakeholders in the spirit of partnership with a view to
achieving result-oriented outcomes from such debates.
We also recognize the importance of the interaction
between the General Assembly and international or
regional forums and organizations dealing with global
matters of concern to the international community and
the benefits to be drawn from such interaction.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s continued
practice of holding periodic informal briefings on his
priorities, travels and most recent activities, including
his participation in international meetings and events
organized outside the United Nations, and encourage
him to continue with that practice.
With respect to the relationship between the
General Assembly and the other principal organs
of the United Nations, the EU and its member States
believe that improving transparency and cooperation

13-591459/21

A/68/PV.59

remain important goals. The Assembly should benefit
from information about meetings among the Presidents
of the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council, as well as with
the chairs of subsidiary bodies. Periodic briefings by
the President of the General Assembly on his recent
activities, including his official travels, continue to be
an appreciated practice and are a valuable source of
information.
We also welcome resolution 68/1, adopted on
20 September, which addresses the relationship between
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. We underline in particular its call for the
two bodies to ensure that their respective agendas are
rationalized so as to eliminate duplication and overlap
and to promote complementarity in the negotiation of
similar or related issues.
On the issue of working methods, we would like
to stress the need for the further rationalization and
streamlining of the agendas of the General Assembly
and its Main Committees. In that regard, we also
recognize the importance of goodwill and cooperation
on the part of Member States with that goal in mind. We
are of the opinion that it would be appropriate to further
explore the biennialization and triennialization of
certain items, as well as their clustering or elimination.
In that regard, the leadership of the Chairs and Bureaus
of the Main Committees is of particular importance.
We look forward to the briefings on working methods
to the Ad Hoc Working Group by the Chairs of the Main
Committees. Although each Main Committee has its
own authority over the rules of procedure, we believe
that streamlining and standardizing some rules would
lead to more efficient work of the Committees.
We would also like to stress the importance of
making full use of the e-services provided by the
Secretariat. The widespread use by Main Committees
and Member States of such services, including the
PaperSmart portal, has had a positive impact on the
work of the General Assembly during its main session.
It has also saved a considerable amount of resources,
energy and paper. We must continue to work in that
direction.
We look forward to seeing the Secretary-General,
the President of the General Assembly — including in
his capacity as Chair of the General Committee — and
the Chairs of the Main Committees play an active role,
in consultation with Member States, in enhancing the
coordination of the scheduling of high-level meetings
10/21

04/12/2013

with a view to optimizing their number and distribution
throughout the year, bearing in mind the need to
preserve the integrity of the general debate. We believe
that the General Committee could play a useful role in
that process.
Finally, let me emphasize the important role of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly. I would like to assure
the Assembly that the EU and its member States will
continue to engage in a constructive manner in the
proceedings of the Ad Hoc Working Group. We look
forward to receiving a work plan soon.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): Egypt associates itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Algeria
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, I would like to express appreciation
to you, Sir, for the pledge you made on 14 June in your
acceptance speech (see A/67/PV.87) to advance the
reform processes of the principal organs of the United
Nations during the sixty-eighth session, including by
enhancing the role, authority and efficiency of the
General Assembly. We are confident that you will give
the process of revitalizing the General Assembly the
same attention, if not more, as that you are already
devoting to other reform processes, including the
reform and expansion of the Security Council.
I seize this opportunity to congratulate the newly
appointed co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
for the current session, my dear friends Ambassador
Norachit Sinhaseni of Thailand and Ambassador
František Ružička of Slovakia. The Egyptian delegation
will provide them with all the support necessary to
help to push the process of revitalizing the work of the
General Assembly towards achieving tangible results.
Revitalizing the work of the General Assembly
lies at the core of overall reform of the United Nations.
The Assembly is and will remain the main deliberative,
policymaking and representative principal body of
this Organization. That revitalization has been on
its agenda for more than two decades now. Member
States have adopted by consensus many resolutions
with specific provisions on the subject. The latest of
those, resolution 67/297, adopted in August, built on the
modest progress achieved so far under the four clusters
of the revitalization process.
Much more must be done in order to ensure that the
Assembly plays the leading role in global governance
13-59145

04/12/2013

at the political, economic and social levels that it
deserves. If the political will to revitalize it exists, we
should start by identifying the areas where we have
already achieved tangible progress and those that
require more attention. The cluster on working methods
remains the area that has seen most improvement since
the revitalization process began. On the other hand, no
significant progress has been made regarding the role
and authority of the General Assembly. The cluster on
the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
remains in a stalemate. The modest budget for your
Office, Mr. President, continues to be a serious obstacle
to strengthening that Office and its institutional
memory.
One major obstacle facing the authority of the
General Assembly is the Security Council’s continued
encroachment on its role and functions. The Security
Council tends to deviate from its mandate by addressing
important issues even when they do not pose a threat to
international peace and security. We need to develop
a mutually reinforcing and complementary relationship
between the principal organs of the United Nations
as laid down the Charter, by giving their individual
mandates due respect.
The non-implementation of General Assembly
resolutions is at the top of the list of the challenges
for revitalization. It has a negative impact on the
Assembly’s credibility and affects its role and
authority. The Assembly will not be able to respond to
emerging challenges and events of common concern
to the international community without the authority
necessary to implement its own resolutions. If they
were implemented effectively, we would have seen the
question of Palestine resolved decades ago. We would
have seen it taken off the agenda. Yet the adoption of
those resolutions at every session proves that the General
Assembly perseveres in upholding the principles of
justice and equality. Having done that, it now needs the
authority to implement its decisions without selectivity
or politicization.
The first step in advancing the revitalization process
of the Assembly is to transform related decisions and
resolutions into actions. The Ad Hoc Working Group
should benefit from the updated chart of General
Assembly resolutions on revitalization (A/67/936,
annex I) as a tool for following up implementation, and
the chart should be updated at every session in order to
determine the progress achieved in that regard.

A/68/PV.59

During past sessions, many States and groups of
States have reiterated requests for a more streamlined
General Assembly agenda by clustering and biennializing
or triennializing items on it. Nothing specific has been
achieved in that area. It is Member States’ responsibility
to be both innovative and practical. Delegations
should lead by example, by presenting items that they
sponsor to the Ad Hoc Working Group or the General
Committee for streamlining. Egypt has presented a
practical proposal, related to streamlining the Second
Committee’s agenda, for incorporating related items
under the agenda item on sustainable development, in
order to integrate the economic and social aspects of
sustainable development and address them on an equal
footing with the environmental aspects.
The effectiveness of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly depends on increasing its
financial and human resources from the United Nations
regular budget. It is not logical that its budget allocation
has not increased since 1998. We look forward to
seeing a positive outcome on this issue from the related
deliberations in the Fifth Committee on the regular
budget for the next biennium of 2014-2015.
The selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral is yet another issue of great interest to the
wider membership. In accordance with previous
resolutions, the Assembly is mandated to be engaged
in the selection process for the Secretary-General at an
early stage, with full regard to the relevant provisions
of the Charter.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm the Egyptian
delegation’s full support for you, Mr. President, and for
the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group, with a
view to enhancing the role of the General Assembly in
achieving peace, stability and prosperity for all.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
Cuban delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Algeria on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, and would like to make
some additional comments on this topic.
I would first like to thank the co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
General Assembly for preparing the report on the
subject (A/67/936) and for their efforts to advance the
process of revitalizing the Assembly.
The revitalization of the General Assembly is
a key element in achieving real reform of the United

13-5914511/21

A/68/PV.59

Nations. At the present time, it is impossible to tackle
the process of that reform overall if we do not make
it a priority to ensure a more democratic and effective
Organization, having as its centre a General Assembly
fully able to exercise the powers invested in it by
the Charter of the United Nations. Cuba has said on
many occasions that the revitalization process should
have the ultimate goal of restoring and consolidating
the central role of the General Assembly as the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of
the United Nations, as is clearly acknowledged in the
Charter, the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2)
and in multiple resolutions and statements agreed on in
the United Nations.
In the current circumstances, the goals of the
revitalization process should be to help the Assembly
to strengthen its independence and its authority as a
forum for broad debate, where the freedom of Member
States to discuss subjects of interest to them is not
restricted or limited. In order to restore the international
community’s confidence in the United Nations and its
credibility in world public opinion, we must ensure that
our Organization genuinely responds to the collective
interests of its Member States. That can be achieved
only by revitalizing the leading role of the General
Assembly, the one organ of the United Nations where
hegemonies have no place, where everyone has a voice
and a vote, and where the obsolete right of veto does
not exist.
The General Assembly has the capacity, in fact
and in law, to examine crucial and urgent topics
of international reality in order to adopt concrete,
action-oriented resolutions. In our opinion, the
Organization’s main problem today consists precisely
in the failure to implement the Assembly’s numerous
resolutions, which make up an important body of
standards but remain largely inert because their
application depends on the political will of the States
that have the political, military or economic power to
do so. This is also true of many resolutions on the very
theme of the revitalization of the Assembly, whose
implementation has unfortunately been very limited.
Cuba underlines the need to achieve an appropriate
balance between the principal organs of the United
Nations in accordance with the Charter and to put an
immediate end to the growing and dangerous trend of
transferring items on the General Assembly’s agenda
to the Security Council. The Security Council should
strictly observe the provisions of the Charter and all

12/21

04/12/2013

resolutions of the General Assembly, as the chief organ
of the United Nations, and should not include in its
discussions or agenda issues that clearly fall under the
functions and powers of other organs.
The revitalization of the General Assembly cannot
be a bureaucratic process. As Father Miguel d’Escoto,
from the brotherly Republic of Nicaragua, wisely said
in his farewell address as President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session (see A/63/PV.105),
the revitalization of this organ is not a technical issue
but a political one.
We hope that as a result of the revitalization
process, the interaction between the Secretariat and the
General Assembly is strengthened, so that the former
can fulfil more effectively the mandates set out by
the Member States. Furthermore, as part of the work
of the Ad Hoc Working Group, the implementation of
resolutions on this subject should be closely monitored
and the inventory of resolutions on the revitalization of
the General Assembly should be kept up to date.
We already have a large aresenal of legislation on
the necessary revitalization of this principal organ. The
priority is to implement the many resolutions already
adopted and march resolutely towards the practical
implementation of the reform process. It is urgent that we
move forward with concrete steps on the revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly. We cannot
have an Organization that responds effectively to the
contemporary system of international relations without
reforming the Security Council and transforming the
General Assembly into the centre of the debate and
multilateral work.
The delegation of Cuba would like to conclude by
reiterating its willingness to continue to collaborate in
the work to achieve the important and necessary goal of
revitalizing the General Assembly.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the convening of today’s
meeting of the General Assembly on the revitalization
of its work. I take this opportunity to congratulate the
Permanent Representatives of Slovakia and Thailand
on their appointment as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly and to wish them every success
in that endeavour. At the same time, I would like to
express our gratitude to the Permanent Representative
of Egypt for his effective leadership of the Ad Hoc
Working Group during the sixty-seventh session.

13-59145

04/12/2013

Russia supports realistic initiatives aimed at
improving the effectiveness of the General Assembly’s
activities, provided that paramount importance is given
to improving the Assembly’s working methods and
streamlining its agenda, which is far too overburdened.
We support the need to consider some of its agenda
items on a biennial or triennial basis and to remove
items that have lost their relevance.
We reiterate our proposal to ease up during the
high-level week of the general debate, as Heads of State
and Government and Foreign Ministers already have a
busy schedule of bilateral contacts during their stay in
New York. The number of high-level events during that
period should be limited and the rest evenly distributed
throughout the Assembly’s entire session.
We also believe that any reform innovation should
be based on strict compliance with the prerogatives
allocated among the principal organs of the United
Nations, as provided for in the Charter. In particular,
we advocate maintaining the current practice based
on Article 97 of the Charter regarding the role of the
General Assembly in the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General, whereby the Secretary-General
is appointed by the Assembly on the recommendation
of the Security Council.
During the current session, we will need to
determine the procedure for electing the chairs of
the Main Committees of the General Assembly in
the future, given that the current scheme expires this
year. We are willing to consider the proposals on the
negotiating table.
We must carefully study the proposals to
strengthen the institutional memory of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly. At the same
time, we note that, as with any issue that might have
financial implications for the regular budget of the
United Nations, this issue should be considered in full
compliance with the conventional procedure, namely,
in the Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Currently, the international situation continues to
undergo profound and complex changes so as to
effectively respond to the myriad global threats and
challenges. The international community generally
expects the United Nations to play a greater role in
maintaining world peace, enhancing cooperation and
seeking common development.

A/68/PV.59

The General Assembly is one of the main
policy-making and deliberative bodies of the United
Nations and one of the most important Charter
organs within the United Nations system. The broad
membership, especially developing countries, hope to
see the Assembly’s authority and efficiency further
strengthened. Thus the Assembly would respond to the
expectations of the international community and better
fulfil the duties entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations.
China supports the further strengthening of the
policy deliberations of the General Assembly in the
light of the developing international situation and
in response to the outstanding challenges facing the
United Nations in various fields. The Assembly is to
give priority attention to the major issues of universal
concern for the membership, especially those that have
to do with the fundamental interests of developing
countries.
At present, international cooperation for
development is in a critical transitional stage. The
General Assembly needs to focus its attention on how
to scale up its support for development issues and play a
greater role in achieving the Millennium Development
Goals, preparing the post-2015 development agenda
and promoting sustainable development.
The principal organs of the United Nations,
including the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, need to strengthen
their cooperation and division of labour, give full
play to their respective advantages and enhance their
exchanges of information and interaction. On matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, in accordance with the division of labour
set out in the Charter, the General Assembly should
strengthen its coordination and cooperation with the
Security Council.
China supports the General Assembly in its
efforts to improve its working methods, streamline its
decision-making process and improve its efficiency so
as to cultivate a pragmatic and action-oriented culture.
The authority and effectiveness of the Assembly depend
to a large extent on the implementation and results of
its resolutions. Members need to respect the sanctity
of all General Assembly resolutions and maintain the
Assembly’s authority and effectiveness.
The effective functioning of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly is an important

13-5914513/21

A/68/PV.59

04/12/2013

guarantee for the smooth proceeding of the Assembly’s
work. China supports the idea of strengthening the
Office of the President in terms of financial and human
resources, as a means to help resolve the practical
difficulties facing especially the developing countries
that assume the presidency.

globalization. The increasingly complex and pressing
transnational challenges of our time, namely, the issues
of peace and security, development, human rights, the
environment and health, among others, also require
more effective structures of global governance and a
revitalized General Assembly.

China has in recent years contributed to the trust
fund in support of the functioning of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly. We hope that more
countries will take effective measures to support the
functioning of that Office.

In your acceptance speech in June 2013 (see
A/67/PV.87), Mr. President, you rightly identified
reinvigoration of the reform agenda of the General
Assembly as critical. In your inaugural address to the
Assembly at its sixty-eight session (see A/68/PV.1), you
reiterated your determination to dedicate significant
time and resources to the issues of reforming and
revitalizing the major bodies of the United Nations,
namely, the General Assembly and the Security Council.
You can count on India’s support in those endeavours.

The membership generally invests great hope in the
revitalization of the General Assembly. China firmly
supports the President of the General Assembly in
his efforts to revitalize the Assembly and to facilitate
a significant role for the Assembly in the peaceful
resolution of international disputes and in the promotion
of global common development.
China congratulates the Permanent Representatives
of Slovakia and Thailand on their appointment as
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
We hope that, within the framework of the Working
Group, the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions can be taken forward in a spirit of
democratic consultations, via a stepwise approach and
in accordance with the principle of easy matters first.
China stands ready to work with the rest of
the United Nations membership in joint efforts to
facilitate progress on the important agenda item of the
revitalization of the General Assembly.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this important discussion. I am happy to
place on record our appreciation for the good work
done by the Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the General Assembly last year,
Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil, Permanent
Representative of Egypt. I also welcome the appointment
of the Permanent Representatives of Slovakia and
Thailand as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group
for this session.
I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Algeria on behalf of
Non-Aligned Movement.
The impact of the political transformations
sweeping parts of the world and the continuing weakness
in the global economy have exposed the weakness of

14/21

The need for the revitalization of the General
Assembly has long been recognized by the Assembly.
However, after more than two decades of discussions,
few changes have been made, even to its working
methods, and negligible outcomes attained in terms
of substantive changes to the norms and structures of
the Assembly. Without prejudging the proceedings of
the Ad Hoc Working Group, which is soon to begin
its work, I would like to place on record the Indian
delegation’s considered views on some of the most
important aspects of the revitalization of the General
Assembly.
We have consistently held the view that the General
Assembly can be revitalized only when its position as
the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations is respected, both in
letter and spirit. The Assembly should take the lead in
setting the global agenda and restoring the centrality
of the United Nations in formulating multilateral
approaches to resolving transnational issues. In
particular, revitalization must restore the primacy of
the United Nations in development matters. We need
to change the Organization from a talk shop to a place
where transnational issues that impact each and every
one of us are addressed swiftly and where truly global
solutions are prescribed.
First of all, it is critical that we establish a relationship
of mutual respect for the respective mandates of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, in the
spirit of the Charter. The Council should not encroach
upon the mandate of the Assembly through extremely
wide and permissive interpretations of what constitutes
a threat to international peace and security.
13-59145

04/12/2013

Secondly, we believe that the Assembly must have a
greater say in the process of selection of the SecretaryGeneral. The continued circumscription of the
Assembly’s role and responsibilities in the process of
the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
needs to change in the interests of the United Nations
system in general and the Assembly’s prerogatives in
particular.
Thirdly, the Assembly and the other entities that
form part of the United Nations system must reflect
best practices in their day-to-day functioning. They
have a lot to learn from Member States in that regard.
In conclusion, let me re-emphasize the need to
discuss substantive measures that would strengthen
the role of General Assembly as the chief deliberative,
policymaking and representative body of the
international community.
You can count, Sir, on India’s constructive support
and participation in those efforts.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): On behalf of my delegation,
I wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting
on an issue that is of particular importance to us.
I wish also to express Malaysia’s appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Egypt for his tireless
efforts and outstanding leadership in steering the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly during the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. We appreciate the
convening of the four separate thematic meetings on
revitalization. The discussions undertaken and all
efforts by Member States culminated in the report of
the Working Group (A/67/936), for which we have the
Chair of the Working Group to thank. Allow me also to
congratulate the Permanent Representatives of Slovakia
and Thailand on their appointment as co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group for the sixty-eighth session of
the General Assembly.
On that note, I wish to align my statement with that
delivered by the representative of Algeria on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Without a doubt, the General Assembly is the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ
of the United Nations. Representing all 193 Member
States, it is the highest authoritative body of the United
Nations. As such, we must accord it the role and
authority that it rightly deserves. Unfortunately, despite
the extensive discussions that we have held throughout

A/68/PV.59

the years, we have only managed to achieve qualified
success in revitalizing the General Assembly. We have
seen some improvement in its working methods. While
we welcome those improvements, we must continue
to address the actual reasons why there is a need to
revitalize the General Assembly in the first place.
My delegation firmly believes that the
non-implementation of the Assembly’s resolutions
continues to be the biggest stumbling block in enhancing
the role and effectiveness of the Assembly. In fact, no
other weakness of the General Assembly undermines its
relevance or effectiveness more. Malaysia appreciates
the decision to have the Ad Hoc Working Group
continue its review of General Assembly resolutions on
revitalization, and we welcome the updated inventory
chart of those resolutions (A/67/936, annex I). That has
enabled Member States to better understand the reasons
behind the lack of implementation of such resolutions,
with a view to addressing their underlying causes. It is
the first step towards the ultimate goal of achieving full
implementation of all Assembly resolutions.
Malaysia continues to take a serious view of the
issue of encroachment. We cannot emphasize enough
the importance of all principal organs — especially the
leading two, the General Assembly and the Security
Council — faithfully respecting one another’s mandates
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Both organs must work together in consultation and
cooperation to create a more harmonious working
relationship.
We stand ready to look into issues such as
rationalizing or clustering the list of agenda items, as
well as the possibility of biennializing or triennializing
agenda items and resolutions. However, the consent of
the sponsoring State or States is absolutely vital before
any such measures are implemented. At the same
time, we agree that those who call for biennializing or
triennializing agenda items and resolutions should lead
by setting an example for others to follow.
Malaysia welcomes the convening of high-level
meetings and thematic debates on issues that are
important to Member States. However, we believe
there should be better coordination with all the
relevant parties in organizing such meetings so as to
avoid or at least minimize scheduling problems for
delegations, especially during the high-level week of
the General Assembly. We look forward to discussing
proposals — such as exploring the possibility of

13-5914515/21

A/68/PV.59

scheduling such meetings during the early part of the
year — for resolving the problem of too many meetings
and events during that week.
Malaysia is concerned about the delay that occurred
in electing the Chairs of the Main Committees for
the current session of the Assembly. Situations such
as occurred in the lead-up to this session should not
be repeated. We hope that all concerned can respect
the practice of holding the elections, on the basis of
geographical distribution, at least three months prior to
the next session, in order to encourage advance planning
and preparation for the work of the Main Committees.
We also look forward to discussing in greater detail
and determining the rotation pattern for the Chairs
and Bureaus of the Main Committees, bearing in mind
the expiration of the rotation mechanism established
in resolution 48/264. Malaysia believes that whatever
rotation pattern is agreed on should be adhered to by all
Member States.
It is undeniable that the role and activities of
the President of the General Assembly have evolved
significantly over the years. Compared with just a
few years ago, the Assembly currently considers more
issues and agenda items. Furthermore, its workload
now covers the entire year and is no longer limited
to the main session. Given those circumstances, it is
only natural that the Office holder be provided with the
necessary resources to enable him or her to efficiently
and effectively perform the role entrusted to the Office
by the Charter.
While we recognize the benefits of the trust fund
established to assist in funding the President’s work,
it is nonetheless critical that funding from the regular
budget be increased so as to avoid the President being
dependent on the trust fund and voluntary contributions.
In that regard, Malaysia looks forward to proposals
from the Secretary-General for reviewing the budget of
the Office of the President of the General Assembly for
the biennium 2014-2015, pursuant to resolution 66/294.
On the issue of the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General, Malaysia firmly believes that
the Assembly needs to play a more meaningful role
in the process. The selection process must be more
transparent and inclusive, since the Secretary-General
represents all Member States of the United Nations, and
not just the Security Council. It is therefore important
to implement past resolutions on the issue, especially
paragraphs 17 to 22 of the annex to resolution 60/286,

16/21

04/12/2013

in the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral in the future.
The issue of the revitalization of the General
Assembly has been the subject of plenary debate since
1991. It is high time that all Member States approached
the issue with openness and the political will necessary
to realizing substantial progress. Should the pace of
reform continue as it has over the years, we fear being
left with the awkward agenda item of revitalizing the
revitalization process. I am sure that is something we
can avoid.
Mr. Toro-Carnevali (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
My delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil, the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, for his tireless efforts and
excellent job as Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the General Assembly during
the Assembly’s sixty-seventh session. I would also like
to take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassadors
František Ružička and Norachit Sinhaseni, the
Permanent Representatives of Slovakia and Thailand,
respectively, on their appointment as co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group for our sixty-eighth session,
and to wish them every success in fulfilling their tasks.
The revitalization of the General Assembly involves
strengthening it as the preferred forum for promoting
dialogue and cooperation in the search for solutions
to the problems that affect the economic and social
development of the peoples, as well as issues relating
to international peace and security. In that regard, we
should promote and maintain the role and mandate of
the General Assembly in establishing United Nations
priorities, including review of all budgetary and
administrative matters. The Assembly is the only body
authorized to allocate and reallocate financial and
human resources, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and its own resolutions.
The Assembly should continue to function as a
political space for the exchange of ideas and consensus,
in which every Member State has the right to draw this
body’s attention to the issues of concern to it that have to
do with the goals promoted by this Organization. Since
the General Assembly is the supreme United Nations
forum for debate, it must retain its independence

13-59145

04/12/2013

vis-à-vis other organs. As has been stated by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in various
political documents, in particular the Final Document
of its Sixteenth Summit, in Tehran, it is essential to
reverse the Security Council’s tendency to get involved
in considering issues that are outside its purview.
The revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly should be governed by the principles of
democracy, transparency and accountability and should
be achieved through open and inclusive consultations
aimed at continuing to strengthen the role and
standing of the Assembly as the chief deliberative and
policymaking organ of the United Nations.
Venezuela reaffirms the importance of ensuring
the effectiveness of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly through the necessary financial and
human resources. While acknowledging the progress
made to date, we call for the consideration of new ways
to continue strengthening that Office.
In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
wishes to state that it is firmly convinced that the
revitalization and reform of the Organization to which
we aspire should include strengthening the role and
standing of the General Assembly.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank Mr. John Ashe for his leadership in addressing the
various items on the agenda of the General Assembly.
I would also like to extend my sincere gratitude to
Mr. Ahmadein Khalil, Permanent Representative of
Egypt and Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
during the previous session.
In your acceptance speech, Mr. President, you
mentioned that any organization that cannot evolve
or adapt to the changing circumstances is at risk and
that the United Nations must reform or it will become
inconsequential (see A/67/PV.87). I completely share
your views. The United Nations needs to adapt to the
changing realities with a sense of urgency if it wants
to remain relevant and to lead the world for the better.
Revitalizing the General Assembly, together with
Security Council reform, is a crucial component of the
reform agenda. We must make steady progress towards
achieving feasible and realistic results on this agenda
item.
There have been many developments with regard to
this item over the past several years. The compilation
of a handbook on the General Assembly, the review

A/68/PV.59

and update of the inventory of Assembly resolutions on
revitalization, the practice of holding thematic debates
and the close consultations among the Presidents of the
different organs are among the concrete developments
achieved so far. However, much more must be done
and much greater efforts are required. Let me put
forward some ideas that might be worth discussing and
exploring during this session.
First, Japan is of the view that the proposal made
during the previous session to bring forward the date
for the election of members of the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council reflects the legitimate
concerns of newly elected members. It should therefore
be seriously considered. In fact, bringing the elections
forward would ensure that the newly elected members
had more time to prepare before taking up their roles in
the respective Councils.
Secondly, enhancing fairness in the management
of the General Assembly is an important aspect that
we should discuss, particularly with regard to how the
lists of speakers are decided in the Assembly. There is
the issue of the rigid categorization of speakers when
deciding the list of speakers for the general debate.
Let me note that there are countries such as mine in
which the Head of State plays a ceremonial role and
the Head of Government has the highest political
mandate. In cases where such a Head of Government
makes a statement before the General Assembly, some
flexibility should be considered when deciding the
order in the list of speakers. Japan believes that further
improvements in how the list of speakers is organized
should be explored.
A particular case that Japan views with some
concern is when representatives of countries of a
regional organization speak immediately after the
representative of that regional organization. Japan is
of the view that when the representative of a regional
organization has made a statement, countries that do
not belong to that regional organization should be
given the opportunity to express their views before the
members of the regional organization.
Thirdly, I believe that everyone agrees on the
importance of rationalizing the work of the General
Assembly with a view to better enabling it to focus on
important issues. The work of the Assembly has evolved
over the years. Currently, around 170 agenda items are
discussed and around 300 resolutions and decisions are
adopted in the Assembly every year. Efforts have been
made for biennial or triennial consideration and the

13-5914517/21

A/68/PV.59

clustering and the elimination of items, but much more
must be done. We really need to seriously consider
and discuss concrete ways and criteria for the further
streamlining and prioritization of the Assembly’s
agenda and its Main Committees.
With regard to the rationalization of the work of
the General Assembly, allow me also emphasize the
importance of following time restraints when speaking
in the Assembly. We should encourage Member States
to distribute a longer written statement for putting on
record, while delivering concise oral statements within
the time limits. We Member States should maintain a
high level of discipline on that issue if we really want to
enhance the work of the Assembly.
Such issues are some of the ideas that Japan believes
to be worth discussing under this agenda item. The
revitalization of the General Assembly, together with
the reform of the Security Council, is an imminent task
that we must address. Let me conclude my statement
by saying that Japan stands ready to contribute in a
constructive way to the discussions aimed at further
enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of the
United Nations.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank last year’s Chair of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly, Ambassador Mootaz
Khalil of Egypt, for his leadership of the Group. Under
his able stewardship, we adopted a resolution that will
serve as a strong basis for the Group’s discussions as we
move forward (resolution 67/297). We welcome the new
co-Chairs, Ambassador František Ružička of Slovakia
and Ambassador Norachit Sinhaseni of Thailand, and
offer them our full support. We also look forward to
working with fellow Member States as we consider the
best options for revitalizing the General Assembly.
The United States is fully committed to multilateral
engagement and a strong United Nations system. We
support the contributions of the General Assembly
in that regard. Accordingly, our delegation believes
that making the work of the Assembly more focused
and relevant should be a priority for everyone. While
there has been modest progress on improving the
work of the Assembly, it has not kept pace with the
Assembly’s workload in terms of the number of agenda
items, resolutions adopted and reports requested
of the Secretary-General. That number has grown
exponentially over time. We therefore call on Member
States to refocus their attention on efforts to streamline
18/21

04/12/2013

the work and to reform the working methods of the
General Assembly.
We welcome the updated inventory chart of General
Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed to
the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group (A/67/936)
submitted during the sixty-seventh session. We propose
an emphasis on follow up of unimplemented provisions
of the annex related to resolutions, the consolidation
of reports, the preparation and issuance of reports,
the report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organization, the practices and working methods
of the Main Committees and the General Committee.
Those efforts could enhance the role, authority and
effectiveness of the Assembly.
We also support Ambassador Khalil’s proposal to
consider scheduling some high-level debates earlier in
the year to remedy the congested General Assembly
calendar. We should not shy away from thinking about
new ways to make the Assembly a more nimble and
responsive body. We recognize that many delegations
continue to focus on other aspects related to the
United Nations work, such as the role and authority
of the President of the General Assembly, the working
methods of the Security Council or the process to select
the Secretary-General. While important topics, we do
not believe they should be the primary focus of the
Working Group’s efforts.
The United Nations Charter makes clear the
co-equal relationship of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, which should be respected. And
in our view, the selection process for the SecretaryGeneral has already been adequately addressed.
Article 97 of the Charter provides a straightforward
and clear process.
My delegation looks forward to working closely with
you, Mr. President, the co-Chairs and our counterparts
from other delegations towards a constructive dialogue
for concrete reform.
Mrs. Zarrouk Boumiza (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Egypt for his significant efforts as Chair of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly during the sixty-seventh session of
the Assembly.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
repressentative of Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. We would like to make the following
remarks.
13-59145

04/12/2013

First of all, with regard to the role and mandate
of the General Assembly, we believe that revitalizing
its role is an integral part of all United Nations
comprehensive reform. The General Assembly is the
principal deliberative and policymaking body, and the
most representative organ of the United Nations. The
Assembly is also responsible for defining the criteria
for codifying international law and for budgetary and
administrative matters.
While reaffirming the importance of strengthening
the role of the General Assembly and revitalizing
its work, we believe that the common interest of the
international community should be included in the
General Assembly’s agenda. The agenda must go hand
in hand with development issues and challenges, such
as the Millennium Development Goals, the post-2015
development agenda and its follow-up activities. At the
same time, we reaffirm the importance of the holding of
thematic debates, including interactive debates, which
help to define the international community’s important
opinions and positions. We are convinced that such
debates should continue during the sixty-eighth session
and that, with the necessary implementation, they will
yield positive, concrete results and follow-up actions.
We would also stress that strengthening the role
of the General Assembly means recognizing its role in
maintaining international peace and security. While
Articles 12 and 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
give primary responsibility in that matter to the Security
Council, that is not absolute because interaction with
the General Assembly is necessary on matters related
to international peace and security.
Furthermore, we also reaffirm the importance of
improving the contents of the annual reports of the
Security Council to the General Assembly and of their
being more comprehensive and analytical in nature
in order to reflect the decision-making framework
within the Council on different issues. Similarly, we
reaffirm the importance of holding periodic meetings
between the Chairs of the Main Committees of the
General Assembly, and improving the coordination,
cooperation and information exchange between the
Main Committees and the General Assembly through
transparent and regular mechanisms, enabling the
participation of the different countries concerned.
With regard to improving the working methods
of the General Assembly, while there have been
improvements, it is important to ensure the early
election of the Chairs of the Main Committees and

A/68/PV.59

to have concise reports and resolutions in place and
practical methodology for resolutions to improve the
practices of the different Committees, while also giving
each Committee its necessary jurisdiction. It is also
important to avoid any overlapping and to ensure the
coordination and distribution of high-level meetings.
With regard to the election of the Secretary-General
and executive heads of the Secretariat, we would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who held broad
consultations with Member States on transparency and
cooperation in order to strengthen the role and focus of
the Organization and to define his vision of its work,
in accordance with the aspirations of the international
community. We also trust that the election of executive
heads of the Secretariat will be improved by taking into
account the important recommendations of the Joint
Inspection Unit during the session, as well as the need
for equitable geographic distribution.
With regard to strengthening the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, sufficient financial
resources need to be provided to the Office so that it is
not a burden for countries with limited means and to
ensure equality among States on this issue. Institutional
memory should also be maintained.
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s support for
resolution 66/294 of September 2012, on the creation
of a working group to revitalize the General Assembly,
and we welcome the appointment of the Ambassadors of
Slovakia and Thailand to preside over those meetings.
Mr. Warraich (Pakistan): I thank
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

you,

Pakistan associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Algeria on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We would like to make
some additional points on our national capacity.
With regard to the agenda item on the
implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations,
it is critical to reaffirm full confidence in the United
Nations, especially as the General Assembly is the only
universal and legitimate body for offering common
solutions to common problems in this interdependent
global environment. Secondly, addressing the concerns
on the lack of implementation of resolutions will
require not only a demonstration of requisite political
will by all Member States, but also the availability of
adequate resources in the United Nations. Thirdly, the
selection of United Nations agendas in a manner that is
relevant to the needs, preferences and priorities of the

13-5914519/21

A/68/PV.59

peoples around the world will help the implementation
of the agreements contained in the adopted resolutions.
Fourthly, continued monitoring of the status of
implementation is important, and the current updating
of inventory is useful. A more effective mechanism is
needed, however. We would reiterate the suggestion
that for every resolution, the Secretariat should submit,
within a specific time frame, a report on the status of
implementation. The report should include information
on the reasons for non-implementation or delay in
implementation. A special unit could be created within
the Secretariat or within the Office of the President of
the General Assembly for that purpose.
On revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly, we welcome the adoption of resolution
67/297 on the subject. We take the opportunity today
to thank the Permanent Representative of Egypt for his
commendable work as Chair of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the General Assembly
during the sixty-seventh session. We also welcome the
appointment of Permanent Representatives of Slovakia
and Thailand as co-Chairs of the Group for the current
session.
Our discussions on the subject have advanced our
work, particularly with respect to streamling the agenda
and improving working methods. It will be worthwhile
to carry out a study to assess the impact of efficiency
measures on the overall effectiveness of the General
Assembly. There is also a need to further enhance
coherence and coordination among the principal organs
while building on their complementarities. Adherence
to the Charter mandates can help to resolve the matter
of the perceived encroachment of the Security Council
on the role and the authority of the General Assembly.
Meeting the expectations of Member States for an
inclusive procedure for the selection of the SecretaryGeneral is also important.
The efforts to improve the working methods and
agenda-setting continue. We nevertheless emphasize
that any biennialization or triennialization of draft
resolutions — reasonable tools, indeed, for improving
working methods — should be carried out with the clear
and prior consent of the sponsoring State or States.
We must progress to further strengthening the
General Assembly’s status as the chief deliberative and
policymaking organ of the United Nations. The Charter
provides enormous space to the General Assembly,
and we should enable the Assembly to fully utilize that

20/21

04/12/2013

space. Our deliberations on the post-2015 development
agenda provide an historic opportunity to reassert the
Assembly’s authority. We must endeavour to make
sure that our agreement on the post-2015 development
agenda meets the Charter’s promise regarding the
promotion of economic and social advancement of all
peoples.
A careful and skilful pursuit of Security Council
reform will also contribute to the enhancement of
the credibility of the United Nations. Shortcuts or
procedural moves and manoeuvres cannot achieve
results, and decisions in that regard must enjoy the
support of all Members of the Organization. What
we need is consensus. The reforms should aggregate
and reflect the aspirations and interest of all, not the
ambitions of the few. Council reform should make it
more representative, democratic and equitable and
should make its work more effective, transparent and
accountable. As the Prime Minister of Pakistan told
the Assembly, we should plan for a dynamic future,
not entrenched, anachronistic, historical practices and
privileges.
United Nations interaction with other international
organizations such as the Bretton Woods institutions
and intergovernmental groupings like the Group of 20,
as well as relevant stakeholders, including civil society
and the private sector, will make it more responsive
and relevant with respect to global issues, which are
the essential ingredients for any exercise aiming at the
revitalization of the Organization.
We maintain that there is a need to bring more
vigour, visibility and attention to the revitalization
debate. We propose that, in its work during the current
session, the Ad Hoc Working Group examine the
possibility of convening a high-level meeting in the
near future.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on the agenda items before us. The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda items 121 and 122.
Programme of work
The President: I would like to make the following
announcements concerning the programme of work of
the plenary.
The joint debate on agenda item 70, “Strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
13-59145

04/12/2013

economic assistance”, and its sub-items (a) to (d), and
agenda item 71, “Assistance to survivors of the 1994
genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and
victims of sexual violence”, originally scheduled to be
held at 10 a.m. on Thursday, 12 December, will now
take place at 3 p.m. on the same date.

A/68/PV.59

In addition, consideration of agenda item 34,
“Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security and
development”, originally scheduled on Monday,
16 December, has been postponed to a later date to be
announced.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

13-5914521/21
