254

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

28. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to mark, in their
respective fields of operation, the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to
report to the Secretary-General on the measures taken;
29. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/44. United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, in
particular resolution 38/52 of 7 December 1983,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 60
containing an account of the work of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa and the operation of the
Programme for the period from I October 1983 to 30 September I 984,
Recognizing the valuable assistance rendered by the
Programme to the peoples of South Africa and Namibia,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion
of the Programme is essential in order to meet the increasing demand for educational and training opportunities by
the peoples of South Africa and Namibia,
Fully recognizing the need to provide educational
opportunities and counselling to student refugees in a wide
variety of professional, cultural, technical and linguistic
disciplines, particularly in the areas of development and
international co-operation,
1. Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa;
2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa for their continued
efforts to promote generous contributions to the Programme and to enhance co-operation with governmental,
intergovernmental and non-governmental scholarship
agencies;
3. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have supported the Programme by providing contributions, scholarships or places in their educational institutions;
4. . Notes with concern that, owing to inflation and rising scholarship costs, contributions and pledges have
60 A/39/351.

declined, in real terms, in 1984 from the corresponding figure in 1983;
5. Appeals to all States, institutions, organizations and
individuals to offer greater financial and other support to
the Programme in order to ensure its continuation and
expansion.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/45. Offers by Member States of studf and training facilities for inhabitants o Non-SelfGoverning Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/53 of 7 December 1983,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on
offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 61 prepared
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22
November 1954,
Considering that more scholarships should be made
available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories in all parts of the world and that steps should be
taken to encourage applications from students in those
Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants
of those Territories that have not yet attained self-government or independence and, wherever possible, to provide
travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective
measures to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of
information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such offers:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984
61 A/39/541 and Corr. I and Add. I and 2.
