A/55/PV.61

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

61st plenary meeting
Tuesday, 14 November 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Shihab
(Maldives) Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of one member of the Economic and
Social Council
Letter from the Permanent Representative of
Greece to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the General Assembly (A/55/523)
The Acting President: In connection with the
General Assembly’s consideration of the item before it,
I should like to draw the attention of members to
document A/55/523, containing a letter dated
20 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of
Greece to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the General Assembly.
In his letter, the Permanent Representative of
Greece announces that Greece would like to relinquish
its seat on the Economic and Social Council for the
years 2001 and 2002 in favour of Malta.
As a result, a vacancy occurs, and a new member
must therefore be elected for the remaining period of
two years, commencing on 1 January 2001.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 2847 (XXVI) of 20 December

(Finland)

1971, and taking into account the fact that the vacancy
occurs from among the Western European and other
States, the new member should be elected from that
region.
I should like to inform the Assembly that the
candidate which receives a two-thirds majority of
members present and voting will be declared elected.
In the case of a tie vote, there will be a restricted ballot
limited to those candidates that have obtained an equal
number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
that procedure?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: In accordance with rule
92 of the rules of procedure, the election shall be held
by secret ballot, and there shall be no nominations.
Regarding the vacancy, the Chairman of the
Group of Western European and other States for the
month of October has informed the Secretariat that the
Group has endorsed Malta.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, we shall now proceed to the election by
secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like
to remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a
point of order on the actual conduct of the voting.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-74556 (E)

*0074556*

A/55/PV.61

We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed. I request
representatives to use only those ballot papers and to
write on them the name of the one State for which they
wish to vote. A ballot paper containing more than one
name from the region will be declared invalid. Names
of Member States on a ballot paper which do not
belong to that region will not be counted at all.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Ms. Romulus (Haiti), Mr. Al Yassin (Kuwait) and
Mr. Bambissa (Mozambique) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 10.40 a.m. and
resumed at 11 a.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Western European and other States
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Malta

127
2
125
0
125
84
125

Having obtained the required two-thirds majority,
Malta was elected a member of the Economic and
Social Council for a two-year term beginning
1 January 2001.
The Acting President: I congratulate Malta,
which has been elected a member of the Economic and
Social Council, and I thank the tellers for their
assistance in this election.
This concludes our consideration of subitem (b)
of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 18
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Draft decision (A/55/L.4)
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Papua New Guinea, Chairman of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the

2

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, to
introduce draft decision A/55/L.4.
Mr. Donigi (Papua New Guinea), Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: It
is an honour for me to introduce the draft decision on
the observance of the fortieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in document A/55/L.4.
The effect of the draft decision would be that a
special plenary meeting would be convened during the
fifty-fifth session in observance of the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration. It is
hoped that at that special plenary meeting there will be
statements by the Chairman of the Special Committee
and the chairpersons of the five regional groups to
mark the occasion. That should not take too much time.
I therefore commend the draft decision to the
Assembly and urge members to adopt it by
acclamation.
The Acting President: There are no further
speakers on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
decision A/55/L.4, entitled “Observance of the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples”. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/55/L.4 was adopted.
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that the date for the observance of the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples will be announced at a later date.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 18.

A/55/PV.61

Agenda item 45
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Draft resolution (A/55/L.31)
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to introduce
draft resolution A/55/L.31.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the sponsors of the draft resolution contained
in document A/55/L.31, I have the privilege to
introduce that draft resolution, on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I have the honour also to add
the following sponsors not listed on the document:
Bulgaria, Denmark, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Luxembourg, Morocco, Oman and Senegal.
I will be very brief because the draft resolution
has enjoyed wide support in its development. We
would like to thank all for their contributions and for
the constructive manner in which our dialogue was
conducted. Because of those things, we anticipate
consensus adoption.
This seems a far cry from some of the past
debates on this item; it would appear that we have
come full circle. Unfortunately, too many of the old
issues still remain outstanding, from the arrest of
indicted war criminals and the proper functioning of
institutions to the return of refugees and displaced
persons and economic rejuvenation. We have again
re-emphasized those issues in the draft resolution
before the Assembly.
What is new in the text, thank God, is more
positive, and that is primarily the democratic change in
the region. This will, in the longer term, have a most
favourable impact on Bosnia and Herzegovina and
discourage the forces of disintegration within and
outside Bosnia, which still unfortunately remain.
It is also clear that Bosnia and Herzegovina must
take greater charge of its own future and that the future
lies in Bosnia and Herzegovina being accepted as an
equal partner in the Euro-Atlantic family, as well as in
continuing to develop its unique relationships and roles
throughout the world. For this reason, we are most
proud and pleased to highlight Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s contributions, including those to
peacekeeping. Also, as a consequence of the Srebrenica
report — and others, I might add — asked for by this

General Assembly, we have helped initiate a
constructive
re-evaluation
of
peace-building,
peacekeeping and peace-making challenges to the
United Nations, through the Brahimi report.
What probably remains as the main challenge in
the next year is to review the efficacy of the current
international efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These
contributions are most necessary still. However, they
should be rationalized and made more efficient, and
Bosnians must be treated more as partners. Investment
should replace aid. Consultation should supersede
dictate. The longer-term sociological and psychological
effects of the current situation must be taken into
consideration. And more elections with certain desired
changes cannot substitute for the gradual process of
truly helping establish the environment for progressive
economic, democratic and political development.
I would like to add that the Arabic draft is not
entirely in line with the original text, and therefore
adoption of the draft resolution may be delayed. We
will be informed as to how quickly it can be brought
into line and the draft resolution can be formally
adopted.
Mr. Walker (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to be a sponsor of draft
resolution A/55/L.31, on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is an especially propitious time to
consider the progress that has been achieved and to
review the tasks that remain so that Dayton’s dream of
a democratic, tolerant and multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be fully realized.
It has now been five years since the signing of the
Dayton Accords. The three original signers of that
historic agreement are no longer in power: one has
died; one has been overthrown in a peaceful
revolution; and the other has retired from the
Presidency. New democratic leaders have emerged in
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
changing the regional dynamic and opening the door to
more progress on refugee returns, succession issues,
war crimes and other complicated matters.
As the draft resolution makes clear, there has
been slow but steady progress in a number of areas.
Refugee returns to minority areas are more than oneand-one-half times greater than last year. Privatization
of the economy has begun. There has been some
limited reduction in the size of the militaries, and a
Bosnian multi-ethnic United Nations civilian police

3

A/55/PV.61

contingent is serving in East Timor. But real progress
in addressing these and other problems will not be
made until more is done to strengthen Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s central political structures. Overlapping
authorities and jurisdictions have complicated even the
simplest governing decisions and allowed rejectionists,
separatists and criminals to hold up progress, even
when the people are yearning for reform.
A perfect example of this is the slow progress we
have seen in implementing the New York Declaration.
One year ago tomorrow, in a historic meeting with the
Security Council, the three Presidents of Bosnia and
Herzegovina committed themselves to a series of
measures designed to strengthen the central
Government. Unfortunately, only part of that
Declaration has been fulfilled. Too much of it,
including a unified passport and a State Border
Service, had to be imposed by the High Representative
after hard-line Serb Democratic Party (SDS) deputies
opposed these measures. We applaud the High
Representative for taking resolute action and using the
full authority of his office in this case. We will
continue to encourage him to deal with obstructionists
in a similarly resolute manner.
Progress in strengthening institutions and
ensuring that extremists and obstructionists are not
allowed to block Dayton’s implementation would help
resolve continuing problems in several areas which
have been addressed in this draft resolution. More
transparency and accountability would help address the
problem of corruption and clear the way for progress in
privatization and economic reform. Implementation of
needed property legislation and removal of local
criminal leaders would help accelerate refugee returns.
Strengthening freedom of the press would help curtail
and expose abuses. And the apprehension of war
criminals still at large would help deliver justice and
bring a degree of closure to all those who are suffering
because of past war crimes. The United States
continues to believe that there will be no lasting peace
in the Balkans until all of the outstanding indictees of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia are brought to justice.
Last Saturday the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina participated in their fourth democratic
elections since the signing of the Dayton Accords five
years ago. The preliminary results continue to show a
trend toward greater political pluralism. We hope that
the new leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina will

4

commit themselves to addressing the difficult issues
that are the focus of this draft resolution and strive to
build a multi-ethnic State based on freedom and
tolerance.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): There could hardly be
a more appropriate time to discuss the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina than today. On the one hand,
we are only a few days away from the fifth anniversary
of the conclusion of the Dayton Accords, an agreement
that, after years of bitter fighting, brought peace to the
country and created a political and legal framework for
its future. On the other hand, very important elections
in that country have just been concluded and we await
the final outcome.
Much has been done in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but more still needs to be accomplished. I shall not
praise the positive developments and achievements,
which certainly exist. Rather, I would like to use this
opportunity to point out what needs to be done if we
want to have Bosnia and Herzegovina functioning
without the visible presence and influence of the
international community. At least three factors are
crucial here: the arrest and trial of all indicted war
criminals, the return of refugees and displaced persons
and economic revitalization.
We should all be perfectly aware that the Dayton
Accords consist of a set of conditions that are highly
interdependent and interrelated. Without all of them
being fully implemented, the goal of achieving a selfsustainable, democratic and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina will not be accomplished. That is not yet
the case. While in certain areas positive developments
are visible — such as the development of State
institutions — in many they are not. The most
acknowledged problem is definitely the lack of
minority returns to all areas, and especially to
Republika Srpska.
The new Croatian Administration, soon after
winning the election, took many significant steps to
speed up the process of the return of its citizens of
Serbian origin. One of those steps included the signing
of a bilateral agreement with the Republika Srpska
related to the two-way return of refugees. Croatia
respected and implemented the agreement, while the
Government of Republika Srpska has not. Croatia will
continue to create conditions for the return of all its
citizens, but will also insist on the return of Croats to
their homes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

A/55/PV.61

We strongly believe that Dayton has to be fully
implemented by all parties. In this regard, bringing to
justice those indicted for war crimes will not only
serve the noble purpose of making a moral and just
remedy, but will also meet practical ends. Croatia
agrees with those who recognize the link between the
process of minority returns and the fact that the most
notorious war crime perpetrators are still at large. Only
a few weeks ago one Bosnian newspaper published a
letter sent by Radovan Karadzic to some Republika
Srpska officials, giving them clear instructions on what
to do and how to proceed on a set of specific issues.

We support the recent decision of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
firmly believe that the equality and sovereignty of all
constituent peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina has to
become the norm and practice throughout the territory
of the State. This is primarily important for the Croats
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, given that they are the
smallest constituent nation. Simply put, the main
source of security in the minds of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is as follows: for the Bosniacs, their
numbers; for the Serbs, their entity; whereas for the
Croats it can only be their parity.

The Republic of Croatia therefore welcomes the
report on the war criminals in Republika Srpska
prepared by the International Crisis Group and hopes
that The Hague Tribunal and other relevant
international actors have taken note of its findings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina will never achieve the rule of
law and interethnic reconciliation until major war
criminals appear before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia or locally
authorized courts.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is another
neighbour of Bosnia and Herzegovina and a party to
the Dayton Accords. We welcome the political change
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its rapid
integration into international organizations like the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, but we would encourage our
Yugoslav neighbours to persist in their attempt to
establish good-neighbourly relations and to give input
into stabilizing the region. First and foremost, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should recognize
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign State and
establish diplomatic relations with it without
preconditions, as it agreed to do in Dayton five years
ago. Furthermore, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia’s
acceptance of the principle of the equality of all five
successor States, reaffirmed in this year’s draft
resolution on Bosnia and Herzegovina, represents
important confirmation of the existing borders between
the republics of the former Socialist Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia.

On the issue of reconciliation, we commend the
initiative taken by the High Representative to acquire
land in the municipality of Srebrenica and to make it
the final resting place of the victims of the massacre
that took place there in 1995.
At the beginning of this statement I mentioned
the elections. One could easily say that this is the year
of elections in the region, a region which has Bosnia
positioned at its centre. It all started with January
elections in my country, followed by elections in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, then in Kosovo, and
the latest in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These processes
brought about a significant change in political elites,
who now include people with fresh ideas and energy to
start something new and positive.
On the part of Croatia, a new and constructive
approach towards Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
clearly evident. The Croatian President, Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister have each visited Sarajevo on
different occasions and reassured the leadership of
Bosnia and Herzegovina that Croatia fully respects
Bosnia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Nevertheless, Croatia will continue to be of assistance
to Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but in a
transparent manner acceptable to both countries.

Finally, I would like to speak about the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As we have noted, the
political environment in the region has changed and
has become conducive to the further stabilization of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. While this is not enough, it is
promising. The results of the elections should be
implemented and the rhetoric should be toned down.
For Bosnia and Herzegovina it is very important to
swiftly join the Council of Europe and to continue on
the path towards democratization, development, the
rule of law and the protection of human rights, as well
as further integration into the political and economic
mainstream of Europe. This integration, as with the
integration of any other State, should be based upon
individual merits and achievements, as set out in the
draft resolution on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

5

A/55/PV.61

Handling affairs in Bosnia and Herzegovina
always requires caution. There are still obstacles, but
the desired objective is clear and worthy of effort and
international support: Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
democratic and prosperous State and a country of three
constituent nations and equal citizens.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): In a few days we
will observe the fifth anniversary of the signing of the
Dayton Peace Accord, which was done in Paris. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has now emerged as a sovereign
State, with internationally agreed borders. The people
in Bosnia have had to work hard during the last five
years to restore their war-ravaged State to normalcy.
Not many of their efforts have been rewarded with
success, but some notable progress has been achieved.
A lot, however, still remains to be done.
The Dayton Peace Agreement is the most
practical basis for peace objectives and the return to
normalcy to be pursued. There is uneasiness over the
slow implementation of the Peace Agreement. There is
a long list of deadlines that have not been met, and
there are promises that are yet to be fulfilled. Much of
this has been attributed to the leadership’s lack of
commitment. Unfortunately, the leaders’ party goals
and their nationalist agendas have been given priority
over the well-being of citizens, and the principal State
institutions are still dominated by ethnic rather than
State interests. The political climate that prevailed in
the region for so long is often considered a chief
obstacle. With a change in the political atmosphere, we
are cautiously optimistic that the implementation
process will receive a boost and that a much faster pace
of progress will be attainable.
There are a number of priorities that must be
vigorously pursued in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
outline these in right earnest and with a genuine
motivation for the betterment of the people of a
country with which Bangladesh has great friendship.
First, economic reform must be promoted and
conditions for self-sustaining economic growth
created. Bosnia and Herzegovina must move away
from the legacies of the past and make the transition to
a dynamic civil society and a market-driven, vibrant
economy. The need for continued support by the
partners of the peace implementation process is vital.
This will set the stage for success, despite the hurdles
that have been erected by the obstructionist political
forces.

6

Secondly, there is a need to consolidate
institutions and to ensure that they function effectively
and properly. Smoothly functioning institutions are
critical for long-term stability and prosperity.
Thirdly, Bosnia has entered a stage of the peace
process in which donor support is declining
significantly and rapidly. The increasingly scant flow
of resources from the international community should
now be directed towards building the necessary
institutional framework to allow for private investment,
both domestic and foreign. The donor countries and
agencies should ensure that the process is not
abandoned midway, before it is firmly set on course
towards a self-sustaining economy.
Fourthly, the international community should
continue to support the establishment of the essential
prerequisites for economic growth — modern
legislation, deregulation, a viable banking system,
transparent privatization and investment protection,
making the rule of law a reality. Some progress has
already been achieved; there is more to come.
Fifthly, attention should be directed in particular
at capacity-building: modernizing the judiciary with
strong and independent courts; training police and
border-service personnel; supporting key legislation
projects; and building a professional merit-based civil
service, among other measures.
Finally, the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons remains a priority. The latest figures
from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees show that by the end of
August 2000 about 30,000 minority returns were
registered. The figures will be much higher when nonregistered returns are taken into account. The most
important thing is that these returns have taken place in
or near the towns of Srebrenica and Foca — towns that
are synonymous with massacre and destruction. The
tough implementation of the property law must be
credited for this. However, a lot more needs to be done
to restore the confidence of refugees and internally
displaced persons so that they return to their pre-war
homes.
Economic reform, the return of displaced persons
and refugees and the development of common
institutions remain the priorities for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. These are the areas identified by the
High Representative for the implementation of the
peace process. Although it has moved at a slow pace,

A/55/PV.61

Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way over the
past five years in attaining these goals. We need to
appreciate the fact that, with the legacies of the past
haunting the present, and with the bitter memories of
protracted and devastating war and massacre at the
back of the mind, it is not easy to be fully ready for the
prompt restoration of well-functioning statehood. We
applaud the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina for their
continued efforts to build a well-functioning sovereign
State, despite these difficulties. We are fully cognizant
of the many obstacles standing in their way. That is
why the world should stand by and continue to provide
necessary support, assistance and encouragement,
rather than being impatient at the perceived slowness
of progress in that country.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The Central and Eastern European countries associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated
countries, Cyprus and Malta, as well as Norway, align
themselves with this statement.
I should like first of all to commend the work of
the international community’s High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement. For
almost one and a half years, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch
has been discharging his mandate with energy and
tenacity. He has spared no effort in promoting peace,
reconciliation and economic development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. He can rest assured of the full
support of the European Union in accomplishing this
long-term task that has been entrusted to him.
I should also like to pay tribute to the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
International Police Task Force, the Stabilization
Force, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the non-governmental organizations,
which have been working day after day, each in its own
field, to reconstruct a multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina that is closely tied to Europe.
Five years after the signing of the Dayton
Agreements, Bosnia and Herzegovina, like the rest of
the region, has made considerable progress. The
reconstruction of the country is under way, with
significant achievements being made. People belonging
to minority groups are returning to their homes in
increasing numbers. Political pluralism, freedom and

security are developing, as was shown by the fact that
the general elections of 11 November took place in
favourable conditions. These developments confirm
that the course set by the Peace Agreements was the
right one and that there is no alternative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the full implementation of their
provisions. On 15 November 1999, in the New York
Declaration, the Joint Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina reaffirmed its attachment to the
implementation of the Agreements.
The results, however, have not yet lived up to the
expectations, in particular because obstructionism
persists. Certain policies and practices based on clan or
ethnic considerations prevent the population from
benefiting fully from the advantages offered by the
Agreements. The Peace Implementation Council,
which met in Brussels on 23 and 24 May, therefore
defined the areas for which change is a priority:
institution-building, economic reform and the return of
refugees.
With regard to institution-building, we note that
progress has been slow. Greater commitment on the
part of the Bosnian leadership to the general interest,
particularly at the level of the common institutions, is
required. We must hope that the political leaders
elected on 11 November will work in this direction.
Such progress would help to deepen the process
through which Bosnians themselves take ownership of
their common future. We hope that this will soon be the
case.
The High Representative has been called upon to
use his powers in a tactful and diplomatic way, when
he considers it necessary, in order to accelerate the
implementation of the Peace Agreements. The most
recent example of this occurred on 25 October, when a
single passport was created for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Furthermore, in accordance with his
mandate, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch had to dismiss some
20 Bosnian leaders who had impeded the
implementation of the Dayton Agreements.
For its part, on 1 July, the constitutional court in
Bosnia and Herzegovina handed down a decision that I
must commend, in the case relating to the constituent
peoples. By reaffirming in constitutional terms that
none of the three peoples — Serbs, Croats or
Bosniacs — can be discriminated against in the
territory as a whole or any part thereof, the court has
laid a stone in the building of the State of Bosnia and

7

A/55/PV.61

be

countries of the region will create new prospects for a
phased rapprochement with the European Union.

Turning to the economy, reform must be
enhanced, as the Peace Implementation Council has
emphasized. The difficult economic situation requires
this type of progress. The restrictive framework created
by certain regulations must be relaxed. The control of
political parties over commercial and financial
activities must be reduced. Corruption must be fought.
Particular efforts are required in the area of
privatization projects, which should be carried out
quickly and with the necessary transparency.
Furthermore, the adoption by the two entities of new
legislation concerning pensions should not be
postponed any longer.

Mr. Bohayevskiy (Ukraine): Five years ago,
when the Dayton/Paris Peace Accords were signed,
many of us cherished the hope that domestic peace and
stability would very soon prevail in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Herzegovina.
implemented.

That

decision

should

now

As regards the return of refugees, the latest report
of the High Representative has given us reason to
hope. Obstacles in the area of security are receding, but
an improvement in the economic situation will be
required in order to promote lasting returns.
The accelerating democratic changes in SouthEastern Europe will have a positive impact on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Progress has
already been noted as a result of the Croatian elections
of January this year. President Kostunica’s recent visit
to Sarajevo has opened the way to new prospects of
normalization throughout the region. The European
Union encourages and strongly supports this process.
Its commitment to promote peace and development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been considerable. The
European Union is the principal troop contributor, the
main donor and the main supplier of technical
assistance. I should like also to recall the active role of
the Union in the signing on 12 July of the Mostar
document, whose implementation will contribute to
putting an end to division in that city.
In regional terms, the Union promotes
cooperation projects, supports economic integration
and encourages stronger ties with Europe in the context
of the Stability Pact.
On 24 November, the Union will reaffirm its
political commitment at the Zagreb Summit, which will
bring together for the first time the countries of the
European Union and those of the western Balkans.
The flourishing of democracy, reconciliation and
the development of trust and cooperation among all the

8

The achievement of this goal has taken longer
than, and not been as easy as, we initially anticipated.
However, we have every reason to acknowledge that
the country has been moving in that direction and has
made substantial progress, which, to a great extent, has
been made possible by the significant amount of
assistance provided by the international community,
including the United Nations.
Still, a lot remains to be done to ensure the full
realization of the goals that have been set. We have to
remember that Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced
the worst kind of destruction in the war, which took so
many lives and forced many people to leave their
homes. Despite the undeniably positive changes in this
country, many of the scars inflicted by the war remain.
Just two months ago, in the statement he made
from this rostrum, Mr. Jadranko Prlić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, confirmed
the commitment of his country and of its authorities to
continue with efforts to achieve peace and
stabilization, to root out all causes of intolerance and to
eradicate everything that in the recent past has
poisoned relations with neighbouring countries.
Here we can also see positive signs. Since the
Foreign Minister spoke in the Assembly, we have also
witnessed very encouraging changes in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, whose people voted on
24 September last in favour of democracy. In this
respect, the new situation in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has created a good basis for further
reconciliation between and among the former Yugoslav
republics and throughout the whole region.
We must therefore continue to support, at both
the national and international levels, this very
important positive development, as it can bring us
closer to achieving the goal of establishing general
peace and stability in the Balkans.
The United Nations must continue to lend its
support to Bosnia and Herzegovina, because that
country still needs an international presence and

A/55/PV.61

assistance in eliminating the consequences of war and
in preparing itself for self-sustained development.
There is no alternative if we want to help that country
take on a larger share of responsibility as a United
Nations Member State and as a country that today is
striving to bring about a truly democratic society and a
better life for its people.
Last Sunday, 12 November, general elections
were held in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For the nation,
that day was yet another test of its aspirations for
democratic change. The results of those elections will
show whether they have met our highest expectations.
Let us hope that they will not be assessed as a lost
opportunity, but rather become a further step towards
ending the politics of fear and division in the country.
In conclusion, I wish to convey our message of
encouragement to the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina who are here today. On behalf of our
delegation, I want to assure them that Ukraine
welcomes all of the positive developments taking place
in their country today. Ukraine is ready to cooperate
with Bosnia and Herzegovina in all areas of mutual
interest. This interest was recently confirmed during a
visit to Sarajevo by a delegation of Ukrainian experts
in the area of transportation. There are many other
areas in which our two countries could benefit from
their cooperation.
We are the United Nations, and, as Member
States of this international Organization, we should not
only present and promote our national interests, but
also help each other in the realization of our domestic
priorities and goals. United, we will be more confident
and stronger. We believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be a test case in this respect.
In conclusion, I should like to state that Ukraine
will support any action that will facilitate further
democratic changes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Ahmad (Malaysia): The international
community has made a long-term commitment to the
achievement of just and durable peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Nearly five years after its
signing, the General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina — the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement — continues to be implemented with the
sustained support and active engagement of the
international community.

The Malaysian delegation is gratified that there
has indeed been substantial progress in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The presence of the multinational
Stabilization
Force
(SFOR)
has
significantly
contributed to providing a secure environment whereby
the Bosnian people in most parts of the country have
begun to experience security and relative normalcy.
The Office of the High Representative continues to
undertake important efforts and initiatives to establish
and strengthen the Bosnian common institutions, as
well as to ensure their effective functioning in
accordance with the Peace Agreement. Meanwhile, the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the International Police Task Force, is
playing a major role in the restructuring and reform of
the Bosnian police forces and judiciary. All these
efforts, including those by other international
organizations that are actively engaged in the Bosnian
peace process, deserve our commendation.
The success of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina still depends very much at this stage on
the continuing and active involvement of the
international
community.
Despite
the
clear
achievements that have been made so far, much
remains to be done to consolidate peace and to build
Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent, unified,
multi-ethnic and multicultural State within its
internationally recognized borders. The remaining
critical tasks of the international community must be
accomplished so that peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be irreversible, and so that the
country will emerge out of the current protective care
of the international community.
My delegation recalls that, following the
initiative of the High Representative, the ministerial
meeting of the Peace Implementation Council — which
was held in Brussels last May, and in which Malaysia
participated — set three key strategic targets for
advancing the Bosnian peace process: strengthening
the State institutions, comprehensive economic reform
and the accelerated return of refugees and displaced
persons.
Malaysia supported and endorsed this threepronged strategy, just as we did the concept of
ownership espoused by the High Representative, and
the New York Declaration adopted by the Bosnian Joint
Presidency exactly one year ago. We believe that all
these efforts provide a clear framework within which

9

A/55/PV.61

the international community and the leadership of
Bosnia and Herzegovina should work together to bring
about further progress in the peace process.
It is indeed encouraging that some progress has
been made in those key strategic areas, including the
recent re-establishment of the Council of Ministers and
the appointment of its Chair. There has also been an
increase in so-called minority returns, which are now
more than double the number of such returns during
the same period last year. Further determined efforts
are necessary to promote the return process, which is
crucial for lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Existing political and administrative obstructions to the
return process must be overcome effectively. Equally
important is the fostering of economic, educational and
labour-market opportunities for returnees. We support
the ongoing work of the High Representative to ensure
the full and vigorous implementation of the package of
property legislation, in order to further increase the rate
of return.
Meanwhile, economic reform is still lagging very
far behind. Further strenuous efforts on the part of the
Bosnian leadership are therefore pivotal for progress to
be made in this area.
At the same time, continued emphasis on
reconciliation should remain one of the most important
priorities
in
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina. The
consequences of ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity in the country must be reversed, and justice
must be done, and done quickly. In this regard, my
delegation wishes to underline once again the
particular importance of the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, which
the international community must continue to strongly
support. The early arrest and prosecution of all indicted
war criminals, especially the likes of Radovan
Karadzić and Ratko Mladić, will not only serve to mete
out justice, but also contribute towards accomplishing
the long-term goal of national reconciliation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
My delegation commends the Bosnians and the
international community for the successful holding of
national elections last Saturday, 11 November 2000.
That the elections were held in a free and fair manner
is a strong tribute to the international community and
to the Bosnian people themselves. We await the final
and official outcome of the elections. Malaysia
strongly calls upon the leaders who are elected to work

10

together among themselves and with the international
community to strengthen the political, economic and
social foundations for reintegration and reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina — a paramount
responsibility envisaged in the Peace Agreement. At
this point, however, we cannot but express our serious
concern over the illegal referendum that was organized
by the Croatian Democratic Union. That referendum
clearly goes against the very spirit and intent of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.
It is our earnest hope that the recent
developments in the region will augur well for a
speedier implementation of the Peace Agreement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call on all Bosnia’s
neighbours to support and cooperate with Bosnia and
Herzegovina in realizing the full implementation of the
Peace Agreement.
For its part, Malaysia is proud to have been
associated with the efforts to rebuild peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have
contributed funds from the Government and the
Malaysian public for economic rehabilitation and
infrastructure reconstruction in Bosnia. Under its
Technical Cooperation Programme, Malaysia is also
making available training and other facilities, as well
as sharing our experiences in the field of socioeconomic development and in the successful
implementation of privatization in Malaysia. We will
continue to participate in the International Police Task
Force and the Peace Implementation Council, as well
as in the work carried out by the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the United Nations.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Being also a Balkan
country, Turkey has always been directly involved in
the quest to create a peaceful and stable Balkans that is
poised to move towards prosperity in security, and has
made incessant efforts to that end. With this aim, we
have always tried to foster friendly relations and
enlightened cooperation with all the countries in the
region.
Given our strong bonds, stemming from a
common history that time further enriches, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has traditionally ranked as a priority for
our foreign policy. We therefore regarded the
re-establishment of the multi-ethnic and multicultural
status of Bosnia and Herzegovina, through the
preservation of its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized

A/55/PV.61

borders, as of paramount importance for securing peace
and stability in the Balkans, and hence in the continent.
The developments that have taken place during
the past year — from the adoption of the New York
Declaration exactly a year ago to the recent
elections — testify to the accuracy of the key strategic
targets set by the Peace Implementation Council for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, namely, the consolidation of
State institutions, economic reform and the return of
refugees and displaced persons.
As a member of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, Turkey strongly believes that
bringing about durable solutions depends on the
achievement of these clear targets. The way to reach
these targets is through the full implementation of the
Dayton Peace Accords. However, while not playing
down
the
many
accomplishments
in
the
implementation of the civilian aspect of the Dayton
Peace Accords, I should also add that much remains to
be done in this respect.
Meanwhile, mutual confidence among the
Bosniacs, the Croats and the Serbs remains the key for
achieving lasting peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As a corollary, the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the international community should
take advantage of each and every opportunity to
advance the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Accords.
In this connection, we believe that the aftermath
of the recent general elections, completed in due order
thanks to the common sense of the people of Bosnia
and the commendable efforts of High Representative
Mr. Petritsch, as well as those of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission,
offers such an opportunity.
It is now the duty of all leaders representing their
people at the cantonal, entity and state levels to work
hard for the political stability and economic
development of the country, at the same time resisting,
hand in hand with the people, any attempt by any
group or circle aiming to derail the path to normalcy.
We firmly believe that the people of Bosnia will
maintain a firm hold on this challenge. We hope that
the governing bodies will be established without delay
so that the essential work toward structural reforms can
start as soon as possible.

Among the many urgent issues here, I should
highlight the need for the passing of new electoral
legislation to pave the way for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s admission into the Council of Europe.
Last, but not least, I would be remiss if I did not
stress the ongoing need to have the international
community firmly involved in the developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We cannot withhold such
support from the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
while their country moves through a crucial stage on its
way to becoming a full member of the European family
of nations.
Mr. Darwish (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Over a
whole decade, Egypt has been closely observing with
grave concern the deterioration of the situation in the
territories of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the eruption of racial conflicts and aggression
perpetrated by one group against another. We have also
followed the failure of the international community and
the United Nations to immediately put an end to acts of
violence and aggression and to halt the spread of ethnic
cleansing. We all know now what happened in
Srebrenica and the failure of the international
community and the international Organization to
protect and safeguard the Bosnians. This has led to
similar failures in African regions. It also led to a
comprehensive and integrated review of peacekeeping
operations and of United Nations policies.
Today the General Assembly is discussing the
issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Things have greatly
improved through the changes that Yugoslavia has
witnessed recently, and through the readmission of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the United Nations
on an equal footing with the other four successor States
of former Yugoslavia.
The Egyptian position vis-à-vis the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is based on a number of
unchanging elements reaffirmed in the Dayton Peace
Accords. These are as follows: first, the importance of
respecting the sovereignty and independence of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its territorial integrity as a single
State, made up of two multi-racial entities; secondly,
the importance of respect for human rights in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, including the right of refugees and
internally displaced persons to return to their homeland
in peace; and thirdly, the importance of trying those
who are charged with perpetrating war crimes in
Bosnia. These are considered an inherent part of the

11

A/55/PV.61

successful implementation of the peace accords. In
addition, all parties concerned are urged to fully
cooperate with the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991, established by the Security Council for this
noble purpose.
In view of the unchanging Egyptian position, and
in order to find out how the Peace Accords have been
implemented so far, we are satisfied that the voices
expressing separatism or scepticism about Bosnia’s
unity and independence have decreased. We are also
pleased that the activation of institutions reflects the
importance of this unity and of the principle of
sovereignty at the international level. But this does not
mean that we should be complacent. We must continue
to reaffirm and support this element and its
institutional mechanisms as a central part of the Peace
Accords, which will not be achieved unless there is full
respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as one
unified multi-racial country.
Egypt also welcomes the breakthroughs made in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement signed in
Paris on 14 December 1995. These breakthroughs
followed efforts made to promote reconstruction and
improve the security situation, as well as the efforts of
local councils in cooperation with the United Nations
mission to develop joint institutions that would
guarantee Bosnia and Herzegovina’s functioning as a
unified and modern democratic State.
Egypt has supported the United Nations efforts
aimed at supporting the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the United Nations
International Police Task Force, sent there in order to
observe and safeguard human rights and the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. Here we are
honoured to point out that Egypt was part of the
International Police Task Force and provided a number
of efficient officers.
It is quite clear that there is still a lot to be done
before we feel content with the implementation of this
important component of the Peace Accords. The rate of
refugees returning to their homeland is still lower than
our expectations. Also, the provision of security and
safety to those refugees and internally displaced
persons is still below the required level to convince

12

them to return voluntarily
particularly in minority areas.

to

their

homeland,

Egypt believes in the importance of totally
implementing the Dayton Peace Accords so that
everybody fully cooperates with the International
Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia. Those two important
elements are part and parcel of bringing about a stable
and just peace for the peoples of the region.
For our part, we will continue to provide support
and assistance to the people and Government of Bosnia
in all areas.
Finally, on the basis of its unswerving position of
supporting reconstruction and consolidation with the
objective of returning matters to their original
situation, Egypt has supported the draft resolution
before the Assembly today contained in document
A/55/L.31.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In exactly one month, the fifth anniversary of
the entry into force of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina will be commemorated. The Russian
Federation, as an active participant in the Bosnian
settlement at all its stages, welcomes the progress
achieved to date in implementing this Agreement. Its
signing has allowed for diverse, sometimes
contradictory, interests of the three Bosnian peoples
and neighbouring States to be taken into account,
especially Yugoslavia and Croatia, and to lay the
foundation for Bosnian statehood on the basis of two
entities with equal rights and three constituent peoples.
The Agreements reached in 1995 have lost none
of their importance today.
Moreover, in spite of the generally stable
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is too soon for
the world community to be complacent. We still need
to make the process of the Bosnian settlement
permanent and irreversible and to strengthen multiethnic statehood in observance of the rights of all the
peoples of that country. The Russian Federation still
feels that this process should be implemented in strict
conformity with the Peace Agreement, the resolutions
of the Security Council and other international
documents on a settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Any arbitrary interpretation of this mandate on the part
of the international organizations is inadmissible. A
revision of Dayton would inevitably destroy the
balance of interests and be fraught with new tensions,

A/55/PV.61

not only within Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also
beyond its borders.
The lengthy experience of international efforts to
implement the Peace Agreement proves that the
Bosnians themselves and their political leaders must
assume particular responsibility for furthering the
peace process and for the destiny of their own country.
All parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina need to
demonstrate practical political will strictly to
implement the Dayton provisions and to achieve
genuine multi-ethnic reconciliation and the effective
post-conflict reconstruction of the country. We are
satisfied that the leading political forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina
are
demonstrating
a
growing
understanding of these problems, which was the
specific purpose of the New York Declaration of the
Joint Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is high
time to put it into practice.
We feel that priority should be given to
overcoming all the remaining difficulties as soon as
possible, with concern for the appropriate level of
cooperation of both ethnic entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, not only in all Bosnian state organs, but
also with the leading international bodies in the
country, especially the High Representative, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the United Nations Mission as a whole. The activation
of such interaction will allow us to achieve a
breakthrough on unresolved issues. We hope that this
will be helped by the results of the elections held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on 11 November. In
particular, we need to see the rapid adoption of
electoral laws; the ongoing reorganization of the
Bosnian police on a multi-ethnic basis; reform of the
judicial system; the creation of a modern market
economy; a campaign against corruption and organized
crime; and a solution to the problem of the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
We welcome the commitment made by the
Bosnian leadership, expressed in the New York
Declaration, to the task of strengthening military
cooperation between forces, including the creation of a
joint subdivision for United Nations peace-building
operations. Furthermore, we feel it counterproductive
artificially to force the issue of a single political
defence policy, primarily in the creation of a single
army. Such action can only disturb the fragile balance
of political stability in the mutual relations between the
entities.

We also feel that the Final Arbitration Award on
the Brcko District should be implemented so as to
avoid raising tensions and to stabilize the situation in
the region as much as possible, in conformity with the
Peace Agreement, by finding solutions to remaining
issues that are acceptable to all parties.
As to the work in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991, we wish once again to
emphasize the importance of separating this activity
from current political circumstances and of bringing it
into strict conformity with the Statute of the Tribunal
and the decisions of the Security Council. It is time to
end the practice of hunting down indictees on the basis
of so-called sealed indictments issued by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
which is not within the Force’s mandate of stabilizing
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Russian Federation feels that the draft
resolution under consideration today is generally aimed
towards the achievement of a number of Dayton
provisions, total inter-ethnic reconciliation and the
effective post-conflict reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a democratic European State. We are
convinced that recent political developments in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will have a positive
impact on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially in the Republika Srpska. Attesting to this is
the statement made by Yugoslav President Kostunica
during his visit to Sarajevo concerning his readiness to
establish diplomatic relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and his commitment to supporting the
Dayton Peace Agreement.
For its part, the Russian Federation will make a
constructive contribution to finding a solution to the
pending issues on the agenda of the Bosnian settlement
and to the establishment of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a single, democratic, multi-ethnic and prosperous State.
Mr. Žbogar (Slovenia): Five years have passed
since the conclusion of the Dayton Peace Agreement. It
cannot be repeated and recalled often enough that the
Peace Agreement ended the most brutal and
devastating armed conflict in Europe since the Second
World War. The Peace Agreement in all its aspects and
phases created a framework for life in peace and laid

13

A/55/PV.61

the foundation of a new constitutional arrangement for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Zagreb summit of the countries of the region and the
European Union.

It has also been a year since the historic visit of
the members of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to New York and their participation in a
meeting of the Security Council. The New York
Declaration adopted on that occasion has reconfirmed
the commitment of the Presidency to the key tasks in
the implementation of peace.

We would refrain from commenting on the
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina since official
results have not been announced yet. However,
regardless of who will form the future Governments,
they should be led by the mandate of the people to
implement the Peace Agreement and to speed up
democratization and economic recovery. They should
lead the country away from the hatreds, poverty and
isolation of the past and towards a better life and a
common future in the European structures. These are
ideals that we believe people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina voted for.

The General Assembly’s present consideration of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is marked by
several encouraging events in that country’s
neighbourhood.
First, following the elections in Croatia almost a
year ago and the changes in its policies towards Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the relations between the two
countries have been normalized and improved
significantly. Croatia has, through its actions,
reconfirmed its respect for the sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Secondly, the recent change of regime in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, followed by the first
visit of the Yugoslav President to the Bosnian capital,
encourages hope for a change of policy of that country
towards Bosnia and Herzegovina. That change would
considerably influence the speed of the implementation
of the Peace Agreement by the Bosnians themselves.

The post-conflict stabilization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a process — slow but continuing.
Several essential elements of the Peace Agreement
remain to be fulfilled. We are convinced that the
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into European
structures, starting with the Council of Europe, would
significantly strengthen this process. We also commend
and support fully the High Representative in his efforts
to pursue three strategic priorities to help Bosnian
citizens achieve this Europeanization of the country:
comprehensive economic reform, accelerated refugee
return and the strengthening of the State institutions.

The unconditional establishment of diplomatic
relations between the two countries is a priority and
probably a starting point. The early conclusion of the
agreement on special parallel relations between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska
is of prime importance as well. It would give Serbs in
Bosnia and Herzegovina the needed confidence and
guarantees that were lacking during the years when the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was isolated from the
international community. As a consequence, both
agreements should strengthen inter-ethnic and interentity integration within Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The return of refugees remains one of the central
issues for the normalization of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We note that the number of minority
returns almost doubled this year. However, there are
still hundreds of thousands of people who remain
either displaced or refugees. Our optimism has to be
realistic, especially since the major breakthrough that
the international community has been expecting for the
past few years has not yet happened. And time is not
working in favour of the return. For these reasons, the
right to return must remain one of the basic human
rights of the people in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
the urgent establishment of viable conditions for return
must be one of the priorities for the new Government.

A third encouraging circumstance is that the
establishment of democratic authorities in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia has enabled the integration of
that country into the international community and into
the region. Hence, conditions have finally been set for
the much-needed peace, stability, reconciliation and
reconstruction of the region as a whole. In this context,
Slovenia supports the convening of the upcoming

There is no reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina without the completion of the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The
Tribunal was established to prosecute persons whose
actions and policies brought the destruction to the
region. It continues to be important — maybe now
more than ever — that all those who committed crimes
against humanity and are responsible for or

14

A/55/PV.61

participated in the genocide be brought to justice. The
international community owes this to the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We commend the efforts of the Tribunal in
bringing justice to the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are pleased to note the willingness of
the High Representative and the Stabilization Force to
use their authority to enforce the provisions of the
Peace Agreement, including the provisions concerning
compliance with the orders of the Tribunal.
At the same time, we are concerned with the fact
that the work of the Tribunal could go on for another
16 years. We expect the Security Council to speedily
consider several solutions proposed by the judges of
the Tribunal to shorten the time-frame for the
conclusion of the Tribunal’s work.
I wish also to touch upon one unresolved issue,
the resolution of which would also contribute
positively to the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina: that of the succession of the former
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which ceased
to exist. It is essential that a resolution of this issue be
based upon respect for the principle of legal equality of
all successor States, as determined by the Badinter
Arbitration Commission, in order to contribute to
lasting peace and stability in the region. The recent
changes in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia promise
to remove this obstacle to the normalization of
relations among the successor States to the former
Yugoslavia, and we are looking forward to an early
conclusion of this issue within the Peace
Implementation
Council’s
working
group
on
succession.
Demining is an area that Slovenia considers
important in the normalization of life in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Successful demining not only will allow
a more adequate return of refugees but will also help to
restore economic activity in the country. This is the
reason for our continuing commitment to the
International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine
Victims Assistance. The Trust Fund has in the past year
alone successfully cleared as much as two thirds of all
the territory that has been cleared of mines in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, or 3 million square metres. The Trust
Fund, as the most cost-effective and most efficient way
to clear mines in Bosnia and Herzegovina, has attracted
until now donations from 22 Governments in the
amount of $56 million. We would like to encourage

other countries to join us in our efforts to clear Bosnia
and Herzegovina of all mines.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize the
importance of the continued interest of the United
Nations and its General Assembly in the post-conflict
reconstruction in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope
that the draft resolution before us, of which Slovenia is
proud to be a sponsor, will guide the action of all
involved in the effort to establish just and durable
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of
Iran): The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the last year has continued to
indicate that smooth and fast progress towards the
implementation of the Peace Agreement still faces
significant resistance. Although some important
progress has been noted, such as the establishment of a
new Council of Ministers and of three new ministries,
it is disappointing that a lack of political will on the
part of those who focus on ethnic issues threatens the
effective functioning of the institutions.
Overall, the important issue of the search for selfsustaining stability in the Balkans is high on the
agenda, but we are still far from the goals set in this
regard. Despite slow but steady progress in the
implementation of the 1995 Peace Agreement, which is
the prerequisite for peace and stability in the region,
there are a number of underlying challenges yet to be
overcome. They include short-sighted views still
maintained by certain groups, parties and ethnic
divisions, as well as delays in institution-building,
judicial
reform
and
economic
regeneration.
Surmounting these challenges demands greater efforts
on the part of the leadership and principal forces in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve increased
democracy, tolerance and reconciliation among the
different ethnic communities.
The return of refugees and displaced persons —
in particular, the return of people to areas in which they
are in the minority — reconciliation among different
ethnic communities, minority protection, economic
reforms and recovery, and freedom of movement for
people, goods, services and information throughout the
country are among the main outstanding issues that
have to be comprehensively addressed to facilitate the
establishment of viable statehood for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

15

A/55/PV.61

The return of refugees to all parts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a prerequisite for reconciliation in the
country. Although the overall return process has been
rather slow, it is encouraging to note that the recent
increase in the minority returns has brought the figures
to more than double the number of such return during
the same period last year, and further efforts should
therefore be made to promote them.
We continue to attach great importance to the role
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in bringing justice to the region.
Unfortunately, despite the repeated calls of the
international community, and in contravention of the
Peace Agreement, some notorious indicted war
criminals continue to remain free and disrupt the
political affairs of the country. The continued freedom
enjoyed by the leading indicted war criminals sends the
wrong political message. Worse yet, it contributes to a
climate of insecurity that limits refugee returns,
particularly in minority areas. The arrest and
prosecution of these indicted war criminals would not
only serve justice, but would also contribute to
accomplishing the long-term goal of national
reconciliation, which alone can guarantee to Bosnia
and Herzegovina the ability to free itself from the
ghosts of its tragic past.
In view of this background, we hope that the
recent developments in the region as a whole will be
conducive to creating a new, positive momentum which
could accelerate the pace of change and strengthen
peace in a multi-ethnic, multicultural society in that
country. We also hope that these developments will
present an opportunity for progress on issues of
succession and will pave the way for good-neighbourly
relations and close cooperation among all Balkan
countries, which is of great importance for the
attainment of self-sustaining peace in the region.
Although a strong commitment of, and full
cooperation from, the Bosnian leadership and the
people at every level are imperative, durable peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina requires the full cooperation
of its neighbours and the international community.
Therefore, we believe that international assistance, in
various forms, should continue, with a view to bringing
about a self-sustaining peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the wider region.
We believe that continued commitment and
serious efforts towards realizing a shared vision of

16

Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent, unified,
multi-ethnic, multicultural and multi-religious State
within its internationally recognized borders are the
only way that will lead to a durable and just peace in
that country and the Balkans.
We commend the ongoing work of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the
United Nations International Police Task Force
(UNIPTF). We also appreciate the relentless efforts
made by the High Representative and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Sarajevo in
furthering the peace-seeking objectives of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and in the whole region.
In closing, I would like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to President Izetbegović, who resigned last
October from the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. He is an outstanding statesman and a
respected leader, who worked assiduously for the
political independence and territorial integrity of his
country and the well-being of his people. We consider
his departure to be a great loss to the peace process in
the Balkans.
Mr. Islam (Pakistan): Bosnia and Herzegovina is
a unique example of a country which, after the
devastation of war, is trying to take the reins of its
destiny back into its own hands. A war-torn nation is
now struggling not only to consolidate its nationhood,
but also to integrate itself into the international
community. Five years ago, at Dayton, Ohio, the
leaders of that devastated country committed
themselves to rebuild peace. This commitment was all
the more difficult because the very fabric of their
society had been ripped apart. The people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina deserve our highest admiration for
their determination to abandon the way of violence.
Despite daunting odds, their progress down the path to
peace and reconstruction has been appreciable.
Yet peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
fragile. There can be no durable peace unless the
ghosts of war can be laid to rest. The multi-ethnic
society of Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to be
protected from any recurrence of conflict. The basic
requirement for this is an end to the deep-seated hatred
that manifested itself during the brutal war and the
re-establishment of mutual trust. This daunting task is
made even more difficult by an absence of sincere
commitment, largely on the part of the Serbian

A/55/PV.61

community. Mutual accommodation and acceptance is
a necessary condition without which it will not be
possible to ensure reconciliation and strengthen the
national institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
urge all parties, therefore, to make earnest and
determined efforts to bring about peace for their
peoples and for the sake of their children.
Faithful implementation of the Dayton Accords is
central to durable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a united, sovereign and independent State. While the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has fulfilled
its obligations to a large extent, we regret that the
Republika Srpska is lagging behind in certain key
areas. We are particularly concerned at the lack of
progress by the Serbian entity in the return of refugees
and displaced persons, freedom of movement across
the inter-entity boundary line, cooperation with the
International
Tribunal
for
war
crimes,
the
establishment of common institutions, judicial and
police reform, and a host of other issues.
The return of refugees and displaced persons to
their homes is a vital element in the reintegration
process of the fragmented multi-ethnic society of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The safe, voluntary and
dignified return of refugees and displaced persons is
essential to reverse the consequences of “ethnic
cleansing” and to heal, as far as possible, the deep and
festering wounds that it caused during the long years of
war. We call on all the parties, especially the
Republika Srpska, to cooperate with each other in this
vital area of national reconstruction.
Justice is the hallmark of peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as it is elsewhere. All parties must
implement their solemn commitment made at Dayton
to pursue and apprehend war criminals. We note with
concern that most of the war criminals remain at large,
mostly in the territory of the Republika Srpska and
Serbia. These criminals must be surrendered to the
International Tribunal so that proceedings against them
can be started without any further delay. Cooperation
of the authorities in the Republika Srpska and Belgrade
is essential for the apprehension of those accused of
genocide and crimes against humanity. Strict and
unconditional adherence to international law is
essential to advance the goal of reintegration. We
believe that those who participated in mass murders
must not go unpunished anywhere in the world, be it in
Srebrenica, in Kosovo, in Rwanda or in Jammu and
Kashmir.

The international community needs to commit
itself to the sustained revival of Bosnia’s economic and
social structure, which was devastated by three years of
war. An integrated and comprehensive approach to
economic reform which would contribute to a
homogeneous development of the economy and trade
in the two entities and across the inter-entity boundary
line is essential. Ways must be found to speed up the
pace of economic development and reconstruction in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The donor countries and the
donor agencies must continue to provide financial and
technical support to Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the
same time, the three communities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have to recognize that cooperation in this
area will benefit all sides and remove many of the
obstacles to lasting peace in that country. It is therefore
essential that the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
make concerted efforts towards establishing a multiethnic society that is economically vibrant and where
respect for human rights and fundamental freedom
enjoys primacy.
We recall with appreciation the integrity of the
Secretary-General’s report on the massacre of
thousands of innocent people in the United Nations
“safe area” in Srebrenica. This is an important
document, and we commend the efforts made to
uncover the facts concerning those unforgivable crimes
in Srebrenica. It is our earnest hope that the SecretaryGeneral, the Member States and the relevant organs of
the United Nations will appropriately address the
disturbing revelations in the report with a view to
ensuring that such inhuman acts will never be allowed
to take place anywhere in the world in the future.
We have long remained committed to peace and
prosperity in Bosnia. During the war, Pakistan
provided one of the largest troop contingents for the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a member of the Security
Council at that time, we worked to bring about peace,
but peace with justice. In those days of deep crisis,
Pakistan extended moral, political, financial, technical
and material support to the people of that country in
defence of international law and morality as a sign of
our solidarity with them in the hour of suffering. We
continue to stand by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina today. Our support is, as it was then, a
manifestation of our conviction that no nation must be
victimized because of its weakness and vulnerability,
no people should be brutalized because of their ethno-

17

A/55/PV.61

religious origins and no nation or people should be
denied their inherent right to self-determination and the
right to wage a legitimate struggle for freedom.
We believe in the resilience and strength of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and in their ability
to overcome the formidable challenges confronting
them. The have come a long way and they deserve our
full support in their efforts for national reconstruction.
The international community must continue to provide
unswerving support to a sovereign, united, multiethnic, multicultural and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina, at peace with itself and contributing to
international peace and security. In this regard, we laud
the recent participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
The draft resolution before this Assembly today
embodies the principles and goals that must be
accomplished to bring about a just and lasting peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Pakistan is a sponsor of this draft resolution and
recommends its adoption by consensus.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/55/L.31.
I would like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following

18

countries have become co-sponsors of draft resolution
A/55/L.31: Iceland, Liechtenstein and Tunisia.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/55/L.31.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.31?
Draft resolution A/55/L.31 was adopted
(resolution 55/24).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 45.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I wish to inform members
of an addition to the programme of work of the General
Assembly. On Monday, 20 November 2000 in the
afternoon, the General Assembly will consider the
reports of the First Committee. I should like also to
inform members that, as announced in today’s Journal,
the third meeting of the open-ended informal
consultations of the plenary on agenda item 182,
“Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”, will be held on Tuesday, 21 November 2000,
at 3 p.m. in Conference Room 1, to consider
conference room paper A/55/CRP.1, copies of which
are available in room 2925.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.
