S/PV.7750

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7750th meeting

28 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kishida/Mr. Bessho/Mr. Okamura . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Chikoti
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Vallini
Mr. Aman
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ndiaye
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Peacebuilding in Africa
Letter dated 1 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/586)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-23927 (E)
*1623927*

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Peacebuilding in Africa
Letter dated 1 July 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2016/586)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives present in today’s meeting. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Denmark, Ethiopia,
Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey
and Uganda to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Amina Chawahir Mohamed, Cabinet Secretary
for Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Kenya
and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and His
Excellency Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Carl
Hallergard, Minister Counsellor of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
2/65

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

28/07/2016

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/586, which contains a letter dated
1 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Japan to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Peacebuilding is at the
core of the United Nations activities in conflict-affected
countries throughout the world. The recent historic
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council emphasize that sustaining peace
is a shared responsibility of Governments, national
stakeholders and the United Nations.
Peace in Africa is a top priority. As we meet, South
Sudan remains precariously poised on the brink of an
abyss. The promises of the new State for peace, justice
and opportunity have been squandered. I am appalled
by the scale of sexual violence documented by our
human rights teams. We demand accountability for all
atrocities and that the leaders of South Sudan commit
to the peace process. Instability also persists in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Libya, Mali and a number of other nations.
This a cause of grave concern for all, but it is also
important to emphasize that this is not the full story
of Africa. There is another narrative, largely untold,
of growing economies, improved living standards and
expanding democratic space. Our shared responsibility
is to nourish these seeds of peace and prosperity. One
way we can do that is to nurture inclusive, transparent,
effective and accountable institutions and help the
nations of Africa achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals. When institutions are weak, nations cannot
thrive. Inclusive and accountable institutions are
the cement that bonds States and citizens. They
provide security and justice, limit corruption, reduce
marginalization and avert ethnic tension. They promote
the delivery of essential services, from sanitation and
health care to an enabling environment for business to
flourish. They offer a channel for resolving disputes
and preventing the outbreak of violent conflict. They
are the bedrock of peace and sustainable development.
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Building effective and legitimate institutions is not
easy, but we have learned some fundamental lessons.
First, there are no one-size-fits-all solutions.
Institution-building has to be rooted in national
historical, political, social, cultural and economic
contexts. Trying to impose an outside model on a postconflict country can do more harm than good. The
focus should be on building on existing institutions to
provide the services that people need.
Secondly, institution-building needs to be
rooted in political agreement. National ownership
and leadership are key. That means broad, inclusive
dialogue encompassing central Government, local
authorities, communities, the private sector and civil
society, especially youth, women and marginalized
groups. Such dialogue enhances social cohesion,
strengthens the legitimacy of the State and increases
the sustainability of reforms.
Thirdly, institution-building is a long-term
process that sometimes takes decades. Each country’s
institutions should be allowed to develop incrementally,
allowing for experimentation, learning and adaptation.
But communities also need to see early and tangible
progress. Peace dividends are essential, and perceptions
are critical. If expectations are high but not met, even
if there is progress, grievances can mount. Measuring
the impact of institution-building is not easy. Results
can be intangible or elusive for years. Pressures from
donor countries for instant results can be detrimental
to long-term development objectives and, ultimately, to
peace. Therefore, in meeting our shared responsibility,
we need wisdom, commitment and patience.
United Nations missions and humanitarian and
development actors are committed to working closely as
one to support institution-rebuilding and strengthening
in Africa. In Somalia, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the country team, the Peacebuilding
Support Office, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank are supporting the
Government under the New Deal Compact to restore
core Government functions, including through a
flagship capacity development programme. We are
helping the country to build stronger public-sector
institutions that can deliver services and access, thereby
helping the Federal Government to establish and gain
the people’s trust in State authority, especially outside
of Mogadishu in newly recovered areas.

S/PV.7750

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations country team have been working on an
integrated programme of justice, local governance and
development initiatives in support of the international
security, stabilization and support strategy. The
programme focuses on the delivery of basic services
in stabilized areas in North Kivu and on preventing
grievances that could lead to further conflict
Finally, the United Nations and the World Bank
have jointly developed a diagnostic tool to assess
core Government functions and identify key actions
necessary to deliver essential services. Drawing on our
experience in the Central African Republic in 2014,
when the United Nations and the World Bank supported
the payment of civil servants, the tool is currently being
piloted in Libya, and we hope to be able to deploy it in
South Sudan and Yemen. Support for core Government
functions is critical during the early recovery period
and an essential component of the peacebuilding and
State-building process.
Peacekeeping operations and political missions
have seen a significant increase in institution-building
mandates from the Council in recent years. However,
these have not always come with realistic time frames
or the necessary resources and support. I welcome
the fact that the Fifth Committee has allocated
funds in the budgets of a number of peacekeeping
operations for programmatic activities focusing on
institution-building, including in partnership with
United Nations country teams.
But a large gap remains. Despite praise for the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) in the recent peace and
security reviews, it faces a desperate funding shortfall.
To deliver on the collective commitment to sustaining
peace. I am asking Governments to help the PBF pledging
conference in September to achieve the funding target
of $300 million. I thank the efforts of hosts Kenya,
Mexico, the Netherlands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sweden
and the United Kingdom for their efforts.
Institution-building entails strong partnership,
coherence and coordination among many actors:
intergovernmental bodies, headquarters and the
field, entities on the ground, international financial
institutions, regional organizations and civil society.
The Peacebuilding Commission provides an important
platform to help focus the attention of all these actors

16-239273/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

on long-term institution-building. It can help mobilize
resources, share lessons and sustain engagement by
the international community. I encourage the Security
Council to build on the recent resolution 2282 (2016),
on sustaining peace, and on its deliberations during the
informal interactive dialogue led by France in June,
and to continue to strengthen its relationship with the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohamed.
Ms. Mohamed: I thank you very much, Sir, for
the opportunity to participate in this important debate
on peacebuilding in Africa. I congratulate you on
Japan’s ascendancy to the presidency of the Council
for July and commend you for the manner in which
you have conducted its affairs. I also thank you for
providing the concept note (S/2016/586, annex) that has
guided and will continue to guide the debate on this
important subject.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing, as well as for his leadership,
wisdom, commitment and patience.
Kenya is honoured to participate in this debate,
which is taking place just before the sixth Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD VI), which will be held in Nairobi on
27 and 28 August. Japan’s historic commitment to
and its reliable partnership with Africa in peace and
development are well known. The hosting of TICAD
VI in Africa reaffirms Japan’s strong commitment to
our continent.
I applaud the Security Council for its role in
stabilizing countries in conflict. In an increasingly
complex and interconnected world, the role of the United
Nations cannot be overemphasized. All the countries
on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
are from Africa. Peacebuilding remains crucial to
our continent, which continues to face unprecedented
challenges even as the world becomes more globalized,
democracy spreads and regional integration deepens.
Today Africa is still struggling with some of the
same challenges. The key difference today is that the
continent is more determined than ever to overcome
them. Let me outline some of the measures that Africa
has taken to respond to the challenges it faces.
4/65

28/07/2016

First, in 2002, Africa transformed the Organization
of African Unity into the African Union (AU), complete
with a framework for the development of an African
Peace and Security Architecture. The framework laid
the foundation for institutionalizing peacebuilding in
Africa. Through it, institutions such as the African
Union Commission, the AU Peace and Security
Council, the Continental Early Warning System, the
Panel of the Wise, the African Standby Force and the
AU Peace Fund were established. Those institutions
are still at different stages of evolution and provide the
basis for peacebuilding in Africa. The recent relaunch
of the revamped AU Peace Fund by the AU Summit in
Kigali earlier this month reaffirms our commitment.
Secondly, African countries have revitalized their
regional economic integration initiatives in order to
ensure sustained peace and shared prosperity. Today
the regional bodies the Common Market for Eastern
and Southern Africa, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Southern African Development
Community, the Arab Maghreb Union and the East
African Community are determined to sustain peace
through trade and economic partnerships. We have
all signed up for the Continental Free Trade Area.
We are looking for freer movement of goods, services
and persons.
Thirdly, institutionalized strategic partnerships
were sought with the United Nations and its various
agencies in all areas of peace and security based on
consultative decision-making, a division of labour, and
burden- and responsibility-sharing. Those relationships
have evolved from ad hoc consultations to systematic,
principled and predictable arrangements through the
setting up of the United Nations Office to the AU and
the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, both of
which remain a positive work in progress.
The challenge of achieving effective peacebuilding
has become the main preoccupation for policymakers
on our continent and beyond. The evolving nature
of conflicts in Africa and elsewhere necessitated the
institutionalization of peacebuilding through the
establishment of the PBC in 2005. The PBC brings
together various actors, both national and international,
to ensure that countries affected by conflict do not
lapse or relapse into conflict. The essence remains that
of building effective partnerships for sustaining peace.
True partnership actually starts at the community level,
moving on to the national, regional and international
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

levels. The whole process, which is intended to leave
no one behind, must include the private sector, civil
society, women and youth. Effective partnerships
remain essential to sustaining peace and development
in Africa. Of course, there is sufficient evidence to
show that there can be no peace without development.
It is exactly three months since the Security
Council and the General Assembly adopted identical
resolutions on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. The report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490) provided a solid basis
for the two progressive resolutions. The report also
observed that the fragmentation between several
intergovernmental organs dealing with peace and
security, each holding a piece of the peacebuilding
puzzle, had proved to be a significant impediment to
operations on the ground, where peacebuilding actually
takes place. The resolutions introduced the principle
of sustaining peace, which stresses the need for more
investment in governance, security and development
in the continuum of conflict prevention, management
and resolution.
More emphasis on conflict prevention means
recognizing the primacy of politics in the pacific
settlement of disputes — an issue to which the
Secretary-General has referred. The importance of
investing in early-warning systems instead of reacting
to outbreaks of violence is clear, and could not be more
clear in the cases he cited. The full implementation
of the resolutions could result in lesser emphasis on
militarized responses to conflicts in Africa, and instead
promote more political engagement and developmental
approaches that could result in effective peacebuilding.
The PBC strives to uphold national ownership and
leadership in the implementation of peacebuilding
initiatives. We fully appreciate that. Similarly, the
Peacebuilding Fund has provided critical funding to the
establishment and functioning of national institutions
that play a central role in peacebuilding processes to
address challenges. Moving forward, in order to sustain
peace for effective development in Africa, let me make
the following observations.
First, peacebuilding cannot succeed if half of
the population is excluded from the process. Across
Africa, the invaluable role of women in the whole cycle
of conflict — and not just during the post-conflict
reconstruction — as well as their capacity to shape,

S/PV.7750

drive and promote peace, is well known. Bridging
cultural challenges that hinder women’s participation
in sustaining peace, mainstreaming gender in the
peacebuilding discourse and involving them in
decision-making at all levels must be a priority. I am
pleased to report substantive progress in the drafting
of the PBC gender strategy, which I am confident will
further strengthen the Commission’s engagement on
gender-related peacebuilding. We intend to formally
propose the strategy for adoption in early September.
Secondly, the PBC can be effective only if policy and
political discussions are complemented by predictable
financial support for critical priorities. As I mentioned
earlier, the revamped African Union Peace Fund to
support AU-led peace operations was launched during
the AU Summit in Kigali. It remains underfunded.
Similarly, we all recognize the crucial role of
the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), especially in Africa.
Its flexibility and impact on our collective efforts
to sustaining peace at short notice is not in dispute.
However, it has perennially faced a desperate funding
shortfall. It is against that backdrop that Kenya, the
United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, Mexico, Sri
Lanka and Somalia will co-host a pledging conference
for the PBF on 21 September on the margins of the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly. I take
this opportunity to invite all Member States to the
pledging conference.
Finally, allow me to make a few remarks in my
national capacity as the representative of Kenya.
I came here from chairing the fourteenth session of
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), which successfully concluded in Nairobi
last Friday and whose theme was “From Decisions to
Actions”. The Conference underscored the importance
of international support measures such as market access,
official development assistance, increased investment
flows, and technical assistance and technology transfer
as crucial building blocks to enhance the economic
resilience of countries and communities in developing
countries. Enhancing economic development is
recognized as building resilience to risks and
vulnerabilities in the most fragile States. Peacebuilding
therefore has to contribute to maximizing trade,
investment and development opportunities. Such effort
no doubt requires the collective, coordinated and
sustained support of both State and non-State actors.

16-239275/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

28/07/2016

Moreover, in the wake of the historic adoption of key
global policies in 2015, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1) and the Paris Climate Change Agreement,
among others, achieving peace and security has to
continue to underpin the delivery of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The interconnectivity of
the SDGs implies that the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission has to fit into and complement the work
of all other agencies and initiatives that promote
social, economic and political development. The divide
between peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance and
development needs to be overcome and addressed as a
continuum, so that every person everywhere can have
an opportunity to achieve peace and prosperity.

Ki-moon, Her Excellency and my sister, Ms. Amina
Mohamed, Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs and
International Trade of Kenya, and the ministers present
here.

I would like to assure everyone that we are
committed to the pursuit of peace on and beyond the
continent and consider it a prerequisite for development
and prosperity. That is why we are concerned by the
pullback on the part of the European Union of its
funding to the African Union Mission in Somalia and
AU missions elsewhere — a move that we consider not
well-aligned with our collective objective to achieve
sustainable peace in our part of the world. I hope that
that matter will continue to receive the attention of the
Council.

As everyone knows, in 2013 the African Union
celebrated 50 years of existence since the birth of
that continental body in 1963, under the theme of
pan-Africanism and African renaissance. While we
remember the great strides that the continent has made
in the economic, political and social areas, we are
also aware that there are still numerous challenges to
peace and development in Africa. We therefore need to
continue to undertake sustained, bold and innovative
initiatives and endeavours, inspired by the ambitions
that led to the birth of the African Union and its
predecessor, the Organization of African Unity.

Once again, I wish to thank Japan for organizing
this debate. I wish to invite all members of the Council
to TICAD VI, which is to be held in Nairobi from
27 to 28 August. It is our desire that the link between
peace, peacebuilding, security and the 2030 Agenda be
emphasized and given pride of place.
In conclusion, we welcome the diagnostic tool
developed by the United Nations and the World Bank.
We in Kenya actually know the wisdom and the value
of deploying technology in the service of humankind.
We have developed three such technologies and
applications: the “Umati” project for crowds; “Wiano”
for reconciliation; and “Ushahidi”, which means
“witness” or “testimony”. The Ushahidi project was
used in Kenya, Haiti and Japan, among other places.
The President: I thank Ms. Mohamed for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: I thank His Excellency Mr. Kishida,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan, for presiding over
today’s meeting, I also thank Secretary-General Ban
6/65

I wish to express the gratitude of the African
Union (AU) to the Security Council and also to
Japan for organizing this open debate on the subject
of peacebuilding in Africa. The high calibre of the
representatives gathered here in the Chamber shows
the importance that we all attach to the critical issue of
peacebuilding in Africa.
At the outset, let me say that I fully endorse the
important contribution made by my sister, Amina, on
this matter.

It is in that context that the theme of today’s open
debate resonates well with our vision of ensuring a better
Africa for all our citizens, especially women and youth,
who are particularly affected by the tragic consequences
of conflicts and often find it hard to access the resources
that will ensure them a better livelihood, as better
livelihoods contribute to nation-building. Experience
has shown that any failure to ensure the consolidation
of peace is to be viewed as a clear threat to peace and
human security, and that is a reality for many countries
in Africa, especially those emerging from conflict. I
wish to underline that the African Union’s authoritative
policy framework on post-conflict reconstruction and
development, endorsed 10 years ago by its Executive
Council, outlines six indicative elements that provide
the foundation for achieving sustainable development in
a post-conflict setting, namely, security, humanitarian
and emergency assistance; political governance
and transition; socioeconomic reconstruction and
development; human rights, justice and reconciliation;
and women and gender. That policy requires the
African Union to work with the regional economic
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

communities, the relevant United Nations agencies
and other institutions and African non-governmental
organizations in a collaborative manner to realize
and consolidate post-conflict reconstruction and
development in post-conflict and conflict-prone States.
Since the adoption of its post-conflict
reconstruction and development policy, the African
Union Commission has taken a number of steps towards
its implementation. They include the identification of
joint activities in support of the implementation of peace
agreements in member States of the African Union
emerging from conflict, conducting needs-assessment
missions, consolidating and scaling up security-sector
reform, pursuing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration initiatives, and sustained collaboration
with regional groupings, mechanisms and civil-society
organizations. Such engagements have also been
geared towards developing and implementing regional
strategies for women’s effective participation in peace
and security frameworks at the regional and national
level, the implementation of quick-impact projects
and peace-strengthening projects in the areas of the
deployment of African Union peace-support operations,
and through the African Union liaison offices.
Secondly, all such post-conflict reconstruction
and development programmes and policies are obliged
to mainstream gender and comply with resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security and
related African Union instruments. In furthering the
advancement of women’s empowerment and gender
equality, the African Union Commission has sponsored
initiatives to promote women’s participation in
democratic processes and institution-building in postconflict settings.
Thirdly, the African Union Commission continues
to engage a number of partners in the implementation
of its post-conflict reconstruction and development
policy. The Peacebuilding Commission and other
United Nations agencies, the African Development
Bank, the Economic Commission for Africa, civil
society organizations and bilateral actors are some of
the key partners that have been engaged thus far. This
year, as we celebrate 10 years of the African Union’s
post-conflict reconstruction and development policy,
we need to consider the evolving global peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction discourse and how it
impacts our response in the light of the interconnected
strategic, structural and operational challenges. As a
dynamic organization, the African Union has taken

S/PV.7750

note of the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts (see S/2015/490), the report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) and the global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I wish to outline several
lessons that we have learned and on which we can build
for more effective peacebuilding in Africa.
First, the most obvious lesson is demonstrated by
the recent relapse of several post-conflict countries
into violence and instability, highlighting the crucial
necessity for coherent post-conflict reconstruction and
development strategies and interventions in Africa.
Secondly, and in view of the magnitude and
complex challenges connected with post-conflict
reconstruction and development, more attention must
be given to the coherence and coordination of all actors
to enhance synergies of action and integrated planning
and operations, which effectively lead to structured
and effective implementation. That will require close
coordination at the strategic, policy and operational
levels with a view to consolidating the implementation
of post-conflict reconstruction and development by
the African Union, regional mechanisms and entities
within the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
In the light of the two United Nations reports on
peacebuilding and peace-support operations (see
S/2015/490, S/2015/446), we look forward to reflecting
on and advancing creative joint modalities so that we
can move forward in addressing the current persisting
reality of disjointed and incoherent peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction implementation, and to
working with other peace and security programmes at
the level of the African Union, regional mechanisms
and Member States in an effort to have a greater
impact. Moreover, if properly calibrated, the African
Union post-conflict reconstruction and development
interventions will be critical to the African Union’s
conflict-prevention strategies. That requires taking into
consideration the regional dimensions and transnational
nature of conflicts in Africa, which necessitate the
formulation of post-conflict reconstruction and
development interventions that address those realities.
Furthermore, with a view to addressing the
limited sharing of lessons learned and best practices
across the United Nations and the African Union,
the African Union and the entities within the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture should explore
practical modalities of sharing experiences, focusing

16-239277/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

on measures to develop appropriate tools for knowledge
management and information-sharing that can empower
the continent and regional mechanisms to respond to
the initiatives aimed at implementing an adequate postconflict reconstruction and development policy. In that
regard, an annual meeting between the African Union
and the United Nations to share experiences, lessons
learned and progress in the implementation of the postconflict reconstruction and development policy should
be institutionalized.
There are a number of interconnected challenges
pertaining to financing for which we have had to find
more innovative approaches. First, one such innovation
is the Africa Solidarity Initiative, whose funding
conference was launched in July 2013 in Addis Ababa as
part of the activities marking the fiftieth anniversary of
the Organization of African Unity/African Union. The
aim was to mobilize the help of Africans to Africans.
That includes the sharing of experiences, best practices,
the offering of training facilities, the exchange of
familiarization schemes and capacity-building.
The overall goal is to promote a paradigm shift
that promotes African self-reliance driven by the motto
“Africa helping Africa”. Let me emphasize the fact that
that initiative does not seek to overlook the support
from traditional and new partners in any way. Rather, it
seeks to provide an opportunity for Africa to generate
additional “beyond-the-box” ideas for addressing postconflict reconstruction and development challenges
and contribute towards a renewed sense of promoting
intra-African solutions to the complex challenges of
post-conflict reconstruction and development.
The implementation of that initiative will also
take into account existing initiatives for post-conflict
reconstruction in Africa, as well as other emerging
initiatives, such as the global dialogue on fragility,
and promote further efforts towards a harmonized
conceptual understanding of the transition-recoverydevelopment continuum in the African context. We
believe that the Africa Solidarity Initiative will
galvanize the private sector as an important stakeholder
in reconstruction and socioeconomic development. The
contribution made by the private sector to the African
Union’s fight against the Ebola virus outbreak provides
invaluable lessons.
At this juncture, I also stress the need for local
perspectives and the empowerment of the marginalized
as the key to sustaining peace. The effort to involve local
8/65

28/07/2016

communities and convert their in-kind contributions
and indigenous knowledge into coherent plans and
programmes requires patience and greater resources
and involves security risks where conflict persists.
Yet identifying mechanisms for local participation and
empowerment is critical to sustaining peace.
If peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction
in Africa is to move beyond partial success, the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture need to consider developing
a joint 10-year strategy for implementation, with a
robust monitoring and evaluation plan that would
enhance the peace dividends in Africa for many
families, communities and societies.
What we need is for both the African Union and
the United Nations to fully play their roles, which
would consolidate sustainable peace, human rights and
development in Africa. In doing so, we would be better
prepared to anticipate future conflicts and adapt our
interventions accordingly.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
The Council has before it the draft text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2016/12.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Let me begin by expressing my deep appreciation
for the informative and insightful briefings just given by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Amina
Chawahir Mohamed of Kenya and Commissioner Smail
Chergui of the African Union. I would also like to
thank the Ministers from Angola, France, Malaysia and
Senegal for their presence here today.
At the outset, we might want to ask ourselves why
we need to discuss peacebuilding in Africa. The answer
is quite straightforward: Africa and its people possess
a rich culture and traditions and a huge potential for
future growth. But there are African countries that are
suffering from conflicts, confrontations and terrorism.
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

As we know, the Republic of South Sudan has been
facing grave challenges. Japanese peacekeepers are
working alongside international forces in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which was
originally mandated to support peace-consolidation
efforts aimed at fostering State-building, with an
emphasis on institution-building. In the light of the
changes on the ground, UNMISS now focuses on the
protection of civilians and other urgent tasks. We need
to pool our collective wisdom in order to engage in
institution-building in countries where confrontation
persists.
Much greater efforts and resources are needed to
address situations once conflicts occur than to prevent
situations from turning into conflicts or relapsing into
conflicts. Whether we succeed in building national
institutions conducive to peace and stability in Africa
is enormously important.
During this open debate, I would like to encourage
representatives to focus on the significant role played by
institution-building, particularly in conflict prevention.
I look forward to pragmatic discussions that might show
us the way forward as we consider lessons learned.
Now let me touch upon Japan’s three principles on
peacebuilding in Africa.
First, there is an emphasis on people and the field.
We move forward together with local populations,
empowering the people on the ground.
Secondly, we put emphasis on improving living
standards through inclusive economic development,
which serves as the basis of peace.
The third principle is tolerance of diversity. While
emphasizing universal values, Japan also respects the
importance of ethnic diversity and local ownership, and
is cautious not to rush to quick results.
These principles are in line with the basic
philosophy of the Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD) process: ownership and
partnership. TICAD VI, which will be held in Kenya
this August, will be a good opportunity to promote
peacebuilding in Africa via development. Japan will
continue to engage with Africa through the open
process of TICAD, based on a broad partnership with
the United Nations and other international bodies.

S/PV.7750

Bearing in mind these three principles, let me
outline four priority areas for Japan’s peacebuilding
efforts.
First, the focus of our support is institution-building
in Africa, while also respecting the continent’s diversity,
unique characteristics and traditional institutions. In
Chad, Japan has supported the enhanced administration
of electoral institutions, as well as the design of systems
to manage election-related disputes. In this context, it is
useful to collaborate with regional organizations with a
deep understanding of the local context.
Secondly, we support capacity-building for the
people who actually run the institutions. In order
to eradicate violence and terror, we need to train the
police forces in communities. Japan has supported a
police-training programme in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for more than 20,000 police officers. In
addition, Japan will cooperate with the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Organization to promote capacitybuilding for legal institutions.
Thirdly, in order to sustain peace, we need
to build trust in addition to institutions. In Côte
d’Ivoire, Japan has supported strengthened capacity
of the administrative services, with an eye towards
social integration, in order to restore trust between
administration and the people.
Lastly, we need innovation in peacebuilding
methods. There is ample room for expanded use of
science and technology. In North Africa, Japan has
supported the installation of high-tech surveillance
cameras to improve security and border control.
Japan also contributes to peacebuilding in Africa
through expanded training of industry professionals
and coordination between industry, Government and
academia.
In order to promote peacebuilding, enhanced
cooperation for counter-terrorism is critical. To
strengthen counter-terrorism capacity in Africa, I
would like to announce here that Japan will implement
the assistance of $120 million, including human
resource development of 30,000 people, from 2016 to
2018. The purpose of this assistance is to strengthen
capacity for information and data collection in Africa.
This will include border control at international
airports with cutting-edge technologies and for security
maintenance, including criminal justice enforcement
and the capacity-building of police forces.

16-239279/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We need to break down silos in order to achieve a
seamless transition of peacebuilding. The entire United
Nations system, national Governments, civil society
and all related actors need to work together over the
long term.
As a Foreign Minister who comes from Hiroshima,
peace is particularly close to my heart. After the
Second World War, Japan succeeded in rebuilding its
institutions by learning from foreign countries while also
maintaining the best parts of its traditional institutions.
We will continue to reflect on our experience as we
make further efforts for peacebuilding in Africa.
I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
Japan’s strong commitment to contributing to the peace
and security of Africa. We will also fully utilize the
views expressed in today’s debate at the upcoming
TICAD VI summit in Nairobi and beyond.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
I now call on His Excellency Mr. Anifah Aman,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.
Mr. Aman (Malaysia): On behalf of the Malaysian
delegation, I thank you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Japan for having convened this timely and important
debate. This meeting is an excellent opportunity to
take stock of and assess the various plans and measures
aimed at supporting the peacebuilding agenda as well
as the broader peace and security agenda in Africa thus
far, as well as the decisions taken by the Council, the
United Nations and the wider international community.
The outcome of these discussions should contribute
to future efforts in support of the peacebuilding agenda
in Africa especially, but also in other regions more
generally. As such, we are pleased to note Japan’s
intention to do so for the sixth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development.
We greatly appreciate the Secretary-General’s
briefing, which we believe highlighted his perspective
on the key issues and areas that require greater focus
and attention. As a concurrent member of both the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Malaysia welcomes the participation of Ms. Amina
Mohamed in her capacity as the Chair of the PBC,
demonstrating Kenya’s strong support and commitment
10/65

28/07/2016

to peacebuilding, and I thank her for her statement,
which we fully endorse.
I wish also to thank his Excellency Ambassador
Smail Chergui for presenting the message of the African
Union Peace and Security Commission, which we heard
very carefully and with much interest. In aligning with
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations statement
to be delivered shortly by the Ambassador of Thailand,
I wish to make a few additional points to contribute to
this discussion.
Mr. President, as you have rightly stated, a
sustainable peacebuilding agenda must place a
strong emphasis on institution-building and national
ownership. From our own experience as a developing
country, I can say with absolute certainty that faithful
adherence to these two key principles have contributed
significantly to strengthening national resilience. At
one point in the not-too-distant past, many observers
were certain that a country with a population as diverse
as Malaysia’s could not have achieved coherence or
unity, much less peace and stability, which consists of
socioeconomic development and progress. However,
instead of seeing diversity as a potential security
threat, the Government took concrete and sustained
measures to ensure that all could enjoy a place at the
table. Therefore, we succeeded in turning the perceived
disadvantage of our diversity and harnessing it into
what it should be rightly taken for, which is strength.
Another important lesson we learned was that
developing countries required support and assistance.
For many, the natural choice would be to seek out
the bigger and rich countries and donors. However,
what perhaps may be overlooked is the role that other
developing countries can play in supporting fellow
developing countries. In that regard, Malaysia’s foreign
policy includes a commitment to the principle of
“prosper thy neighbour”. Despite the inconvenience
of distance, Malaysia very much considers Africa as a
close neighbour. We remain committed to contributing
to Africa’s continued peace and security, political
stability and economic growth, and we endeavour
to support this as best as we can, despite our modest
resources.
Over the past few decades, Malaysia’s engagement
with Africa has been increasing steadily, specifically
on institution-building and support in areas such as
peace and security, trade, investment and holistic
development. The primary vehicle for such efforts
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

is through the Malaysian Technical Cooperation
Programme (MTCP), established in 1980. In addition
to the direct bilateral engagement through the MTCP,
Malaysia also extends cooperation through the MTCPJapan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
Africa programme. To date, 29,000 participants, many
hailing from Africa, have participated in courses and
programmes offered under the MTCP.
Our commitment to continued support and
assistance to partners in Africa is also premised on
the belief that attaining higher levels of development
is dependent upon the quality of the human capital,
resources and institutions in place. To that end, Malaysia
pioneered the concept of smart partnership dialogues
with African countries, beginning with the inaugural
Langkawi International Dialogue in 1995, which has
been held biannually since then. The dialogues aim to
promote partnership through engagement at all levels
of society, including political leaders, the civil service,
business, labour, the media and populations, including
women and youth. We are pleased to note that this
dialogue concept has gained traction within Africa,
which now convenes a similar process of its own,
known as the Southern Africa International Dialogue.
At the multilateral level, the outcome of the
recently concluded peacebuilding architecture review
paves the way for the United Nations to better address
fragmentation issues, as well as to promote better
synergy, coordination and complementarity in the
work of the relevant United Nations bodies — anchored
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security
Council — agencies and mechanism towards achieving
the core objective of promoting and sustaining peace.
I wish to conclude by welcoming presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/12, which was just adopted.
I would also like to emphasize that Malaysia remains
committed to Africa over the long haul, with a view to
contributing towards the region’s aspirations for peace,
security, economic development and prosperity.
Finally, I wish Japan, Kenya and all participants
success at the sixth Tokyo International Conference on
African Development, to be held later this month.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Georges Rebelo Pinto Chikoti, Minister for
External Relations of Angola.
Mr. Chikoti (Angola): We congratulate Japan
for the manner in which it has been conducting the

S/PV.7750

Security Council during its presidency for the month
of July. Angola applauds Japan’s decision to convene
this important meeting on the theme of peacebuilding
in Africa, thus translating Japan’s commitment to
cooperation with the African continent, as reflected
in the series of Tokyo International Conferences on
African Development dating back to 1993. May I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his insightful
remarks, as well as Minister Amina Mohamed of Kenya
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
briefings.
At the 2005 World Summit, the United Nations
established the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. The 10-year review of what we refer to as the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture concluded
in April with the concurrent adoption of identical
resolutions by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. Ten years ago, at the African Union Summit
held in Banjul, African Governments adopted a
policy framework on post-conflict reconstruction and
development to guide its work in support of countries
emerging from conflict in Africa. More recently,
to better respond to the challenges facing African
countries emerging from conflict, the African Union
Commission launched in 2012 the African Solidarity
Initiative, aimed at mobilizing resources for postconflict reconstruction and development. I mention
those efforts to advance the peacebuilding agenda,
both at the United Nations and at the African Union, in
order to underline the fact that peacebuilding is being
accorded the required priority in the midst of other
competing issues on the international agenda.
Today’s debate on peacebuilding in Africa allows
members of the Security Council and the broader
United Nations membership an opportunity to reflect
on challenges faced by African countries emerging
from conflict in the transition from war to peace, the
priorities for peacebuilding at the national level and,
in particular, the role of the United Nations. Resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262,
adopted in April, of which Australia and Angola were
facilitators, define conflict prevention as the key element
in peacebuilding. They also includes activities running
through all phases aimed at preventing the outbreak,
escalation, persistence and recurrence of conflict, as well
as addressing roots causes, assisting the parties to end
hostilities, ensuring national reconciliation and moving
towards recovery, reconstruction and development.

16-2392711/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

All elements of that definition are important, as they
underscore institution-building as the fundamental
prerequisite for a successful peacebuilding process.
It is widely understood that the existence of conflicts
versus efficient institutions differentiate capable from
fragile States. Therefore, institution-building must
be accorded the highest priority in any peacebuilding
effort. Countries emerging from conflict need to build
institutions that help ensure individuals’ safety, reform
the security sector, revitalize their economies, provide
social services, support national reconciliation and
political cohesion and establish the rule of law.
In spite of the constraints imposed by a lengthy
armed conflict that lasted nearly 30 years and caused
widespread devastation, Angola has been implementing
a development model through a broad national
reconciliation process launched in 2002, leading to
the approval of the Constitution of the Republic in
2010, which reaffirmed the rule of law and democracy,
extending rights and freedoms to all citizens and
ensuring the participation of all in the democratic
process. This national resolve has enabled the Angolan
Government to secure gains that are recognized at
the subregional, regional and international levels. In
this regard, I would like to refer to the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), which
Angola currently chairs, and comment on the initiatives
being undertaken under the auspices of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Angola remains strongly committed to the central
role that preventive diplomacy plays in the resolution of
conflicts in the Great Lakes region. Angola also strongly
believes in the urgent need to put the Great Lakes
region on the path towards sustainable development
through the promotion of investments, international
cooperation and support to help this huge market enjoy
the peace dividend. The Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework, established to support the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region, is
an important tool for achieving the aforementioned
requirements and must be supported, together with
the ICGLR Regional Initiative Against the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources.
The Kinshasa Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, held on
24 and 25 February, brought awareness not only to
the investment opportunities offered by the region
12/65

28/07/2016

but also to what the region needs to do to improve the
business environment, which includes implementing
wide-reaching social reforms, promoting transparency,
encouraging business incentives and establishing
anti-corruption programmes. I should like here to thank
the Secretary-General for his commitment to Africa
and for convening that conference.
In search of peaceful solutions to political crises and
conflicts in the Great Lakes region, Angola has helped
to promote the launch of the Guarantors of the Peace,
Cooperation and Security Framework mechanism, led
by the United Nations, with the participation of ICGLR
and the Southern African Development Community;
the Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great
Lakes Region, held in Kinshasa; and the decision
urging the South Sudanese leaders and people to put
aside their differences and work for the implementation
of the peace agreement in South Sudan.
Concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
ICGLR reiterated the need to combat negative forces
and to complete the preparation for the presidential and
legislative elections in a peaceful, credible, inclusive
and transparent manner, in accordance with the
Constitution of the country. Regarding Burundi, ICGLR
reiterated the call for an inclusive and transparent
dialogue to discuss all issues that pose a threat to the
integrity, security and peace of that country.
We recognize the important work the Peacebuilding
Commission is doing in the consolidation of peace in
several African countries. The PBC played a crucial role
in the fight against the Ebola outbreak in Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, and is promoting post-Ebola recovery
in collaboration with the Economic Community of
West African States and other international, regional,
bilateral and multilateral partners.
We would like to underline the importance of
financing for peacebuilding. In countries emerging
from conflict, financial support is crucial to achieving
many of the lofty and laudable goals associated with
peacebuilding. Even the most carefully crafted and
best-designed peacebuilding programme will fail
if the financial resources to implement its various
components are not provided in a timely manner.
Political consensus among national stakeholders and the
commitment of Governments are essential ingredients
of peacebuilding. However, unless financial resources
are provided to implement priority programmes for
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.7750

which political consensus and commitment exist,
peacebuilding efforts can easily be derailed.

for their important statements, to which Senegal fully
subscribes.

I would like to issue a cautionary note to the Council.
Peacebuilding is a complex process encompassing
many priorities and involving many stakeholders. More
importantly, the hierarchy of priorities varies from
country to country. An election, while being decisive
for a nation emerging from conflict and a tool for
the consolidation of democratic institutions, is not in
itself the solution for consolidating peace in a postconflict country, since weak institutions and economic
stagnation go hand in hand with relapse into conflict.
Furthermore, unless institutional capacity-building and
economic recovery are addressed first, a relapse into
conflict is the most probable outcome, in particular
when the election results are challenged by the losing
parties.

Taking stock of our efforts to promote peace
and security in Africa, it is regrettable that the bulk
of those efforts is devoted to peacebuilding in postconflict situations. Despite the continued engagement
of the Peacebuilding Commission in Africa for over a
decade now, as well as the commendable efforts of the
African Union and African subregional organizations,
several African countries in crisis or emerging from
crisis remain vulnerable and are still struggling to
achieve lasting stability. The fact that all six countries
on the Peacebuilding Commission’s agenda are African
is sufficiently illustrative. This fragility, which is
partly the result of factors whose root causes are not
always easy to grasp, casts doubt on the effectiveness
of peacebuilding strategies developed several decades,
particularly in Africa.

Post-conflict countries must build strong
institutions and revitalize their economies in order to
enable their Governments to meet the socioeconomic
needs of their people by creating job opportunities and
providing social services and the necessary conditions
for the well-being of their population. Governments in
post-conflict countries must gain legitimacy through
their performance and ability to deliver results and by
adequately resolving the socioeconomic problems of
their people.
To conclude, it is clear that financial assistance is
central to peacebuilding in post-conflict countries in
order to support the implementation of concrete social
programmes, while bearing in mind the importance of
national ownership, in which the national authorities in
post-conflict countries lead the way in the establishment
of peacebuilding priorities.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad of Senegal.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you personally,
Mr. President, and your Government for acceding to
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
to thank you for convening this high-level ministerial
meeting on an issue that is of great concern to us as an
African country. Allow me also to thank and congratulate
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, as well as our briefers,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, Ms. Amina
Chawahir Mohamed, and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Smail Chergui,

Clearly, a new approach to the way we work to
consolidate peace — as the conclusions of the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts (S/2015/490) on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture suggest — is
essential if we are to be more effective and to attain
sustainable results. Thus, taking into account the
specificity of each country and each situation, we must
mark a break in our approach, focusing on strategies
and actions aimed at creating conditions conducive to
the emergence of resilient societies and States able to
address the challenges of sustainable peace. Without
a doubt, this will require us to redefine the order of
priorities in our actions and strategies. In that regard,
I would particularly like to emphasize four basic
directions that should guide, it seems to us, our efforts
if we wish to achieve meaningful results.
We must first invest more in prevention by also
addressing the root causes of conflicts in Africa. The
tools at our disposal in this regard are certainly many,
but too often it is the political will that is lacking and that
becomes an obstacle to any early action, particularly
by the Security Council. This has often resulted in late
interventions or reactions after the fact, which have
sometimes been ineffective and very expensive.
Moreover, beyond the cyclical causes, our actions
must also move towards resolving the root causes of
conflict, the only guarantee of lasting solutions. Make
no mistake; the efficiency and effectiveness of our
action will depend largely on our ability to prevent
conflicts and emerging threats. It is no coincidence

16-2392713/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that the comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects, the review
of the peacebuilding architecture and the review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security all converge on the need to give a
new impetus to prevention. Obviously, the cross-cutting
dimension of prevention calls for building synergies
between these three complementary reviews, with a
view to developing coherent and holistic strategies and
approaches to promoting sustainable peace. In order
to achieve a lasting peace, we must give primacy to
political solutions.
That is why we must improve our prevention and
mediation tools by setting up more effective strategies.
Admittedly, under Article 33 of the Charter, the
responsibility for prevention lies with Member States.
But the Organization — particularly the Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security — has a
crucial role to play in that regard. This brings me to
welcome the Council’s adoption just before this debate of
the presidential statement on the United Nations Office
in West Africa and the Sahel region (S/PRST/2016/11).
The success of the Office’s activities teaches us that
preventive diplomacy is within reach if it is backed
by the strong political will of the leaders of the region
with the constant support of the African Union and the
United Nations. This is the intrinsic reality of goodneighbour diplomacy as we try to develop it in Senegal.
The African Union and African regional
organizations are actively involved in mediation
and conflict prevention in Africa. Thanks to their
interventions, several crises and tensions have
been defused at an early stage. Better still, with the
establishment of its peace and security architecture,
the African Union has made clear its ambition to play
a more active role in conflict prevention. I therefore
call for greater support for efforts to operationalize the
peace and security architecture.
This brings me to the second point of my speech,
namely, strengthening cooperation with the African
Union and African subregional organizations.
Incidentally, it should be noted that the lessons learned
from peace consolidation in Africa reveal the crucial role
they play in this area. The example of the involvement
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), particularly in Guinea-Bissau and several
other countries of the subregion, in collaboration
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
14/65

28/07/2016

Secretary General for West Africa and other regional
and international partners, is quite illustrative of the
importance of this action.
Another important issue to consider in the
framework of enhanced cooperation with the African
Union and subregional organizations is coordinating
the activities of the various actors involved in the
process of consolidating peace in Africa, with a view
to promoting concerted and coherent actions. Greater
interaction between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the relevant organs of the African Union would
promote better coordination and streamlining of efforts
on the ground. Furthermore, joint assessments of the
nature and challenges of peacebuilding in Africa, as
well as ongoing dialogue on the best way to harmonize
support to countries on the peacebuilding agenda, are
other actions that may give more added value to this
cooperation.
The third point I would like to address today
is the management of the transition to sustainable
peace. We all agree that the success of this critical
phase of peace consolidation is a fundamental element
in preventing renewed conflict, while providing a
guarantee of lasting stability. We have learned from
the experience of countries coming out of conflict that
the transition to sustainable peace is a very demanding
undertaking, one that, moreover, requires planning at
an early stage. Such planning should duly take into
account the conditions and goals that must be met to
end a peacekeeping operation and to safeguard the
transition to an integrated peacebuilding office or
some other arrangement. In that respect, it is important
to guarantee from the outset that peace missions can
create the conditions for a smooth transition, drawdown
and withdrawal without compromising efforts to attain
the long-term goals of peace and stability.
To that end, we should start developing
peacebuilding activities in the early stages of missions,
directing efforts towards strengthening national
capacities and addressing the deeper structural and
socioeconomic problems that these countries often
face, while promoting an ongoing political dialogue and
effective coordination between the various stakeholders.
Steps should be taken to create the conditions for the
transfer of functions to the countries concerned as soon
as peacekeeping operations withdraw.
of

I would also like to emphasize the importance
maintaining and strengthening support and
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

assistance for countries in transition to peace so that
they can continue to benefit from the attention of the
international community, particularly in terms of
receiving sustainable and predictable funding. While
countries emerging from conflict require significant
funding over long periods, it is clear that that funding is
limited, irregular and unpredictable. However, in order
for peace to be durable, the restoration of security must
go hand in hand with economic development.
The lessons learned from the consolidation process
in Guinea Bissau, in particular, give us the full measure
of this dimension. The example of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) is a case study
that documents the difficulties that regional and
subregional African organizations face in financing
peacebuilding measures. Here, we would like to
welcome the valuable support of the European Union,
without which ECOMIB could not continue its work in
Guinea-Bissau today.
Countries involved in peacebuilding are still
politically fragile. Their institutions are often weak,
their economies are vulnerable, and their young people
face the challenges of idleness and unemployment.
These are often countries where everything has to be
rebuilt. The challenges they face in the peacebuilding
process are enormous, as is their need of assistance.
They require assistance with electoral affairs,
judicial and security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, strengthening the
health and education systems, relaunching activity, and
supporting agriculture and job creation, particularly for
the young.
Meeting these challenges is a complex undertaking
that cannot be successful without a comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated approach by the various
actors and stakeholders in the peacebuilding process.
The adoption of an identical resolution by the General
Assembly (resolution 70/262) and the Security Council
(resolution 2282 (2016)) on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture represents a
historic step in that it reflects a desire to make a break
in our approach to peacebuilding. The resolution sets
the parameters for developing more coordinated,
comprehensive and coherent strategies capable of laying
the true foundations for a lasting peace as it addresses
the areas of peace, development and human rights. These
strategies should now focus on strengthening synergies
so as to ensure greater impact on the ground. This is

S/PV.7750

where the relevance of the concept of the sustainability
of peace is found.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
resolution 2282 (2016) is an important step forward in
our efforts to adapt the peacebuilding architecture to
today’s challenges and that we should now mobilize
further in order to implement it effectively.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban, Minister Mohamed and
Commissioner Chergui for their briefings. I offer
thanks to each of them as well as to the Ministers who
have shown the importance of the issue before us by
making the long trip here to New York. We are very
grateful.
Preventing conflicts and promoting stability in
Africa is obviously an immensely important subject for
the Security Council to focus on. The list of political,
economic and social factors to debate is long, as is the
list of tools that we have at our disposal. But at a moment
when conflicts are re-emerging in Africa and too many
other States are on the brink, the Council needs to do
more than debate lessons learned. It needs to reaffirm
the principles that are fundamental to ending conflicts
and take concrete steps to translate them into practice.
National ownership of peacebuilding processes is
important, as many speakers have highlighted today
and as many more speakers will continue to do. But
national ownership cannot be a pretext for the Council
or the international community to defer reflexively
to Governments when we know their practices are
undermining or failing to enhance peace and security.
And this happens too often. Especially when the Council
authorizes major peacekeeping missions to restore
stability, we must hold political leaders accountable for
committing to the process of stopping violence, abiding
by the rule of law and strengthening State institutions.
I will set up the importance of sustaining political will
across the different stages of the peacebuilding process,
drawing upon South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Somalia as examples.
First, the violence in South Sudan this past
month shows what happens when political leaders
fail to commit to peace at the start of a peacebuilding
intervention. In just four days of fighting in Juba, from
7 to 11 July, more than 36,000 people were displaced.
The United Nations reported that the number of
refugees who arrived in Uganda from South Sudan on
21 July was the largest single day total for this conflict

16-2392715/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

in more than two years — some 8,337 new arrivals,
many of whom had spent days on foot, often with little
more than the clothes on their backs, to reach safety.
Women and children make up more than 90 per cent of
the refugees who have left South Sudan since 7 July.
The international community has spent billions of
dollars trying to avert a famine in the country, money
that, if not for this man-made conflict, a conflict that
contributes to severe acute malnutrition, prevents
planting and stymies the economy completely, could
have been dedicated to building roads, economic
development, girls’ education and boys’ education; it
has been a total waste. And yet we have to continue
to mobilize resources to try to keep this long-suffering
population living with some basic dignity and
living — surviving — in the first place.
Gruesome atrocities are being committed daily,
with civilians targeted and killed, women raped,
homes looted and destroyed. Both Government- and
opposition-affiliated soldiers have been implicated in
these horrors. Yet there has been no effort to hold the
perpetrators accountable, which then compounds the
tendency to ascribe collective guilt, which in turn fuels
ethnic targeting, which in turn further fuels the cycle of
violence. Amid all of the foregoing, to quote a 42-yearold from South Sudan named James Benjamin Wani,
who asked a simple question of a reporter after days of
fighting in Juba: “Why do our leaders not want to sit
down and solve their problems? Let them hear us. Let
them cry. We do not want fighting. We want peace.”
The level of misrepresentation of the population by
leadership that will not commit to the implementation
of the steps that the international community has
rallied behind is clear. For years we have been asking
questions similar to those asked by this 42-year-old
man. In 2011, we invested heavily in South Sudan’s
future by giving the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) a mandate to assist
the State at all levels — building institutions, fostering
economic development, reforming the security sector
and promoting human rights. At every step the Mission
sought to collaborate closely with the Government of
South Sudan, taking pains to avoid imposing solutions.
UNMISS was designed with peacebuilding best
practices in mind. It was South Sudan’s leaders who
failed to live up to their end of the bargain by being
unable to put their personal power struggles aside.
16/65

28/07/2016

We now have to come together as a Council, as an
international community, around a single approach to
end the violence in South Sudan and, more importantly,
to prevent its recurrence. In the immediate term,
this means working with and present South Sudan’s
leadership to provide for security in Juba, to safeguard
freedom of movement and to provide for unfettered
humanitarian access. It also means answering the calls
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the African Union for strengthening UNMISS so
that the Mission can better protect civilians and help
establish a secure environment so the parties can in fact
make political progress.
Restoring security in Juba may be necessary but we
all know it is far from sufficient. South Sudan’s leaders
must govern on behalf of their people and demonstrate
the political will for peace. In practical terms, the parties
need to carry out the reform pillars in the August 2015
Peace Agreement, professionalizing the security sector,
carrying out economic reforms, promoting justice and
accountability and drafting a constitution. What all of
this underscores is that peacebuilding, as others have
noted, is itself a form of conflict prevention, and it is
one form that collectively we need to double down on in
a country where too much tragedy has been happening
for too long. This formula is not revolutionary or
even new; the difference is that the members of the
Security Council, together with partners in the region
and the international community, must redouble our
collective efforts to influence the choices made every
day by individuals who comprise the South Sudanese
leadership.
On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have a country now entering a later phase of its
peacebuilding process as it prepares for elections.
Further progress depends on President Joseph Kabila’s
political commitment to upholding the Constitution.
The Congolese have spent many years building a
relative peace with the support of billions of dollars
invested in the peacekeeping mission there, that is,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). President Kabila is barred from running
for a third time when his term expires at the end of the
year but there are serious concerns that elections will
not be held in accordance with the Constitution.
As the deadline for elections approaches, instability,
as we have seen, is growing, which is why the United
States has stressed the need for an environment that
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

supports international efforts to bring Congolese
stakeholders together to determine a way forward. And
yet, at precisely the moment a dialogue is needed to
resolve these tensions, the Government is closing off
space for the political opposition and civil-society
groups to assemble and has not taken adequate steps to
release political prisoners.
In recent months, the Government has continued
to harass and imprison politicians and civil-society
activists, and peaceful protests have all too often
ended with arbitrary arrests, injuries and even death.
According to United Nations reports, the Government
arbitrarily detained dozens of people during opposition
rallies in April and May, and clashes between protesters
and security forces led to deaths and injuries on both
sides. With major rallies planned for this very week, and
with the return of opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi
yesterday, we call on the Government and security
forces to respect the fundamental rights of citizens to
peaceful assembly. Again, that is not a matter of purely
domestic concern, but is an extension of the objectives
that the Council has supported since MONUSCO
deployed six years ago to help build a fragile peace.
Thirdly, and finally, Somalia’s leaders have to
show the political will to extend State authority and
develop functioning democratic institutions. The
Federal Government must match the achievements of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in
building security with commensurate steps to build
institutions to keep people safe.
AMISOM’s troop contributors deserve the
Council’s immense gratitude for the Mission’s ability
to improve security for the Somali people, especially
around the capital. Their sacrifices, especially over the
last year, have been mind-blowing. The United States
condemns in the strongest terms the attack this past
week by Al-Shabaab on the United Nations base at the
Mogadishu international Airport — just the latest in a
wave of heinous attacks.
AMISOM has a critical role to play, as the
Security Council has recognized and endorsed, but the
Government does as well. And that is why the Council’s
interest in Somalia does not end with AMISOM’s
performance. Just as in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia has made progress towards a durable
peace based on the success of the political steps taken
by the Government. The Council should welcome
the agreement on an electoral model for 2016 and

S/PV.7750

encourage its swift implementation as a step towards
universal direct elections by 2020. Yet for that process
to succeed, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and
his Government must accelerate the training of the
Somali national army and the process of building State
institutions, and all of us must, of course, chip in to
support the Government as they do that. In particular,
the Government needs to strengthen the protection of
human rights, including by showing respect for free
expression and the media and by holding security forces
accountable when they commit violations.
We all know that the conditions in Somalia and the
circumstances and the steps that I have described are
not only difficult but downright daunting. And they
will, of course, take time. But military victories alone
will not bring peace, unless the Government takes
concrete steps to establish peace and extend its reach.
While South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Somalia each face very different
challenges, the common principle is that success in
peacebuilding requires political will. There are only
so many workarounds that the region and the Security
Council can come up with.The Council has authorized
a peacekeeping mission for each of those countries in
order to help restore stability; but at every stage, the
Council has to remain focused on taking steps to ensure
that leaders make choices in the service of peace.
Amid the violence in South Sudan, the BBC reported
recently that a group of musicians called the “All Stars”
gathered to write a song speaking out against revenge
killing. The song, written in multiple South Sudanese
dialects, includes the lyric “I wish my talent could be a
weapon. I would use it to protect my people.”
There are so many South Sudanese who share that
group’s desire to protect people from conflict just to
keep their families safe. We must harness our tools to
help create an environment in which such talent can be
harnessed and in which peace can, at last, take hold.
Mr. Vallini (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Japanese presidency for organizing this open debate on
peacebuilding in Africa and for its initiative on behalf
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12, which we
have just adopted.
Given its historical ties with the continent, France
cannot remain indifferent towards anything taking
place in Africa. Each time it is needed, France has
assumed its responsibilities in Africa. When Bamako

16-2392717/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

ran the risk of falling into the hands of terrorists, we
shouldered our responsibility. When the threat of
genocide arose in the Central African Republic, we
assumed our responsibilities. Faced with the ongoing
conflicts in Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are also
assuming our responsibilities.
For France, engagement in Africa does not mean
acting on its own or as it alone sees fit. For France, being
engaged in Africa does not mean acting unilaterally;
it means acting first at the request of and with our
African partners, and, of course, acting in accordance
with international law. All of the military interventions
undertaken by President François Hollande were
authorized by, and have included the participation of,
the African Union and the United Nations. Moreover,
engaging in Africa does not mean intervening militarily
and then leaving the country and its people to take
care of themselves. It means standing beside them and
supporting them along the path to security, democracy
and human development.
Security in the African continent is our primary
goal. I would mention Operation Barkhane in the
Sahel, particularly in Mali, where the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is also deployed. I am also thinking about our
continuing presence in the Central African Republic,
alongside the African Union’s African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA).
We also support the African peacekeeping
operations, and I would refer in particular of the joint
multinational force in the Lake Chad region, which was
agreed upon at the Paris summit on security in Nigeria,
in connection with the fight against Boko Haram. France
has devoted significant human and logistical resources
to the African countries that have been targeted by that
terrorist group.
The primary responsibility of every State is to
guarantee the safety of its citizens and protect its
population. That requires sufficient numbers of welltrained and well-equipped police and military forces.
That is why France has been cooperating on security
issues, especially in the Sahel countries, in order
to enable Africans to ensure their own safety to the
greatest extent possible on their own. We have been
18/65

28/07/2016

training more than 20,000 African soldiers each year
in France and Africa and have also been playing an
active role in deploying European security missions in
Africa — for example, in the Central African Republic.
After security comes democracy. Security should
never be pursued at the expense of respect for the rule
of law. The protecting human rights, strengthening
democratic institutions, combating impunity and
establishing good governance are imperative. In that
context, the holding of fair and transparent elections
is highly important, and France strongly supports
the African Union regulations that oppose late and
non-consensual changes to a country’s Constitution,
especially when the purpose of such changes is to
prevent a democratic change.
France has always mobilized in defence of human
rights. We have just renewed and strengthened the
mandate of MINUSCA, which is deployed in the
Central African Republic and which we consider
multidimensional. In fact, our goal is not only the
physical protection of civilians, but also the rule of
law, the fight against impunity, good governance and
strengthening the State’s authority throughout the
territory as it seeks to address the threat of armed
groups. In that context, on 26 and 27 October in Paris,
France will organize a ministerial conference on
peacekeeping in the Francophone community.
Finally, after security and democracy, which act to
support peacebuilding, I would like to discuss human
development. In that regard, I would like to focus some
comments on education. Education, as we all know,
is the foundation of development, whether the issue
involves health, the environment, women’s rights, the
fight against extremism or democratic governance.
Everything depends on education, everything starts
with education. No country has truly taken off until
80 per cent of its population has completed primary
school. The progress made over the past 15 years is
considerable.
Let us measure it: the number of children not
attending school worldwide has been halved. However,
major challenges remain owing to the crises, the chronic
under-funding and, of course, the population explosion.
Today, 60 million children around the world are totally
deprived of education. By 2030, we will have to enrol
more than 600 million additional children, including
450 million in Africa, and the investment needs are
huge. They amount to $40 billion per year. We must
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

therefore shift the balance, and the international
community must reinvest substantially and urgently in
quality education, especially in Africa, as it was able to
do in health.
That is why I welcome the work of the commission
led by Gordon Brown, upon the initiative in Ban
Ki-moon, particularly with respect to education in
emergency situations, which is key to maintaining
peace in Africa. Crises disrupt social cohesion and
undermine the ability of States to rebuild. They are
preventing 75 million children today from attending
school normally. The Education Cannot Wait fund,
set up at the Global Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul,
provides a first response.
In conclusion, conflicts are not inevitable in Africa.
Let us see the continent as a whole, bearing in mind not
only the failures but also the successes of Africans and
the international community in many areas, which offer
the promise that Africa will one day be a continent
of peace.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank you, Sir,
for presiding over this important debate today. I also
wish to acknowledge the presence of the other Ministers.
The
Secretary-General,
Cabinet
Secretary
Mohamed and Commissioner Chergui have each
thoughtfully laid out important issues that we must
address as we seek to give life to the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in Africa. Many of those themes
are addressed in presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12,
which we have adopted today under Japan’s leadership.
I want to now comment on a few of those themes.
The peacebuilding architecture was established a
decade ago to address what former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan described as a gaping hole in the United
Nations capacity to support countries transitioning
from violent conflict to sustainable peace. There
has been progress since then, including through the
recognition that peacebuilding must underlie the
whole of the conflict cycle and this year’s resolutions
on sustaining peace. But, as last year’s review by the
Advisory Group of Experts found, there continue to be
serious systemic shortcomings.
We recognize that peacebuilding is a task that
extends well beyond the mandate and responsibility
of the Security Council, but supporting effective
peacebuilding is core to the Council’s role of maintaining
international peace and security. And what the Council

S/PV.7750

does in this area is critical to the success of work of
the other actors in peacebuilding. Yet fragmentation
of approaches across the United Nations and the wider
international effort continues to be a major obstacle.
We wish to reiterate key areas where we believe the
Council must do better, not just in Africa but especially
in Africa.
First, the Council needs to play a more deliberate
and active role in peacebuilding. Council-mandated
missions contribute directly to creating an enabling
environment for peacebuilding by providing security
and political stability, by facilitating reconciliation and
accountability, and by supporting governance. These
mutually reinforcing peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts are most effective when they are planned and
considered from the very earliest stages of a mission.
What the Council does in mandating and ensuring
the implementation of peacebuilding tasks and in
mobilizing the necessary resources is critical to the
success of post-conflict efforts. Making the peace stick
is key to avoiding another conflict spiral.
Secondly, the Council needs to do its part to
ensure that the institutions of governance, security, and
economy that are central to peacebuilding are supported
by a wide range of organizations. Better coordination
with other peacebuilding contributors — including
United Nations agencies, international financial
institutions, regional and bilateral partners, and
donors — is crucial. This is especially the case as
operating environments change. We welcome the
inclusion of language encouraging such cooperation in
the recent resolution 2301 (2016), renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
We hope to see similar provisions included in other
relevant peacekeeping missions.
Even when they are well coordinated, peacebuilding
efforts suffer when the Mission’s activities are unable
to be sustained beyond the life of the mission. As we
have seen in countries like Guinea-Bissau, emerging
from conflict and fragility is a long process; it requires
equally long-term engagement by the international
community. If we look at South Sudan or other
situations, too often we focus on a fragile and conflictaffected State only as long as it takes to resolve the
immediate crisis. Too often, our attention and resources
are pulled to the next crisis.

16-2392719/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Thirdly, the Council needs to ensure that the host
State in particular takes early joint ownership and
leadership of relevant peacebuilding activities. That
does not mean that host Governments can dictate
the course of the peacebuilding effort, for all of the
reasons identified by Ambassador Power. The horrific
problems we are seeing in South Sudan only reinforce
the point that national ownership is the greatest
determinant of the success or failure of peacebuilding
efforts. As a means of building public confidence in the
State, United Nations missions should aim to reinforce
national ownership by assisting but not displacing
the delivery of critical services. They should plan for
peacebuilding activities to transition to the host State
as soon as possible. In this context, we also reiterate
our support for resident coordinators to focus on
ensuring the continuity of peacebuilding efforts during
such transitions.
Additionally, ongoing national commitments to
peacebuilding and political stability require the vocal
support of the Council and regional organizations and
ensuring that local leaders deliver on their promises.
The African Union and the regional economic
communities, such as the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern African Development
Community, have demonstrated the important role they
can play in encouraging political leaders to maintain
their commitments to peacebuilding. The Security
Council should support these efforts and more actively
seek the views of regional organizations on African
peacebuilding. In so doing, we should seek to enhance
regional ownership of peacebuilding in Africa.
Finally, the peacebuilding architecture is a valuable
framework for sustaining peace in Africa. As we have
emphasized regularly, there is room for improving
interaction between the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Security Council. We need to be much more joined
up. Maintaining a significant disconnect between our
respective efforts because of artificial ideological
constructs about the respective roles of the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission is a major impediment
to our shared objective of sustainable peace.
We reiterate our strong support for close Council
engagement and meaningful dialogue with country
configurations, moving beyond the briefings to which we
are currently constrained. This could be accomplished
through informal formats if necessary, similar to
informal consultations with troop-contributing
countries. We also believe that it makes sense for
20/65

28/07/2016

country configuration chairs to participate in Council
missions where feasible and where interests overlap.
The themes I have covered are not new. Our task
is to translate them into a greater and clearer sense of
purpose in the way the Council and other stakeholders
support peacebuilding. The Council’s readiness to
tackle the challenges of peacebuilding in Africa will
be judged by the results; in our willingness to prioritize
the long-term sustainability of peacebuilding efforts;
in our willingness to work more closely with regional
organizations and the Peacebuilding Commission; and
in our willingness to encourage greater coordination
and longer-term planning of the peacebuilding activities
we authorize.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Sir, for convening today’s open debate.
Our thanks also go to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Foreign Minister Mohamed of Kenya and African
Union (AU) Commissioner Chergui for their briefings.
Ten days ago, the United Nations celebrated Nelson
Mandela International Day, commemorating the
enormous contribution made by that great statesman to
peace in Africa. Africa today is full of vigour. Joining
hands towards self-improvement and the pursuit
of peace and development is now the main theme
heard throughout the continent. African peace and
development are critical to the security, stability and
common prosperity of the entire world.
Peacebuilding — which spans the political,
security and development realms — can offer important
support to Africa’s efforts to achieve lasting peace and
sustainable development. The world today is facing
growing challenges from terrorism. Terrorist attacks
occur frequently and in many locations, resulting in
heavy casualties and damage. Africa is also a victim of
terrorism. Some countries and regions continue to suffer
from conflict and war. As traditional and non-traditional
security threats are interlinked, effectively enhancing
peacebuilding in Africa to tangibly help the continent
achieve lasting peace is a major challenge for the
international community. In that regard, China would
like to make the following points.
First, it is imperative to vigorously help Africa to
respond to the challenge of terrorism. Africa’s counterterrorism efforts are an important part of the global
fight against terrorism. The international community
should apply a uniform standard on counter-terrorism,
support the counter-terrorism efforts in Africa and
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

resolutely combat terrorist activities regardless of their
pretexts, targets and means. The United Nations should
concretely help African countries to enhance their
counter-terrorism capacity-building, prioritize that
endeavour and provide more substantive assistance to
African countries.
Secondly, with regard to respecting the independent
choices of African countries, Africa belongs to
the African people, and an African approach is the
more effective and feasible way of resolving African
problems. Peacebuilding in Africa should abide by
the principles of national ownership and respect for
the sovereignty and will of the countries concerned,
while avoiding imposing outside will on them. The
United Nations should align its priorities with those of
African countries and be empathetic and concentrate
on resolving the issues deemed most urgent by the
countries concerned. When it comes to peacebuilding
activities, United Nations special political missions
should strictly abide by their respective mandates and
division of responsibilities in order to avoid duplication
of effort and trying to take on all things at the same
time, so as to strike a comprehensive balance between
efficiency and benefits.
Thirdly, with regard to letting regional organizations
play an active role, the African Union and the relevant
subregional organizations have in-depth knowledge
of the countries in the region and their peacebuilding
needs. They have long mediated and dealt with
complex conflicts and possess unique geographical,
historical and cultural advantages. We also support
African countries in proposing holistic peacebuilding
strategies from a regional perspective. We support the
AU’s peacebuilding initiatives, such as its policy on
post-conflict reconstruction and development and the
African solidarity initiative, as well as an active role for
regional mechanisms.
Fourthly, with regard to helping Africa resolve
development issues, peace is the fundamental guarantee
for development. Many post-conflict African countries
face multiple challenges in the areas of the economy,
infrastructure, reconstruction, poverty elimination,
employment, education, public health and social
security. The international community should work hard
to help the countries concerned achieve early economic
recovery and, through industrialization, agriculture
modernization and human resources development, help
Africa’s peoples enjoy a peace dividend at an early date.

S/PV.7750

China is committed to an African policy and concept
based on sincerity, delivering outcomes, affinity, good
faith and a proper approach to justice and interests,
and has steadfastly supported peace and development
in Africa. China has participated in 16 United Nations
peacekeeping operations in African. At the moment,
there are more than 2,600 Chinese peacekeepers
deployed in Africa. Over the past two months, three
young Chinese keepers gave their precious lives for
peace in Africa.
The Johannesburg Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation proposed 10 cooperation programmes,
including in the areas of industrialization cooperation,
agricultural modernization, infrastructure development,
financial cooperation, green development, trade and
investment facilitation, poverty elimination to benefit
the people, public health, culture and people-to-people
exchanges, and peace and security cooperation. China
is moving forward to comprehensively implement those
plans.
Over the next five years, China will provide AU
$100 million in gratis military assistance to support the
setting up of the African Standby Force and the Crisis
Rapid Response Force, including for the training of
2,000 peacekeepers from around the world, including
from Africa. China stands ready to work with the rest
of the international community to continue to make our
contribution to the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa and to promote its development.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost,
allow me to commend you, Mr. President, on the
holding of this important open debate on peacebuilding
in Africa. I also thank you for your presence here at
the helm of the presidency of the Security Council. We
express our gratitude for the briefings by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon; Kenya’s Cabinet Secretary for
Foreign Affairs, Ms. Amina Chawahir Mohamed, in her
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and
Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace Security
of the African Union.
We Venezuelans share a close bond with Africa,
and as such we cannot but reflect on what is happening
on the continent. Following the end of colonialism,
Africa has benefited from unprecedented economic
growth and has made substantial progress in meeting
the Millennium Development Goals, especially
those concerning education, women’s empowerment

16-2392721/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and combating HIV/AIDS and other diseases. The
continent has also made progress in strengthening its
governance institutions at the national, subregional and
regional levels. Nevertheless, Africa still faces major
challenges, such as reducing poverty, inequality and
exclusion, as well as in promoting sustainable economic
growth through its own model. Like Latin America
and the Caribbean, Africa suffers from the scourge of
organized crime, drug trafficking and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and human beings. That
is in addition to the armed conflicts that still affect
some countries in the region.
Against the backdrop of that situation, it is fair to
ask ourselves the extent to which Africa’s colonial past
weighs on its future. The truth is that for most Africans
European colonialism was exploitative, violent and
illegal, and the subsequent development of Africa is
tied to that legacy. By the logic of domination, colonial
Powers came to enslave, plunder resources and exploit
existing differences between various leaders and
communities for their own benefit. Groups that had
historically been united were separated, and vice versa.
One of the biggest mistakes was not to understand
that tribal identities were only one of many by which
Africans identified themselves, such as ancestry, clan
and occupation. The result was the drawing of artificial
boundaries lacking a proper sense of nationhood.
The legacy of exploitation still weighs on African
peoples, while a colony — Western Sahara — still
suffers the indignities of oppression. Africa today
continues to be the victim of armed intervention by
Western Powers, such as took place in Libya in 2011,
which resulted in great destabilization and uncertainty
in the entire region, including the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons among terrorists and
violent non-State actors. We should also mention the
negative impact of unilateral sanctions against African
countries, as is the case of the sanctions imposed by
the European Union, as well as the fact that more than
60 per cent of United Nations sanctions committees
focus on the region.
Instead, what we should do is to promote
cooperation, dialogue and respect for the principles
of sovereignty and the self-determination of peoples.
The great task facing African leaders is to continue,
as they have been doing for many years, to change the
system they inherited from the former colonial Powers
on which they were dependent, and pave a truly African
22/65

28/07/2016

path forward in the full exercise of their sovereignty
and self-determination of their people.
To confront those challenges, the African countries
have gradually developed a peace and security
architecture of their own. The African Union therefore
represents the legitimate forum for dealing with African
affairs. Through its institutions, such as the Peace
and Security Council, the Continental Early Warning
System, the Panel of the Wise, the African Standby
Force, the Peace Fund and its policy frameworks, such
as the African solidarity initiative and that of postconflict reconstruction and development, the African
Union has laying the groundwork for peacebuilding
in the continent. It is our responsibility to support the
African Union as the legitimate organization of the
region, as well as relevant subregiongal forums.
Since 2005, the Peacebuilding Commission has
been assisting African countries emerging from conflict
to overcome the destructive legacy of war. Currently,
six African countries are on the Commission’s agenda.
Furthermore, 18 of the 33 countries that benefit from
the Peacebuilding Fund are on the African continent.
Support for these entities is geared towards, inter alia,
modernizing the State, building administrative and
management capacity, building democratic institutions,
restoring the rule of law, providing public services,
creating jobs, reducing poverty and reintegrating
vulnerable groups.
As noted by presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12,
adopted today, the purpose of peacebuilding must be to
build institutional and human capacities enabling States
to overcome the root causes that have led or could lead
to further conflict. The support of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund has helped
some States to leave behind the legacy of war and
embark on the path towards peace and development. In
other cases, their efforts have been insufficient and old
conflicts have broken out again. With the adoption of
resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution
70/262, the United Nations has taken a meaningful
step forward to a more comprehensive understanding
of peacebuilding that emphasizes conflict prevention
and the primacy of politics in the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Through the implementation of these
resolutions, we hope to leave military intervention
forever behind to make way for approaches aimed at
achieving political solutions and developing nations.
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

One critical area that has lagged in the work of
United Nations peacebuilding is the mobilization of
international resources and the creation of national
resources for sustaining peace. The mobilization of
resources is vital to deliver the dividends of peace,
including job creation, providing public services,
building strong political institutions and providing
justice. Without the ability to mobilize and generate
resources sustainably and to provide them equitably,
a State emerging from conflict will encounter serious
difficulties in legitimizing its mandate, achieving
reconciliation and establishing ties of trust with its
people.
Many African countries, including those emerging
from conflict, have immense natural resources that
could generate significant national revenue, but they
cannot always take full advantage of them. Among the
main causes for that are the predatory attitudes of many
international companies that, in their quest for oil,
gold, diamonds and other precious materials, interfere
politically and militarily in the region for their own
benefit, take advantage of the fragility of countries
in or emerging from conflict, and illegally exploit
their natural resources. African countries have the
right to manage their national resources to the benefit
of their own people, and their sovereign use of those
resources is key to ensuring that Africa can achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1).
If we are to curb the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and regularly and effectively manage those
resources, States emerging from conflicts must create
the capacity and expertise to negotiate fair contracts
and understand the accounting practices of national and
international concerns with which they interact, on the
understanding that those natural resources belong to the
State and are for the enjoyment of the whole population
and not just a few.
Moreover, many countries in such circumstances
have trouble monitoring and controlling illicit financial
flows and tax evasion by these international mining
concerns. This challenge extends beyond one, two
or three States; it is a problem that requires a legal
international framework to counter those trends
and reform banking secrecy laws and international
corporate tax regimes. Efforts to build peace in Africa
and the rest of the world — particularly those to help
States emerging from conflict to generate their own

S/PV.7750

national resources — cannot overlook those injustices
or fail to address them.
In conclusion, we believe that the main functions of
the Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Fund
must include building national capacities to combat
the exploitative practices of international extractive
corporations, while promoting an international
financial system that is more fair and transparent. Only
through social justice will we have sustainable peace
in Africa.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation): We welcome
the initiative of the Japanese delegation to hold this
important meeting, and we thank you, Sir, in particular
for having invited such important speakers who have
made such substantive briefings. We believe that the
positions of African representatives are very important
in discussions on peacebuilding within the United
Nations.
We have learned from experience that any
peacebuilding document drafted in New York will
remain a mere piece of paper if it is not based on the
specific situation in a country, an understanding of the
root causes of a conflict, experience from the region
itself and a realistic assessment of how goals can be
achieved. In considering topics of concern to Africa in
the Security Council and other United Nations agencies,
the Russian delegation firmly believes in the principle
that Africa requires African solutions. We therefore
pay special attention to the views of the African Union
and the subregional organizations of the continent,
favouring the establishment of effective cooperation
between them and the United Nations. However, much
remains to be done. We believe that the potential for
peacebuilding cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and subregional organizations has
not been fully tapped.
In April, the Security Council and General
Assembly adopted identical resolutions concluding
the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. These documents are comprehensive and
distil specific guidelines for international cooperation
in that area. Today, when conflicts are often domestic
in character, we welcome the understanding that the
concept of sustaining peace is based on addressing
the root causes of conflict, national reconciliation
and ultimately recovery and reconstruction. Another
critical element is ensuring that the country has a vision
for its future development. It is clear that sustainable

16-2392723/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

28/07/2016

results in a peaceful settlement can be achieved only if
it enjoys the broad support of the people.

a significant impact on countries and the region, needs
to be extinguished.

United Nations Member States unanimously agree
that peacebuilding processes must be based on national
ownership. That is our view. Taking into account the
needs of their society, Governments determine their
corresponding peacebuilding priorities, and all domestic
stakeholders recognize their shared responsibility for
peace. The United Nations and international partners
are called upon, when necessary and with the consent
of the host party, to provide assistance focused first
and foremost on the building the capacity of States
themselves to overcome conflict and its aftermath.

Another example is Burundi. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) country-specific configuration on
that country has been working for almost 10 years. It has
set up a number of significant peacebuilding projects.
The PBC has organized such important activities as
the December 2014 round table in Bujumbura with
the participation of Government representatives and
international partners. The Burundians themselves
gave the PBC’s work its best rating while the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland was the Chair. They
invited him to Bujumbura on numerous occasions at
the highest level. At the same time, the behaviour of
a number of members of the configuration has been
worrisome. Instead of discussing the institutional
development issues facing the country, they were
calling for a reduction in programme assistance. We
were astonished during discussions in the Security
Council on possible assistance to Burundi, including
to the police sector, when some countries categorically
rejected the idea of ​​providing assistance to local lawenforcement agencies for improving police skills.

Unfortunately, achieving sustainable peace in a
post-conflict State is much more complex than writing
and adopting resolutions. Despite some success stories
in United Nations peacebuilding, there have also been
examples of significant failures. For instance, some of
the consistent shortcomings that led to the deterioration
of the situations in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan include the lack of due attention to
meeting peacebuilding challenges that had a direct link
to the root causes of the conflict, the maintenance of
stability and security and the promotion of national
reconciliation. It may be that priorities for these
countries were not sufficiently clear or justified, while
national resources were not properly used and other
United Nations players saw their remit encroached
upon.
Furthermore, with regard to South Sudan, we saw
what was essentially an accountancy-based approach
to peacebuilding. International partners did not scrimp
on providing multibillion dollar assistance to the
country, but they did not stop to think whether that
was being spent effectively, including in terms of the
peacebuilding and State-building challenges facing the
country. There was a lack of due attention paid to the
reasons for the political and war-related instability in
South Sudan, which is rooted in the decades-long bitter
civil war. The signs of an impending armed conflict
appeared several months before December 2013. We
are not going start judging the reasons for the absence
of a response to those signs on the part of international
partners — whether there were systematic blunders
in analysing and predicting the military-political
situation, or a distortion and suppression of facts based
on political and propagandistic considerations. The
appalling results are clear. Currently, South Sudan is
not ready for peacebuilding — the fire, which is having
24/65

We think that such approaches are wrong. United
Nations mechanisms should not be used to exert
political pressure on the Government. The proposals
of the international community should be based
on a well-thought-out and realistic plan and should
enjoy the full support of the host country. Otherwise,
existing problems are just going to be exacerbated.
This point needs to be fully applied with regard to
the draft resolution on Burundi now being discussed
in the Security Council. The ideas in that document
on Burundi need to be clarified. We cannot just move
words around.
The Peacebuilding Commission has been playing
a most important coordinating and advisory role in
peacebuilding in the United Nations. We trust that,
based on the review of its activities, the Commission’s
effectiveness will improve, and that the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council will seek its advice more often. We
think that improving the knowledge of the Commission
itself about the situation on the ground is important,
especially during periods when there is a change in the
form of United Nations assistance — for example, on
the eve of the withdrawal of a peacekeeping operation.
We would urge the Commission to cooperate with the
United Nations peacebuilding offices and other field
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

presences. We consider the recent PBC visit to West
Africa — Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra
Leone — to have been a useful step.
When we are talking about peacebuilding, it
is difficult not to mention the importance of the
predictability and sustainability of financing for such
projects. Of course, the use of funds must be transparent
and accountable. We trust that the Secretary-General
will present well-planned and realistic options for
Member States to consider. One of them is improving
the Fund’s peacebuilding toolkit and also improving its
attractiveness for potential donors.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting. We consider today’s deliberations
and presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12 to be an
important step towards the practical implementation of
resolution 2282 (2016), on post-conflict peacebuilding,
first of all in the African continent.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I would
like to highlight several points in my national capacity.
First, with regard to conflict prevention, it is
clear from resolution 2282 (2016) that the focus of
the peacebuilding architecture has to shift to conflict
prevention in order to avert an escalation of inter-State
or internal tensions into violent conflict and to prevent
imminent relapses into conflict. The Council should
be more proactive in considering emerging conflicts
and fragile situations. In that regard, let me again
underscore the important role that the SecretaryGeneral should play in providing input into Council
deliberations on such issues. At the same time, visiting
missions of the Council are a very useful tool that
should be actively used with respect to all situations
under the Council’s consideration. In our opinion, the
idea of inviting representatives of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) country-specific configurations to
participate in Council field mission visits also deserves
thorough consideration. While a number of recent
visiting missions of the Council to African countries
went smoothly and efficiently, we must mention that it
took six months for the Council to agree on the terms
of its field visit to Burundi. That only underscores that
that mechanism, which is deemed to be an instrument
that can help the Council better understand and assess
situations on the ground, is sometimes affected by

S/PV.7750

political horse-trading in the Council, and therefore
needs serious improvement.
Secondly, with regard to the importance of the
transition period from peacekeeping operations to
other forms of United Nations presence, we witnessed
the successful story of the steady restoration of peace
in Côte d’Ivoire. My country is proud to have been
among those that actively contributed to that endeavour
by supporting the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire. Last April, the Council renewed its mandate
with eventual withdrawal set for mid-2017. However,
we have to follow up on the situation there closely and
implement a successful exit strategy so as to strengthen
positive trends aimed at restoring stability and
sustaining peace in Côte d’Ivoire. The same approach
should be applied to Liberia, where State authorities are
already making the transition towards assuming full
responsibility for the country’s security, taking over
from the United Nations Mission in Liberia. We are
heartened by the fact that earlier this year the Council
fully lifted sanctions against those two countries. We
believe that during the transition period it is essential
to receive timely advice from the PBC and take into
account the primacy of national ownership. In-depth
consultations need to be conducted with national
authorities, the main political actors and civil society
on existing priority needs on the ground.
Thirdly, with regard to the issue of overreliance on
the part of the host country on support from the United
Nations mission, the constitutional referendum in the
Central African Republic, which was held successfully
last December, and the general elections — conducted
with support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic — helped to partially stabilize the country.
At the same time, despite the positive political
developments since the beginning of the year, the
recent events in Bangui and in several other parts of
the country demonstrate that the security situation
remains fragile and a potential for re-escalation exists.
We must therefore encourage the authorities in the
Central African Republic to redouble their efforts to
stabilize the situation in the country. During my recent
visit there last May as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic,
many officials stressed that a successful reform of the
national military forces was of high importance. In
that regard, I think that the 2127 Committee should

16-2392725/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

28/07/2016

make its contribution to that endeavour by considering
applications for arms-embargo exemptions so as to
meet the needs of security-sector reform in the Central
African Republic, thereby supporting the country in
developing its armed and security forces.

the capacity of a country’s institutions, just as the
Secretary-General said this morning, so that they can
secure predictable and sustainable finances. This in
turn will allow them to develop African-led prevention
and mediation processes supporting African ownership.

Last but not least, over the past decade the role of
the African Union in promoting peace and sustainable
development among African States has expanded. The
African Union has demonstrated its ability to take
the lead in the effective resolution of conflicts, and
its views and policies on that matter are of particular
value for the United Nations. The launch of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, the establishment
of its structures and the deployment of the African
Union’s peace-support operations, authorized by the
Security Council, are a clear testimony to the growing
importance of enhancing United Nations-African
Union cooperation. Ukraine, as a Council member and
with observer State status in the African Union, stands
ready to actively contribute to that endeavour.

Secondly, it is vital that we get better at planning
United Nations interventions that reflect the full
conflict cycle, including considering from the outset
how United Nations missions will complement the
work of existing United Nations staff in the country.
Crucially, it means planning how missions will
transition when their objectives have been achieved. So
I strongly support the work of the Executive Office of
the Secretary-General’s strategic planning and analysis
cell. Rigorous analysis and planning is vital to the
effectiveness of the United Nations, and the cell must
be empowered to lead cross-United Nations analysis of
emerging conflict.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this debate. I join others in thanking the
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Chawahir Mohamed
and Mr. Smail Chergui for their briefings, and all the
ministers for their presence.
As we have just heard, Africa is often associated
with the scourge of war. In countries such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo millions have lost
their lives in the deadliest conflict since the Second
World War, while in regions such as the Lake Chad
Basin, as he heard just yesterday (see S/PV.7748),
millions face famine because of the instability caused
by Boko Haram. But this portrayal is incomplete. Many
countries in Africa are living and thriving in peace, and
others are escaping the conflict cycle, countries such
as Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. So how can
we build on those peacebuilding successes? What can
we learn from them, and how can the Council support
peacebuilding so that there are more successes to come?
First, all of our support needs to be in partnership
with the people and the Governments of African
countries. It is not our place to prescribe solutions. We
should instead work together to strengthen the ability
of each country to identify its own threats and help it
respond to them before conflict happens. This means
building on existing practices such as the African
Union’s Continental Early Warning System and the
Panel of the Wise. Our efforts need to focus on building
26/65

At the heart of all of this analysis needs to be
the recognition that countries are different and have
different drivers of conflict. Our planning needs to
be based on real understanding. Mandates should be
country-specific, and then from better planning the
flows the better use of phased mandates. These can help
ensure that mandated activities and resources are the
most appropriate to the political and security conditions.
In some cases, we need to recognize that United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
may not be best placed to deliver institution-building,
which requires long-term and specialist engagement.
Where appropriate, we need to draw on support from a
United Nations country team and from others.
Thirdly, sustainable peace needs inclusive
participation and good governance. Implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals, especially Goal 16,
will be crucial. Well-governed and inclusive societies
with effective and accountable institutions form the
foundations for stability and for economic growth.
So by promoting transparency and accountability,
tackling corruption and ensuring that finances are
used effectively, we can help tackle some of the key
underlying causes of fragility and drivers of conflict.
To build a sustainable peace, everyone must be
allowed to play their part. Women have a crucial role
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding as well as in
building institutional capacity and resilience. Women’s
participation needs more support.
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Working with non-State actors and informal
institutions can be important entry points. It should
not just be for the elite. Getting the right support down
to grass-roots organizations and civil society will also
help create positive changes in the lives of women and
girls, and it means women being able to participate
without fear of reprisal or backlash in politics at all
levels, formal and informal.
We can also do more to engage young people.
Africa has more people aged under 20 than anywhere
else in the world. Capturing all of this potential and
channelling this energy into positive change is vital
to peace, stability and prosperity. So we all need to
respond this opportunity by supporting the needs of
children and young people through education, training
and deployment.
Finally, as I stated before, tackling potential risks to
stability early is the most effective approach to creating
a sustainable peace. Doing so prevents enormous
human suffering, fear and displacement, and it makes
economic sense. But to be effective, early warning
requires early action. This takes political will from
individual countries, the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and key regional actors. I hope that we
will all show some such will in the coming weeks
and months.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank the delegation of Japan for having convened this
open debate and also for the concept note (S/2016/586,
annex). I wish also to thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Amina Mohamed and Ambassador Smail
Chergui for their respective statements today.
Uruguay deems it important to maintain the
momentum created by the resolutions on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture that were adopted
simultaneously by the Security Council and the
General Assembly — resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262, respectively — on
27 April last, so as to continue to be constructive in our
approach to peacebuilding architecture throughout the
United Nations system.
The intra-State nature of current conflict reflect
a new reality that increases pressure on national
Governments, which must face a number of challenges
with limited resources and capacities. This open debate
has been focused on a particularly interesting and
relevant issue, institution-building, which is one of the
priority areas for peacebuilding.

S/PV.7750

In the absence of a State system equipped with
strong and reliable institutions, peace can eventually be
reached but cannot be strengthened or sustained. There
are countries in which conflicts run so very deep that
there is not even a unity Government with which the
population identifies, and, as such, institution-building
would seem an alien concept.
In order to build peace, measures must be taken to
promote socioeconomic growth, promote and protect
human rights and strengthen institutions, so as to build
confidence between national Governments and their
people. Uruguay attaches particular importance to
the solidity of institutions as a factor in the stability
of all societies. As the concept note rightly states,
democracy, national security and law and order, local
governance, the public administration management
system, the economic and financial structure, the basic
social-service system and the system for dialogue
and reconciliation all must be stable, transparent and
reliable in order to ensure their effectiveness and so
that the entire population can reap the benefits of peace
equally.
Women, young people and children are of particular
importance, and the necessary measures need to be
taken to ensure their participation. In that regard,
we reiterate the need to ensure the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, highlighting the importance of strengthening
social inclusion as a means of ensuring that all segments
of society are taken into account.
There are no single models to achieve sustainable
development, and that is why Uruguay believes that the
design of strategies in that respect must focus on the
particular characteristics of a given society. That is why
we must promote greater participation and coordination
among regional and subregional organizations, which
can play a crucial role in institution-building. They are
the ones who best understand the realities and needs of
their member countries.
The new African Peace and Security Architecture
Road Map for 2016-2020 is an excellent tool. It lays
out the role of all actors involved and sets out specific
indicators and goals in priority areas. Uruguay further
underscores the successful peacebuilding efforts of the
African Union, particularly as regards post-conflict
policies, reconstruction and development.
Uruguay believes that we must recognize the role
played by United Nations peacekeeping operations

16-2392727/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

in peacebuilding, particularly in consolidating peace
at the national level. On the other hand, it is worth
noting that, when a peacekeeping operation or when
a special political mission withdraws from the field,
there exists a shared responsibility between the host
State and the United Nations for peacebuilding. That
shared responsibility should always be borne in the
first instance by the host State, which must also lead
the peacebuilding process in its territory.
The United Nations acts as a complement to the
State authorities by supporting peacebuilding efforts.
But peacebuilding operations were not established to
be able to be resorted to in all situations in which the
countries concerned do not assume their responsibilities
as sovereign entities. For that reason, it very important
that the transition process to peacebuilding be led by the
leaders of the States concerned, and that they utilize all
the tools they have for institutional capacity-building.
Uruguay believes that it is by addressing the
structural and root causes of conflict that peace can be
achieved, and there can also be a successful effort to
prevent the recurrence of conflict in the region.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Why have we not been able to collectively ensure a
future of peace for Africa? Well, the truth is that there
is no simple reply. That is why I am particularly grateful
to the Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
having organized this debate. I also thank our invitees
for their briefings, which have given us a clearer picture
of the reality.
A decade after the United Nations and the African
Union developed instruments for peacebuilding, such
as the Peacebuilding Commission, we still have not
broken the vicious circle of conflict. The situations
in Burundi and in South Sudan are sad examples of
that fact. We have not been able to help the people of
Burundi to build lasting, sustainable peace; nor have
we managed to unify ourselves in the Security Council
so as to convey to its Government the need to define
a solution to the crisis. The horrors of the 1990s come
to mind.
South Sudan is another case where the inability
of the country’s leaders is largely to blame for the
situation. I recall that just a few years ago at the United
Nations we celebrated with joy the independence of
South Sudan. Today we are looking at a very different
South Sudan.
28/65

28/07/2016

Fortunately, there are more positive examples
than negative examples — Burkina Faso, where the
instruments of the rule of law have triumphed, and
Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, where the crisis caused
by Ebola was overcome, or even Somalia, which was
a perfect example of a failed State and today sees
light at the end of the tunnel. I shall therefore focus
on the positive examples in order to try to draw three
clear and enlightening lessons from the situation and
strengthen our efforts to achieve sustainable peace in
the African continent.
First, if we take a comprehensive approach, we
can see that peacebuilding is a cycle. It is not just
one event. It is a cycle, a process that begins with one
fundamental word, “prevention”. I will give an example:
Guinea-Bissau, where the preventive efforts of the
United Nations, including those of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council, the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union, might already be bearing fruit. Or consider
Somalia, as I mentioned earlier, where the excellent
cooperation among the various institutions is making it
possible for us to be truly optimistic.
The second lesson has to do with flexibility. I
think that it has become stereotypical, a platitude,
to say, as we often do, that there is no single recipe
for the mandates of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. However, one interesting
possibility that I might suggest to the Security
Council is that we consider establishing an automatic
transition mechanism that would make it possible to
take advantage of the potential of the Peacebuilding
Commission in order to fill, on an immediate basis,
the vacuum left by the withdrawal of a peacekeeping
mission. That would help in situations such as that in
the Central African Republic, which is beginning to
transition from the urgent situation of peacekeeping to
the sustained efforts necessary for peacebuilding. It is
essential to avoid situations in which countries that are
no longer on the agenda of the Security Council find
themselves left alone to face their problems.
The third major lesson is the ability to establish
priorities. Who should establish priorities? Obviously,
first and foremost, the national authorities, but the
national authorities also have a duty to protect their own
citizens. It is the African leaders who will shoulder that
difficult task. We in the international community must
support them in strengthening their own institutions.
Experience has shown us that the most successful
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

examples of post-conflict reconstruction are those
where it has been possible to sequence institutional
reform in an intelligent way, starting with security
reforms and moving on to justice-sector reforms and
then to reconciliation mechanisms. Experience also
tells us that the cycle of conflict can be overcome only
if — and I think that this is the most important thing I am
going to say — we manage to involve the participation
of the entire population of a country. What does the
participation of the entire population mean? It is simply
to give an active and prominent role to women.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by expressing the gratitude of the
delegation of Egypt to the presidency for organizing
this important debate on peacebuilding in Africa,
which is indeed a very relevant topic and one that goes
to the heart of the mandate of the Security Council and
peacekeeping. We also welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/12, which you, Sir, prepared. We would
also like to say how much we appreciate some of the
ideas expressed here during the debate.
Over the past few years, we have witnessed an
unprecedented increase in United Nations efforts in
the area of peacebuilding. Those efforts have been
crowned with the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016)
parallel to General Assembly resolution 70/262,
and those resolutions set out a global approach that
takes into account activities and factors that are
essential for peacebuilding. We hope that such an
approach will provide the necessary political dynamic
needed to consolidate peacebuilding in Africa. The
emerging and new challenges that Africa is facing,
including the expansion of terrorist groups, organized
crime, environmental challenges, as well as other
non-traditional challenges, all demand that we adopt
an innovative approach in order to tackle them. The
nature of those challenges has led us to join together in
resolving conflicts via peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts in order to achieve sustainable
development, all against a backdrop of an ongoing,
sustainable process. We must therefore rid ourselves of
the notion of conflict management, and instead focus
on an approach for resolving conflicts by tackling their
root causes.
We cannot talk about peacebuilding in Africa without
mentioning the key role of comprehensive and inclusive
national reconciliation and of security sector reform
in both its military and police components. Moreover,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts

S/PV.7750

will be in vain unless the economic and social needs of
the people are addressed in order to ensure the process
is successful. We also need to ensure social justice and
that the judicial system is independent and impartial
and the rule of law prevails. We must also strengthen
the relevant institutions in all of the corresponding
areas, which are the main peacebuilding priorities in
Africa.
We cannot disregard the links between peacebuilding
in Africa and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), nor the link between peacebuilding in
Africa and the African Union’s Agenda 2063, which is
an expression of Africa’s determination and reflects the
specific priorities and needs of Africa.
One also cannot talk about good governance, the
rule of law, democratic principles or justice in societies
suffering from hunger, disease and poverty — societies
that are deprived of the foundations of a dignified life
according to internationally recognized standards.
Therefore, it is essential to lay the political, economic
and social groundwork so that the process of
sustainable development is built on a sound foundation.
In that context, Egypt, through the Egyptian agency
of cooperation for development, has trained more than
700 experts from countries that are on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission in the security, medical,
judicial and agricultural sectors. This initiative is part
of a process aimed at strengthening the human resource
capacity in those countries.
I would like to reiterate several basic points.
First, we need to adhere to the principle of
ownership in efforts aimed at building peace in Africa.
National authorities need to determine their priorities
and the way to implement them. The same idea also
applies to strengthening institutions.
Secondly, it is important to increase the effectiveness
of the Peacebuilding Commission so that it can play its
role as a coordinating body of national, regional and
international efforts and advise the Security Council, so
that it in turn can develop mandates that are conducive
to peacebuilding, especially sustainable peace.
Thirdly, it is essential to provide sustainable,
predictable, and timely financing for peacebuilding
efforts in Africa. We must also work towards
maximizing the coordination of international financial
institutions and bolstering the investment capacities

16-2392729/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of the Peacebuilding Fund in order to strengthen its
human and institutional capacities.
Fourthly, promoting the participation of women and
young people in Africa is also crucial, especially in the
planning and implementation stage of peacebuilding
activities throughout the continent.
Fifthly, we must implement African post-conflict
reconstruction and development policies and promote
the African solidarity initiative in the framework of
efforts to strengthen the African Peace and Security
Architecture. Egypt has previously proposed setting up
a specialized centre for reconstruction and development
in Africa as a necessary step. The centre could bolster
all peacebuilding efforts and institutions in Africa.
We welcome Mr. Chergui’s proposal of to hold annual
meetings with a view to sharing experiences and
lessons learned, which could be part of a true strategic
partnership between the two organizations.
To truly sustain peace, we will need significant
resources and we will need to take advantage of lessons
learned and the experiences we have built up. We will
need to put an end to the dividing up and duplication
of work, which undermines the effectiveness of United
Nations efforts towards sustainable peacebuilding in
Africa.
The President: I wish to remind speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I would also like to appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a reasonable speed so that
interpretation may be provided accurately.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Arrieta Munguia (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes the holding of this open
debate, which will encourage the breaking of silos
and call into question inertia in facing the enormous
task of sustaining peace. This is a systemic challenge
that requires us to put an end to the fragmentation
within the Organization and to participate in an active,
coherent and coordinated manner. In that regard, we
welcome the participation of the Secretary-General
30/65

28/07/2016

and Minister Kishida, as well as the briefings made by
the representatives of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the African Union.
Now more than ever, it is necessary for us to
establish an effective dialogue between the Security
Council and the key actors of the Organization. It is
worth drawing attention here to the role played by Japan
during its non-permanent memberships of the Security
Council and as Chair of the PBC Working Group
on Lessons Learned in promoting this dialogue. In
particular, we welcome the comprehensive changes that
will be brought about by the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016),
which together set out a road map for sustainable peace.
We are talking about a new narrative that focuses
our efforts on conflict prevention and on a proactive,
strategic and long-term approach, without neglecting
the fact that each stage of a conflict is crucial and that
its root causes must be addressed. Those root causes
are closely linked to the three pillars of the work of the
United Nations, given that we cannot think about peace
and security without also thinking about development
and human rights. We are convinced that strengthening
the rule of law and accountable and transparent
institutions is as important as promoting sustainable
and inclusive development. Against that backdrop, the
new concept of sustainable peace is based on Goal 16
but goes beyond it, creating a perfect synergy with the
2030 Agenda. This paradigm shift also draws attention
to the need to place people at the centre of our efforts. It
is a call to invest in communities and preserve a healthy
social fabric in order to create more opportunities for
development and for political and social stability.
Over the past several years, we have learned a
number of lessons. The international community has
confirmed that the stability of conflict-affected ctries
does not depend solely on improving security, but that it
also depends on respecting human rights, strengthening
the rule of law and promoting development. Mexico
recognizes that some of the challenges facing Africa
in supporting peace processes are related to democratic
transition and building democracy. That is why, since
2009, we have been providing technical assistance and
training in election matters to African countries that
have requested them. Mexico expresses its willingness to
continue providing electoral assistance and cooperation
to those countries in need of them. Nevertheless, the
recent resurgence of conflict in Africa attests to the
need to go beyond electoral processes and to promote
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the inclusive and active participation of all segments
of society — in particular, that of women and young
people — in peace processes.
Moreover, sustainable peace requires us to
unite our efforts both within and outside the system,
hence the great added value of establishing strategic
alliances with regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union. Mexico reiterates that
the Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory role and
its long-term perspective need to be taken advantage
of on a periodic basis by regional and subregional
organizations in Africa, particularly in the context of
African countries that are on the Commision’s agenda.
Doing so would improve coordination and also help to
develop and share best practices in peacebuilding.
We would also like to call on the Security Council to
promote and to regularly take advantage of the specific
and strategic, defined advisory role of the PBc in the
periodic review carried out by the Security Council
of the situations on its agenda and of those situations
related to the establishment, review and drawdown of
peacekeeping operations. Our main message here is
that we need to find more creative solutions in all the
processes related to the peacebuilding architecture. To
that end, Member States would have to commit to going
beyond the traditional and obvious ways in which we
have been supporting conflict-affected countries. As
an example, and under the modality of South-South
cooperation, Mexico and Cuba, through the World
Health Organization, provided assistance to countries
affected by the Ebola epidemic. Mexico provided
resources for the team and supplies for the Cuban
medical brigades that were deployed to Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, the countries most affected by the
health emergency. The results were very positive. Such
best practices in cooperation could be replicated in
other areas, including in the Peacebuilding Fund.
Mexico will continue to play an active and
constructive role as the leader of the Group of Friends
of Sustainable Peace. That is why I am very pleased to
mention that some 30 countries took part in the Group’s
first meeting, out of a conviction that sustainable peace
must be transformed into a living objective that has
a strong cross-cutting presence throughout the entire
United Nations system. This includes a change in our
approach to the way we work to achieve a peace that
can sustain itself and that is sustainable for all.

S/PV.7750

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Nelson Mandela,
whose International Day was recently celebrated, once
said that he dreamed of an Africa that was at peace
with itself. Until his dream comes true, let us look at
Africa not as a continent made up only of challenges,
but as one made up also of great wisdom, creativity and
a promising future. In this spirit, allow me to refer to
some of the progress recently witnessed on the African
continent in the area of peace and security.
The African Union in particular has developed
a significant pattern of cooperation with the United
Nations. The Economic Community of West African
States is playing a decisive and constructive role in
countries such as Guinea-Bissau. Other subregional
organizations are also playing their part in promoting
peace and enhancing institutions.
It is worth noting that three important peacekeeping
operations in Africa are now led by women — the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara. In West Africa, significant progress has been
achieved in the transitions in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
The sanctions regimes imposed on them have been
discontinued. In Côte d’Ivoire, UNOCI was extended
for one last time. In Liberia, the Government fully
assumed its national security responsibilities last
month.
West Africa recently emerged from the Ebola
outbreak. Despite the tragic loss of 11,000 lives, the
coordinated action of the United Nations and the
essential early-warning role played by the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) contributed to the prevention of
even more casualties. This underlines the relevance of
the PBC’s activities in sustaining peace on the continent.
The Commission has developed considerable expertise
in assisting countries while taking into account a longerterm perspective. Its diversified membership allows for
inclusive discussions that reflect a wide range of views.
As the recurrence of conflicts in some countries
sadly demonstrates, sustaining peace is one of the
most challenging issues faced by the international
community. Brazil has long advocated for the
importance of promoting development policies in
order to foster stability in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The interdependence between security,

16-2392731/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

development and human rights is central to the idea of
peacebuilding.
While acknowledging progress, it is important
to bear in mind some of the difficulties that Africa
still faces. The report of the High-level Panel on
Illicit Financial Flows from Africa estimated that the
continent lost $1 trillion over the past five decades
due to illegal financial flows. In the same vein, a more
recent report from the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development concluded that billions of
dollars are lost by developing countries each year due
to misinvoicing in the trading of commodities. This is
not only an African issue, but one that concerns the
entire international community.
It is not possible to resolve conflicts in Africa
without taking into account the crucial question of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources. Peacebuilding
efforts need to address this issue in order to favour
sustained peace. The Great Lakes region, for instance,
shows that violence can be fuelled, inter alia, by an
abundance of natural resources, not a lack thereof.
With regard to Burundi, we acknowledge the need
of prompt measures to avoid further violence. However,
we believe that the Council should prioritize the
promotion of reconciliation through inclusive dialogue
and national ownership. The fragile humanitarian
situation in the region continues to be aggravated
by the influx of 270,000 refugees from Burundi into
neighbouring countries. These refugees’ status and
rights should be fully recognized and respected. The
PBC configuration should be invited to express itself.
Particularly deplorable is the current crisis in South
Sudan. The United Nations should remain committed to
working with all South Sudanese, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and
other regional partners.
The Sahel continues to face the consequences of an
ill-fated intervention in Libya, which contributed to an
increase in the illegal trafficking of weapons and to the
spread of the activities of terrorist groups in the region,
as the situation in Mali exemplifies. Similarly, violent
extremism that leads to terrorism has been plaguing
the Lake Chad Basin, where Boko Haram continues
to submit the civilian population to heightened fear
and pain. This should be taken as a powerful warning
against resorting to military force as the first measure
to solve conflicts.
32/65

28/07/2016

It is disheartening to acknowledge that many
of these situations could have been less traumatic or
could have been circumvented had different approaches
been attempted. In this sense, the recent reviews
on peacekeeping operations, on the peacebuilding
architecture and on women and peace and security
represent a step in the right direction. They converge on
the emphasis on prevention and on political solutions
to conflicts through dialogue and diplomacy in Africa
and elsewhere.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important open debate which, in
our view, is extremely timely, as it follows the recent
decision by the African Union Summit in Kigali to
operationalize the African Union Peace Fund and the
successful Italy-Africa Ministerial Conference held
in May in Rome, which launched a new pattern of
dialogue and cooperation with the African continent.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of the European Union and wishes to
add the following remarks in its national capacity.
As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Italy fully supports the new concept of sustaining
peace and the need to invest in the Commission’s work
to ensure sustainable funding. This year, we restarted
financing the Peacebuilding Fund and have committed
to increasing our development aid. In the year of
sustainability, the new concept of sustaining peace is
key to long-term, stable and durable peace, particularly
in Africa, a continent still hosting the vast majority
of United Nations peacekeepers and at the centre of
United Nations peacebuilding efforts.
For these reasons, in Rome we proposed a
Sustainability Compact between Italy and Africa, in
which the sustainability of peace and security is the
leading concept, with a view to avoiding conflicts and
relapse into conflicts and to achieving the goal of a
conflict-free Africa. Secondly, the Compact supports
socioeconomic sustainability, with a view to taking
advantage of the immense opportunities the continent
provides. Thirdly, the Compact upholds sustainability
in managing migration, building upon the Migration
Compact that Italy proposed to the European Union
to promote a strategic approach to the issue, working
together with African and European partners.
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

As an incoming Security Council member, we will
take full advantage of the recommendations contained
in the concept note (S/2016/566, annex) and in the
presidential statement just adopted (S/PRST/2016/12),
working closely on these issues with the Netherlands in
light of the agreement to split the 2017-2018 mandate to
ensure continuity of action. Allow me now to focus on
few points.
First of all, we underline the importance of
ownership, which is a pillar of peacebuilding activities
in Africa and elsewhere. It is achieved by actively
involving all relevant national stakeholders in a
responsible and inclusive way.
Secondly, we would stress partnerships and on the
United Nations acting as an enabler of peace in order to
facilitate the necessary political, economic and financial
support for the implementation of peacebuilding
strategies. In this context, the role of the African Union
and of subregional organizations is crucial. I would also
refer to the PBC country configurations and the visit
by the Chairs to the relevant countries as a concrete
example of working in partnerships towards common
goals.
Thirdly, we would highlight supporting a culture
of prevention and strengthening the capacity of
local actors to play a leading role in mediation. Italy
has consistently supported the African Union as it
strengthens its capacities in this respect. The inclusion
of women, young persons and moderate religious
leaders is essential to building solid ground for longstanding reconciliation and a common vision for the
future.
Fourthly, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) needs
to be implemented and fine-tuned so that it works
harmoniously with the African Agenda 2063. The two
Agendas are to be considered as integrated agendas
to better secure economic, social and environmental
development against potential relapses into conflict.
Implementing the 2030 Agenda is the best tool at our
disposal to address the root causes of conflicts and
instability by taking full advantage of the link the
Agenda creates between development and peace, human
rights — in particular, gender equality — governance
and accountability. In the light of the integrated
approach proposed by the 2030 Agenda, a reflection is
needed on strengthening the nexus between sustaining

S/PV.7750

peace and development via Sustainable Development
Goal 16, which promotes peaceful and stable societies.
Finally, I would emphasize the importance of
capacity- and institution-building, which are key to
sustaining peace. Stable and functioning institutions are
the best way to avoid relapse into conflict as, inter alia,
they provide services that citizens need and they create
the proper environment for business opportunities. In
this context, I wish to recall the training offered by the
Italian Custom Police to customs and border control
officers of several African countries to strengthen their
capacity in such a crucial sector.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s open debate on peacebuilding
in Africa. We offer special thanks to Foreign Minister
Kishida, Secretary-General Ban, the briefers and other
Ministers for their statements. It is a great pleasure to
Ambassador Kishida here at the Security Council today.
The countries currently on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) are all in Africa.
Indeed, the PBC’s primary focus remains on Africa.
Despite examples of positive change through
peacebuilding activities in countries such as Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire, Africa continues to face formidable
challenges. The PBC’s work in marshalling resources,
advising on integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery, focusing attention on
reconstruction and institution-building, laying the
foundation for sustainable development, helping
develop best practices and ensuring predictable
financing has made a real difference on ground. And
Africa has benefitted from it.
Violence in Africa has destabilized Governments,
destroyed livelihoods, undermined national economies,
damaged infrastructure, led to the exodus of people and
disrupted the delivery of education and health services.
One of the key messages of the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts (S/2015/490) was that peacebuilding
must include a strong emphasis on conflict prevention
with broad and inclusive partnerships. The Group’s
report and the Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions last spring (resolution 70/262 and resolution
2282 (2016), respectively) identified challenges to and
instruments for effective post-conflict peacebuilding.
They referred to the need for collective efforts by
political, security and development actors in favour

16-2392733/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of sustainable peace. Failure to prioritize could lead
to tragic cycles of relapse. Similarly, addressing
root causes of conflict remains critical to avoiding
recurrence. Let me elucidate some of our thoughts on
best practices.
First, post-conflict needs in Africa are varied,
ranging from institution-building and economic
reconstruction to judicial and security sector reform.
Peacebuilding interventions need to be tailored to
specific situations.
Secondly, success stories in the continent have
one common thread — inclusive national ownership.
We need to keep this in view while devising future
programmes.
Thirdly, the quick refocus of the PBC during the
early stages of the Ebola crisis showed that it is agile and
adaptable, and that it does achieve results. Emerging
crises should continue to get the needed attention.
Fourthly, when we talk about peacebuilding as
a continuum, its activities surely cannot be limited
to one phase alone. Creating conditions that provide
for security and economic welfare is as important as
conflict prevention and resolution itself. Institutional
capacity-building, training and skills development
should be directed at supporting local stakeholders and
engaging external actors in peacebuilding structures
and activities.
Fifthly, regional organizations have an immediate
interest in promoting peace. Enhancing the capacity of
the regional and subregional organizations for conflict
resolution, maintaining regional peace and security
and fostering political and socioeconomic development
remains vital.
Africa’s unparalleled and untapped potential
for growth and development, its positive recent
history — according to one study, more wars have
ended than have started in Africa since the early
1980s — and peaceful transitions in many countries
are all encouraging signs. Prosperity and peace in
Africa can be achieved only when the local, national,
regional and international dimensions of crises are
addressed. Pakistan has supported Africa through its
peacekeeping contributions, capacity-building and
normative and monetary contributions in the area of
peacebuilding. We remain committed to peace, security
and development in Africa.
34/65

28/07/2016

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN): Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Viet Nam and my country, Thailand. I
wish to express ASEAN’s appreciation to the Japanese
presidency for convening today’s open debate and to
all the briefers for their respective remarks. ASEAN
also welcomes the Security Council’s adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12 on this issue.
The review of the peacebuilding architecture called
for a move away from the post-conflict peacebuilding
mindset, and urged us to view peacebuilding more
holistically as part of the peace continuum that spans
from conflict prevention and resolution to laying down
the foundations of sustainable peace. This is in line
with ASEAN’s comprehensive approach to peace and
security. If peace is to take root and grow strong, a
country must have the means and mechanisms to sustain
and build upon the efforts invested by the international
community. In this regard, the presidency’s concept
note (S/2016/586, annex) rightly stresses the importance
of institution- and capacity-building in order to build a
peaceful and resilient society.
Today’s focus on Africa is of particular relevance
for the Security Council. While some African countries
that used to be on the Council’s agenda have attained
peace and stability, a fair number are still grappling
with conflicts and holding on to a fragile peace. As
our contribution, we wish to underline the following
considerations.
The first concerns national ownership. One of
the underlying causes of conflict and instability is
exclusion from political and decision-making processes.
Inclusive national ownership is therefore a prerequisite
for successful peacebuilding. This must begin with
genuine dialogue among all stakeholders, including
women and young people. This process is necessary to
instil a sense of ownership in State institutions, as well
as to restoring legitimacy and trust in them.
The second concerns partnership. ASEAN supports
a greater role for Africa in addressing African problems.
There is vast experience and knowledge in the field
of peacebuilding within the region. In particular, we
echo the recognition by the Council and the General
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Assembly in their respective resolutions on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture of the prominent role
of the African Union in this regard. It is commendable
that peacebuilding is one of the key priorities in the
African Peace and Security Architecture Roadmap
2016-2020. We also encourage enhanced exchanges of
view and dialogue between the African Union and the
Security Council, as well as other United Nations bodies
involved in peacebuilding, in order to achieve synergy
and ensure complementarity. In addition, the experience
within our region has shown that partnership with civil
society can contribute to addressing peacebuilding
challenges, especially in the field of development. We
believe that enhanced partnership with African civil
society can produce the same positive impact.
Finally, I turn to sustained support. We wish to
touch on two particular aspects. Peacebuilding requires
adequate and predictable funding, yet the Peacebuilding
Fund, which has supported numerous catalytic projects
around the world, continues to face financial shortfalls.
Access to assessed contributions for the Fund should
be considered. We must also look for alternative means
to fund peacebuilding activities in Africa. Partnership
with the private sector, international financial
institutions and regional development banks should be
seriously explored. On our part, ASEAN countries have
provided technical cooperation to countries in Africa
through various development cooperation programmes.
We encourage deepening and enhancing South-South
cooperation in the field of peacebuilding.
The valuable contribution of ASEAN countries
to peacekeeping operations and special political
missions to peacebuilding is well-recognized. Over
1,000 personnel from ASEAN countries are deployed
in support of United Nations missions in Africa, such
as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
where justice and security institution-building is
among the priority tasks. In order to ensure coherence
and continuity, as well as preserve peacebuilding gains,
careful mission transition planning and post-mission
United Nations support should be in place from an
early stage. The involvement of United Nations country
teams and the United Nations development system is
also crucial to that end.
I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
ASEAN’s commitment to peacebuilding in Africa. We
cannot wait until the guns fall silent. Peacebuilding
work must begin now. ASEAN members stand ready to

S/PV.7750

lend our support and cooperation to the Council and to
our friends in Africa in build resilient and prosperous
societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the Japanese presidency of the Council for having
convened this discussion. In my intervention, I will
focus on three aspects that I believe to be particularly
important to peacebuilding: national ownership;
coherence among international, regional and national
actors; and the role of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.
In its peacebuilding engagement in Africa,
Switzerland attaches great importance to the principle
of inclusive national ownership by closely cooperating
with national and local authorities and communities.
However, as much as conflict-affected countries
need international assistance, peacebuilding cannot
succeed if it is designed or perceived as an external
intervention. Without a corresponding commitment
from the Government and national key actors, a society
cannot build sustainable peace or launch an inclusive
dialogue. Mitigating the risk that State institutions may
weaken and become less inclusive and representative
in a post-conflict environment is a key challenge for
peacebuilding. The will and capacities of political
decisionmakers to shoulder the responsibility of their
office, as well as the existence of accountable and
inclusive institutions, are crucial to the success of
peacebuilding. In that regard, I underline that there are
many peacebuilding success stories in Africa. Let us
learn from and build on these examples .
This brings me to my second point. Another reason
for the failure of peacebuilding processes is a lack of
coordination among international, regional and national
actors. All too often, the different peacebuilding efforts
turn into unconstructive competitions and contradict
each other. The need for more coherence between the
United Nations and regional and even subregional actors
is highlighted in the recent peacebuilding resolution
2282 (2016). Particularly in Africa, the United Nations
can rely on regional and subregional partners with
extended networks and a sound knowledge of the
continent, its challenges and opportunities. These
partnerships must be driven by synergies in terms
both of substance and of institutional structures. I
am therefore pleased to note that the Peacebuilding

16-2392735/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Fund recently signed an innovative agreement with
the African Union, covering the financing of African
Union observers in Burundi. Let us try to learn from
this experience in terms not only of substance, but also
of administrative cooperation.
Thirdly, I note the role of the peacebuilding
architecture. On numerous occasions, States Members
of the United Nations have recognized that development,
peace and security, and human rights are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing. The willingness to act on
this acknowledgment will be decisive for success in
implementing the new peacebuilding resolution, in
particular with regard to prevention. A multitude of
measures will be necessary to make progress on the
following two tracks.
First, the link between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission must be strengthened, of
course in full respect of their respective mandates. As
noted by the Permanent Representative of New Zealand,
the Peacebuilding Commission has not yet reached its
full potential for supporting the Security Council in
long-term, structural and inclusive conflict prevention.
We need more regular and substantial exchanges
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, including the configuration Chairs. That
would allow the Council to embed its measures into
more comprehensive long-term peace perspectives in
the sense of sustaining peace.
Secondly, we encourage all Member States to pay
greater attention to the link between human rights and
peace. In that regard, at the tenth anniversary of the
establishment of the Human Rights Council on 13 June,
Switzerland and 63 other Member States launched a
public appeal to put human rights at the heart of conflict
prevention. This public appeal stresses that human
rights must play a more prominent role at every stage
of the prevention continuum and that the cooperation
between the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council should therefore be intensified.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks Japan for convening
this open debate under its presidency, and SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Ambassadors Amina
Mohamed and Smail Chergui for their briefings. We
welcome the timely adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/12.
36/65

28/07/2016

My delegation endorses the content of the concept
note for this open debate (S/2016/586, annex), which
indicates that the involvement of various sectors
of society — such as women, youth, children and
organized civil society — is necessary to consolidate a
stable and sustainable peace. In this regard, the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture refers to the importance
of involving different sectors of society in the peace
process and of their sense of ownership of the process
of dialogue and reconciliation for sustainable peace.
Peacebuilding in Africa has set an example for
good practices, but it has also seen instances where
the implementation of sustainable peace has not met
expectations, including when the situation on the
ground has deteriorated, affecting the civil population,
Blue Helmets and diplomats. My delegation takes this
opportunity to condemn such acts vigorously. Guatemala
appreciates the work of all military contingents, staff
officers and military observers deployed in Africa,
who remain on the ground in order to fulfil their
mandates, often in situations of extreme violence that
have left dead and wounded. We appreciate the role of
peacekeeping missions deployed in Africa in protecting
civilians, but it is important to stress that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians lies with
Governments.
When the time came to seek peace in Guatemala,
a country that was afflicted by conflict for more
than three decades, it was crucial that Guatemalan
society play a key role in achieving peace and in the
national reconciliation process. It should be clear that
the achievement of a firm and lasting peace must be
based on participatory socioeconomic development
that is oriented to the common good and meets the
needs of the entire population. Such development
requires social justice as one of the pillars of national
unity and solidarity, and sustainable economic growth
as a condition for meeting the social demands of the
population. The effective participation of citizens from
all sectors of society is also critical in the process of
open and inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation
through truth commissions, which contribute to the
restoration of trust and the social fabric. The State
must facilitate these opportunities for participation as
a guiding force of national development. At the same
time, it is imperative to focus efforts, where necessary,
on implementing programmes for the disarmament,
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

demobilization and reintegration of parties to the
conflict into society.
As I mentioned early in my statement regarding the
importance of organized society’s direct participation
in seeking a sustainable peace on the ground, it is
imperative to facilitate, respect and strengthen the
participation of civil society so as to ensure that
processes are democratic and strengthen sustainable
peace. In cases where conflicts have abated, the national
context provides an opportunity to revitalize State
institutions so that they can consistently guarantee
life, freedom, justice, security, peace and the integral
development of the person to all its citizens.
Finally, it is important to recognize that at present
the United Nations has at its disposal relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and Security Council, as well
up-to-date reports, for the membership to consult and
implement at the national level so as to achieve peace on
the ground before, during and after conflict. We need to
remember that where the Organization has failed most
has been in the implementation of its own decisions
and in the provision of genuine follow-up. Such has
been the case for peacebuilding. It is in the interests
of everyone to ensure the effective implementation of
Council decisions, as well as to strengthen and build
upon the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
General Assembly and the Council itself.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Krapp (Germany): Germany welcomes the
focus of this debate on peacebuilding in Africa. We share
our African partners’ vision of a peaceful, prosperous
and integrated continent, and we have consistently
supported African and United Nations mechanisms
that work to that end. Germany also believes that
peacebuilding must be seen as an endeavour that
encompasses the whole lifespan of a conflict, from
crisis prevention to post-conflict efforts. We need an
approach that is more innovative than one based simply
on institution-building.
Drawing lessons from past conflicts, Germany has
been one of the main actors in developing and promoting
the concept of stabilizing the lives of civilians. Such
stabilization is targeted at creating a secure environment
and improving the living conditions of people afflicted
by internal or inter-State armed conflict. By doing so,
it serves the overarching purpose of supporting and
sustaining political processes aimed at non-violent

S/PV.7750

conflict resolution. Through concrete measures on the
ground, such stabilization contributes to containing,
and ultimately ending, violence.
I will give an example. Together with the United
Nations Development Programme, we have developed
the Stabilization Facility for Libya. The Facility
provides for the quick rehabilitation of critical
infrastructure, enhances the capacity of municipalities
and supports local authorities in their efforts to play
a more active role in peacebuilding. It supports the
new Government of National Accord’s efforts to build
its legitimacy in the eyes of the population. Germany
provides a major part of the funding for the Facility.
However, we have also seen that stabilization measures
will fail in the absence of a political will for change.
Therefore, measures must be designed in a way as to
enable the first steps towards reconciliation between
parties to the conflict. Stabilization can help lay the
foundations for a social and political consensus and
legitimate political structures.
In Mali, for instance, Germany is assisting the
Government in implementing the peace agreement,
with a particular focus on moving ahead with
decentralization. Only when decentralization becomes
visible on the ground and the affected population feels
real change in their lives can the peace agreement
achieve the necessary momentum.
We strongly advocate for generally implementing
the concept of civilian stabilization within the
framework of United Nations missions. That would
require, first, an integrated approach. All instruments
at our disposal should be utilized as the situation
demands. That would include the tools of diplomacy and
mediation, development policy, financial contributions,
police assistance and, where necessary, military
peace operations.
Secondly, it would require the strengthening of
existing tools. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
is a valuable instrument that can help us to improve
the focus of our efforts. The Commission needs to
assume a more active role in sustaining peace, in close
coordination with the Security Council. In order to
achieve that, the rules of procedure of the PBC should
be reviewed and streamlined.
Thirdly, all of that requires money. The
Peacebuilding Fund is an important catalyst for
implementing stabilization projects. Therefore, in 2016,

16-2392737/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

28/07/2016

Germany has again contributed to the Peacebuilding
Fund. This year, the amount is $11 million.

of sustaining
and decisions.

Germany stands ready to further refine, in
consultation with partners, the concept of civilian
stabilization as a contribution to sustaining peace.

The holding of credible elections is a major
challenge in the context of post-conflict and post-crisis
transitions. That entails maintaining, both upstream
and downstream, a political space where the freedom
of expression and assembly prevails for all political
actors and every component of civil society. Numerous
countries on the continent, including a number of
countries emerging from conflicts, have recently held,
or are expected soon to hold, elections. Such periods
are often marked by fragility and renewed tensions.
They deserve our renewed attention so as to avoid
turning back the democratic progress already achieved
and to sustain the progress made in peacebuilding. We
must pay particular attention to ensuring the holding
of free, transparent and inclusive elections, which goes
hand-in-hand — as I have already mentioned — with
respect for human rights, including civil liberties,
during every phase of the electoral process.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank the Japanese presidency for convening this
debate, which comes at a particularly crucial time for
peacebuilding in Africa.
My delegations aligns itself with the statement
to be made on behalf of the European Union. I wish,
however, to make the following comments in my
national capacity.
At the outset, it is necessary to underscore that
Africa is not all made of one and the same cloth, and
the diversity of situations there is great. The conditions
in Africa vary from one subregion to the next. Peace,
however, is struggling to take root in the various parts
of the continent. Several African countries emerging
from conflict are faced with significant challenges,
such as Mali and the Central African Republic. Other
countries that have made progress on the road to
peacebuilding, such as Burundi, are again facing a
crisis situation. South Sudan has just witnessed a new
outbreak of violence and serious violations of human
rights, nearly one year after signing a peace agreement.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the road
to rolling out the electoral process remains long, but
positive steps have just been taken, such as the granting
of collective and individual pardons, in order to foster
a political climate of trust within the national dialogue.
The concept note circulated for this debate
(S/2016/586, annex) identifies a number of crucial
elements for peacebuilding in Africa. Given the
situations I just mentioned, one point appears essential
for the United Nations system in general, and the
Security Council and the missions that it mandates in
particular, namely, the fragile and sensitive nature of
transition situations. A peace agreement is often only
the first step, rather than the conclusion of a process.
That is fully reflected in the concept of sustaining
peace, which has been enshrined in identical resolutions
of the Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) and the
General Assembly (resolution 70/262). Belgium urges
the Security Council to fully integrate the perspective
38/65

peace

in

its

future

deliberations

With regard to supporting the electoral process
and post-election mediation, the United Nations and
regional organizations have long been recognized as
actors. It is important, however, that they agree upon
shared principles. It is in the international community’s
interest that all stakeholders agree on the distribution
of roles and on a common vision of what they want to
accomplish in this area.
As reflected in the Sustainable Development Goals,
the establishment or re-establishment of accountable
and effective institutions in countries emerging from
conflict is crucial — whether in the justice, security
or public-finance sectors — along with the support of
the relevant partners, such as international and regional
financial institutions.
In that regard, we must underscore the international
and regional initiatives aimed at improving transparency
in the development and management of natural resources,
including ensuring their traceability, ensuring that they
do not fuel conflicts and ensuring transparency in
financial flows resulting from the development of those
resources. The rich natural resources of the African
continent have not yet been transformed sufficiently
into prosperity and employment opportunities for the
population, nor into resources for the State. Proper
and transparent governance of that sector is key for
sustainable peace.
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
is also worth noting. Beyond the organization of
the sector of extractive industries, that process has
committed the countries concerned to strengthen
governance of their public finances. That initiative
could play a very useful role in the framework of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) because it encourages
resource-rich countries to mobilize their revenues
to benefit sustainable development. The illegal
exploitation of natural resources has long fuelled the
terrible cycle of armed conflict and made economic and
social development impossible. We need an inclusive
approach on the part of all stakeholders so as to rebuild
trust among populations and mend the social contract
between them and the authorities.
In conclusion, all of those efforts will be in vain
if the root causes of the conflicts and crises in Africa,
the sources of chronic instability, are not addressed.
National ownership and the inclusiveness of the
processes designed to respond to those situations are
essential in efforts to achieve sustainable peace, as
are — and this has not been emphasized enough —
political will on the part of leaders, the increased
participation of women in all peacebuilding processes
and their role as development actors and actors in
conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Carl
Hallergard, Minister Counsellor of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Hallergard: I have the pleasure to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Allow me, first of all, to thank you, Sir, for
taking the initiative to convene this open debate on an
important topic and for the very valuable concept note
(S/2016/586, annex). I also thank the Secretary-General,
the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, in
her capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace
and Security for their briefings, as well as the many
ministers who have spoken today, which is a testament

S/PV.7750

to the importance of this debate. I also welcome the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12.
The timing of this debate is very opportune,
particularly in view of the recent decision by the African
Union Summit in Kigali to operationalize the AU Peace
Fund. The High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President
of the European Commission, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
and the European Commissioner for International
Cooperation and Development, Mr. Neven Mimica,
both welcomed that development. As they stated, that
decision represents an important step towards a system
based on the African Union’s own resources.
The European Union is the African Union’s first
partner, and EU cooperation on peace and security in
Africa is handled primarily through a continental and
regional perspective in the framework of the Africa-EU
partnership. The EU remains committed to work with
the African Union so as to ensure peace and security
on the continent.
With regard to institution-building, the European
Union has provided substantial financial support to a
number of subregional organizations in Africa in order
to increase their capacity to develop regional policies
and enforce their implementation, and that has not been
only in the field of peace and security. While there
has been relatively good progress in the area of peace
and security in our work with the AU, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), among others, which has sought to fulfil
clear functions, the progress of regional integration
initiatives and programmes has been undermined by
a multitude of interrelated factors. Specific challenges
vary from region to region, but overall some issues
can be found everywhere. Member States often belong
to various regional organizations with identical or
overlapping mandates that serve various domestic
objectives and agendas. Political mandates and regional
ambitions are often not sufficiently underpinned with
operational capacity and resources, which in turn limits
their capacity to absorb the aid provided.
The European Union supports the African Union
and its regional economic communities, first and
foremost through the African Peace Facility. Since
its establishment, in 2004, the African Peace Facility
has contributed almost €1.6 billion to the African
Union’s peace and security agenda. Our support is

16-2392739/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

used to build the capacity of the AU and its regional
economic communities and to provide core funding for
their operational work, including addressing emerging
conflicts and ongoing crises. Recent examples include
South Sudan, where IGAD is supported by the
African Peace Facility to run the mediation process
in Addis Ababa, and Burundi, where the East African
Community is trying to contain the crisis. The African
Peace Facility has also been supporting peacebuilding
work in Somalia since 2007.
The African Peace Facility has been a game changer
in terms of making a growing number of African-led
responses to political crises on the continent possible.
By providing the resources needed for those bodies to
act, the Facility has enabled collective African security
actions anchored in the nascent Peace and Security
Council’s political role, which has enabled it to be
tested and put into action.
As was confirmed by the recently adopted two
identical resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)
and General Assembly resolution 70/268, conflict
prevention has become part and parcel of sustaining
peace and peacebuilding. The capacity to manage
tensions in a swift and effective manner is critical
for the success of any peace process. Regional and
continental organizations are usually the best placed to
do so, as long as they have the necessary mandate and
capacities. Africa has several advantages in that regard
on which we can build.
Through its African Peace and Security
Architecture, Africa has a well-established framework
for
conflict
management,
including
conflict
prevention. Furthermore, the African Union and the
regional economic communities have a clear will and
mandate, expressed in the African Peace and Security
Architecture road map for the period 2016-2020, to play
a proactive role in preventing conflict on the continent
and to acquire the necessary capacities to do so.
Those efforts need to be supported. An effective
African preventive diplomacy capacity will no doubt
have a major impact on peacebuilding in the continent.
The European Union is already funding the development
of a continental early-warning system, complemented
by similar systems at the regional level, and the
strengthening of mediation support units able to act
on the basis of early warning analyses. The swiftness
in deploying conflict-prevention efforts is also key to
40/65

28/07/2016

their success. It is therefore necessary that Africa’s own
funding efforts be supplemented by flexible, quickly
disbursable funding. The African Peace Facility has put
in place an early-recovery mechanism aimed precisely
at that.
Peace-support operations that deploy deterrent
forces aimed at ensuring that political tensions do
not translate into open conflict can be critical to
peacebuilding in particularly fragile situations. They
provide the necessary time for national institutions
to be strengthened and for the necessary trust among
the parties to be established. That is an approach
that has worked well in Guinea-Bissau, where the
ECOWAS Security Mission in Guinea-Bissau, which
has been funded by the EU since June 2015, has
been instrumental in ensuring that tensions among
the democratic institutions are addressed within the
constitutional framework. South Sudan, unfortunately,
provides a negative example.
While the African Peace Facility cannot provide
direct training to national institutions, the mandate of
the peace-support operations that it funds can include
a component to train national-security institutions,
such as the army or the police, within the framework
of a wider State-building process. That is the case in
Somalia, where the EU supports the African Union
Mission in Somalia for the reconstruction of a training
centre for the Somali national army and provides
on-the-job training to police forces through joint
patrolling and other activities.
The EU’s involvement in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding in Africa goes beyond the African Peace
Facility. Apart from bilateral development cooperation
programmes with many African countries that
support good governance and inclusive participation
through the European Development Fund, the EU
also uses other foreign policy instruments, such as the
instrument for contributing to stability and peace, EU
election observation missions and common security
and defence policy missions, such as in Mali and the
Central African Republic. These are complemented
by other instruments such as political dialogue, the
use of preventive sanctions, humanitarian assistance,
the work of EU special representatives and support to
civil society, allowing for a comprehensive approach in
fragile and conflict-affected situations.
The EU is also playing an active role as a full
member of all the configurations of the Peacebuilding
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Commission, where is it making constructive
contributions to support ongoing efforts based
on the comprehensive approach outlined earlier,
thereby helping configuration Chairs to coordinate
peacebuilding efforts and generate momentum and
resources for the countries on the PBC’s agenda. In the
case of the Central African Republic, for example, the
EU, as the largest donor in the country, is hosting a
donors’ conference in the fall to support the priorities
of the newly elected authorities and is doing so in full
coordination with United Nations interlocutors and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, with the aim
of agreeing on a compact.
To conclude, the EU will continue to be a strong
proponent of and contributor to peacebuilding efforts in
Africa, which is a challenge that we all need to tackle
in close coordination with international partners and
cooperation with ever more able African Governments
and institutions willing to take the lead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan commends Japan for having convened
this open debate to strengthen peacebuilding in Africa
through the more effective implementation of resolutions
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262,
and the lessons learned as delineated in the 2015 report
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) Working
Group. As a member-observer of the African Union and
a strong supporter of Africa’s revival, my delegation
shares the region’s vision for long-term peacebuilding.
The changing nature of conflict demands a new,
robust and multidimensional strategy combining
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
sustainable
development with climate mitigation. A strategic,
integrated and coherent approach to conflict-affected
countries should be a priority from the onset of
the conflict, and international attention must be
sustained not just for years but even decades so as to
prevent relapses.
The PBC now more than ever must serve an advisory
bridging role among the various departments of the
Secretariat, United Nations organs and entities and field
operations, involving also all relevant actors, together
with the various units — political, human rights, rule of
law and gender — as well as peacekeeping operations
and political missions.

S/PV.7750

Mediation, negotiations and reconciliation between
conflicting sides aimed at resolving long-standing
as well as newly emerging conflicts are the building
blocks for the peacebuilding architecture. This task is
best achieved through coordinating the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Special Representatives
and Envoys, in conjunction with regional and
subregional organizations.
The vast range of regional organizations in Africa
as well as the World Bank, the African Development
Bank and bilateral donors should be involved so
as to advance the situation on the ground and
ensure stable, predictable funding for capacity- and
institution-building. We note the contribution of the
European Union as a strong supporter of Africa.
In addition, parliamentarians and religious
leaders, together with civil society, the private sector
and the media, constitute an influential stakeholder
arrangement. They promote State-building; the rule
of law; good governance; the protection of civilians,
especially women and children; the disarmament of
combatants; security and justice sector reform; and
inclusive political processes. This calls for broadening
the concept of peace and stability from State-centred
security to a people-oriented security, from purely
military to non-military security, which includes food,
water and energy security. In this reconstruction process
for Africa, the women/youth and peace and security
agenda must be overarching and supported by civil
society and the larger multi-stakeholder arrangement.
Kazakhstan believes that there is the need for a
global development strategy in order to create just
structures and a just world order that can eliminate
conflict for all time, because it is well known that
underdevelopment and financial and digital inequality
are the main causes of conflict. My delegation strongly
believes that the international community must develop
and implement a coherent assistance strategy to rebuild
Africa.
Kazakhstan fully supports the vision of Africa
2063 to make the region conflict-free. Kazakhstan,
along with the United Nations Development
Programme, is implementing the Africa-Kazakhstan
Partnership Project for Sustainable Development. We
also were pioneers in establishing a regional centre
for excellence in civil service to prepare professionals
based on meritocracy, and we have great potential for
a partnership with Africa. Kazakhstan stands ready to

16-2392741/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

build peace in Africa as a steady and trusted mediator
and partner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Monsignor Kassas (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for having convened
this open debate on peacebuilding in Africa.
The varied results of the peacebuilding efforts
of African countries in post-conflict situations show
that there is no one single model for peacebuilding.
Certain countries have achieved peace and stability
and sustainable development, while others continue
to sink into extreme poverty, with unstable or even
non-existent institutions.
My delegation would like to begin by mentioning the
role that popular movements, faith-based organizations
and local communities play in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. They have concrete knowledge of local
realities and interact closely with the local population.
They enable individuals and societies at the local level to
identify and encourage the development of new leaders
and to mobilize communities to work together for the
common good. They achieve results that individuals
and local communities can easily recognize and with
which they can identify.
In that regard, the Catholic Church in Africa
contributes directly to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, thanks to its ubiquitous presence as
reflected by its tens of thousands of institutions, such
as hospitals and dispensaries, as well as schools and
other training centres. Catholic humanitarian and
charity organizations work in all African countries in
various areas, promoting dialogue in villages, providing
emergency assistance and building the capacities of
small businesses. The Holy See supervises this vast
network of rapid-impact programs over the medium
and the long term in order to optimize education and
health-care services, ensure that conflict-prevention
efforts continue and build peace through dialogue and
comprehensive human development.
The Holy See believes that in order to achieve
sustainable peace, people must be brought together in
a spirit of dialogue, so that divergent positions can be
heard and solutions found, agreed and implemented.
Furthermore, the contributions of women and young
42/65

28/07/2016

people are particularly important to peacebuilding. In
that respect, the Holy See commends the efforts of the
Council and of national Governments to accord greater
recognition to the vital role of women in preventive
diplomacy, mediation and the peacebuilding process.
Furthermore, the Holy See urges the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations to recognize young
people as active individuals, participants, leaders and
partners in the peace process.
Conflict prevention and peacebuilding efforts
demand that we press to make more progress in
disarmament and in controlling both the legal and
the illegal arms trade. The proliferation of weapons
exacerbates conflict and leads to an enormous cost, both
human and material, which deeply affects the search for
peace. It is the responsibility of the entire international
community to take advantage of the concrete efforts in
that area and to support the engagement of civil society
and religious institutions to that end with a view to
preventing conflicts.
Peacebuilding will not be effective unless human
rights are promoted and encouraged, unless the human
dignity of every human being is recognized and
protected and unless we all stand together in mutual
solidarity, leaving no one behind. During his visit to
Brazil three years ago, Pope Francis said:
“No amount of peacebuilding will be able to last,
nor will harmony and happiness be attained in a
society that ignores, pushes to the margins or
excludes a part of itself. A society of that kind
simply impoverishes itself, it loses something
essential. We must never allow the throwaway
culture to enter our hearts. We must never allow
that because we are brothers and sisters. No one is
disposable.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We commend you, Sir,
for hosting this open debate of the Security Council
on peacebuilding in Africa and for your country’s
continual support for Africa’s development agenda.
The Security Council is charged with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, particularly on the African continent,
form part of that mandate and, indeed, the mandate of
the United Nations in general. South Africa believes
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that the key to sustainable peace consolidation lies in
the strengthening of political approaches, including
preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
management, mediation and peacebuilding. That would
ensure that countries not only seek to avert conflict but
also address the challenges that could prevent countries
from sliding back into conflict.
Consequently, South Africa agrees with the
assertion in the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts for the 2015 Review of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Architecture that peacebuilding
“must be the principle that flows through all
the Organization’s engagements, informing all
its activities — before, during and after violent
conflicts — rather than being marginalized.”
(S/2015/490, p. 3)
In some way or form, the majority of Member
States have been affected by conflict. What prevents
those conflicts from having a disproportionate impact
on Member States is the capacity of States, economies
and societies to withstand such threats to their stability.
That is the central tenant underlying the peacebuilding
agenda: ensuring sustainable development and good
governance in order to avoid relapses into conflict.
Guarding against the spiralling of instability into fullblown conflict therefore becomes critical. In that regard,
the sustained attention of the international community
to countries emerging from conflict and the positive
contributions from the international community to the
stability, economic growth and development of such
countries are fundamental to the global peace and
security agenda.
In order to strengthen States in the continent
emerging from post-conflict situations, the African
Union (AU) has developed a post-conflict reconstruction
and development policy. It is a guide for the development
of comprehensive policies and strategies that seek to
consolidate peace and prevent a relapse into conflict
violence. In 2014, the AU also launched its African
Solidarity Initiative, aimed at mobilizing support from
within the continent for peacebuilding measures. All
of those initiatives contribute to the ambition of the
African Union’s “Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want”
in promoting dialogue-centred conflict prevention, so
that by 2020 all guns will be silent.
We welcome resolution 2282 (2016), as well as
the identical General Assembly resolution 70/262,
adopted in April, which considered the review of the

S/PV.7750

United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Those
resolutions recognize the important work of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as a body presiding
over and ensuring strategic coherence in international
peacebuilding efforts. As is always the case, the
development of national policies in the aftermath of
conflict will not succeed without the positive provision
of adequate, predictable and coherent funding, which
in turn increases the possibility for sustainable peace.
South Africa, like other Member States, is intensely
aware of the various challenges that the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) faces as a result of restricted funding.
Therefore, the Security Council should welcome the
announcement made by the African Union on Mandela
Day, 18 July 2016, in Kigali, regarding the establishment
of an African Union Peace Fund. We believe that that
process will help balance and build on the actions of
the PBC. The operationalization of the AU Peace
Fund will be complemented by the establishment of a
0.2 per cent levy on eligible imports so as to address
the previous financial challenges faced by the AU.
The AU Peace Fund will, among other things, address
factors regarding mediation, preventive diplomacy,
institutional capacity-building and peace-support
operations.
We must not lose sight of the sterling work that the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
have undertaken and continue to do. We are mindful of
the fact that all of the countries on the PBC agenda are
from Africa and that those countries have also received
an estimated 80 per cent of the allocations granted
by the Peacebuilding Fund between 2007 and 2014.
Even at present, the Peacebuilding Fund is assisting
in supporting the African Union Commission’s efforts
to provide peacebuilding initiatives in Burundi, which
serves as a practical example of an action that illustrates
the strengthening of cooperation between the AU and
the United Nations in sustaining peace.
The lack of State authority and weak State
institutions are conditions conducive to conflict. South
Africa therefore supports strengthening the governance
institutions of countries emerging from conflict and the
promotion of good governance. It should be noted that
the AU has adopted an African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance, which sets out the continent’s
vision for good governance, which, in turn, ultimately
supports peacebuilding and sustainable peace.

16-2392743/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Finally, we call for the broadening of the concept of
peacebuilding support to include not only financing for
development, but also, in keeping with the idea behind
the African Solidarity Initiative, in-kind support,
such as the training and capacity-building of State
institutions. Such in-kind initiatives will go a long
way towards rebuilding State capacity to ensure peace,
stability and development in a given country.
The idea of peacebuilding is based significantly
on the understanding that peace cannot exist without
development and that development cannot thrive
without peace and stability. We believe that should
underpin the United Nations approach to fulfilling its
central mandate of the maintenance of international
peace and security, which is strongly dependent on a
prosperous and peaceful Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea congratulates Japan on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month and appreciates its
important initiative in convening today’s open debate
entitled “Peacebuilding in Africa”. I thank Foreign
Minister Fumio Kishida for coming to New York to
preside over this debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his earlier briefing.
Since the last open debate on the topic of
peacebuilding held in February (see S/PV.7629),
resolution 2282 (2016) was adopted on 27 April,
thereby concluding the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. Along with the substantially
identical General Assembly resolution 70/262, it
defined, for the first time, the concept of “sustaining
peace,” which established prevention as the core
function of the United Nations work in the maintenance
of peace and security. Furthermore, those resolutions
clarified that the aim of peacebuilding is to prevent
the outbreak, continuation, escalation, and recurrence
of conflict. That new and ambitious approach to
peacebuilding has been welcomed by many who face
peace and security challenges, Africa in particular.
My delegation can attest to that reaction, as the
Republic of Korea, in our capacity as Vice-Chair, joined
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on
his recent trip to West Africa. Throughout the tour of
the region, we heard at first hand from Government
officials and civil society the high expectations that
they had of the United Nations renewed approach to
44/65

28/07/2016

peacebuilding. Allow me to briefly outline a few points
that may help us chart our way forward.
First, priority should be given to institution-building,
as was highlighted in the concept note circulated by
the President (S/2016/586, annex). The Republic of
Korea can be said to be one of the early recipients of
United Nations post-conflict support — even before
the concept of peacekeeping or peacebuilding had
come into existence. In the immediate aftermath of the
Korean War, in order to extricate the Republic of Korea
from the dire circumstances that it found itself in,
including extreme poverty, the United Nations Korean
Reconstruction Agency was established to implement a
range of projects aimed at restoring stability and laying
the foundation for economic development. Early on in
that process, we identified institution-building — in
particular in the area of education — as a national priority
that would supply the much-needed human resources for
returning the country to normalcy. Drawing in part from
our experience, President Park Geun-Hye underscored
the importance of education as a core component of the
Blueprint for Comprehensive Cooperation with Africa,
unveiled during her address to the African Union (AU)
on 28 May.
Secondly, a sustained and enduring commitment on
the part of international partners is essential. Often in
post-conflict environments, there is a prevailing general
lack of trust among the many stakeholders — between
the Government and its people, and among the different
regions of the country. Under such circumstances,
the prospects of a long-term engagement with the
international community can act as a stabilizing agent,
facilitating national cohesion.
In Africa, we view the African Union’s African
peace and security architecture framework — consisting
of the African Union Commission, the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the African Union
Peace Fund, among others — as a natural complement
to the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and a
mechanism through which the international community
can signal its strong commitment. In order to support
our partners in Africa, the Republic of Korea has
committed to increasing our financial contribution to
the African Union Peace Fund. In that regard, we also
welcome the recent decision at the AU Kigali Summit
to revamp the Fund.
Finally, national ownership is of paramount
importance. Governments in transition must play
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

a leading role in identifying investment priorities,
drawing up development strategies and carrying out
their implementation. From our own experience, the
sense of ownership, along with the spirit of self-help
and cooperation, is what ignited the tapping of the
potential of all, not just some, of our people.
I would like to reiterate the Republic of Korea’s
commitment to partnering with Africa in the cause of
peace and stability. As our President promised a few
months ago in Addis Ababa, Korea will travel together
with Africa along the path towards a prosperous future.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Denmark.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries — Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Denmark.
Let me start by welcoming the adoption by
the Security Council and the General Assembly of
resolutions 2282 (2016) and 70/268, respectively, on
peacebuilding in April. They were nothing less than
a landmark. Let me also applaud the recent reviews
undertaken by the United Nations of its peace operations
and extend our full support to the continued process of
implementing their recommendations.
The diversity and complexity of the various
peacebuilding efforts in Africa call for a differentiated
and comprehensive whole-of-government and whole-ofUnited Nations approach. The experience of the Nordic
countries, for example, in supporting peacebuilding
efforts in the Sahel, is a case in point, emphasizing the
nexus between peace, security and development, and
targeting the root causes of conflict. The inclusion
of Goal 16 in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) is a
political testament to that.
Political solutions must be at the centre of any
peace process, and for any credible political solutions
to be found and adhered to, accountable, transparent
and inclusive political leadership is needed. The most
recent experiences from Somalia, Mali and South Sudan
have once again made that clear. Despite the progress
made, we must place still greater emphasis on conflict
prevention and solution. In that effort, we need strong
African leadership, and we have to place peacebuilding
at the core of all of our actions.

S/PV.7750

The African Union and the various regional groups,
institutions and dialogues, as well as the European
Union and United Nations, each have a unique role
to play in facilitating political processes. The Nordic
countries highly commend the African Union on its
efforts to advance peace and security in the African
continent, including the roles played by the AU’s Panel
of the Wise, high-level panels, high representatives and
special envoys.
We also commend the willingness of many
African countries to contribute troops and other types
of personnel. The African Union and the regional
organizations are usually the first responders to crises
in Africa, dispatching troops on short notice, often into
dangerous environments and sadly, sometimes with
tragic losses. We fully acknowledge the need to look
for more predictable financial solutions for African
Union peace missions, and we welcome the historic
unanimous decision in Kigali, as mentioned by others,
to finance the African Union and the African-led peace
operations. We see that decision as an important step,
and we look forward to supporting its implementation.
We also note the appointment of President Kagame
of Rwanda to lead the ongoing institutional reform
of the African Union aimed at further improving its
effectiveness.
In order to counter the emergence of new
threats — internal or regional — strong governance
structures are required. As we work to adapt and
revitalize the United Nations structures to conform to the
realities of today, it is important to note that the African
Union has in fact developed and operationalized its
own peace and security architecture and its governance
architecture. Reinforcing the strong linkages between
those African structures and the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture is, of course, essential.
In addition, further progress on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and resolution 2242 (2015) is
imperative. Women remain the single most underutilized
resource in effective peacebuilding. Experience shows
that empowering women and supporting their full and
active participation in peace-related, political and
economic decision-making leads to more inclusive
and lasting agreements. That has to be the central
component in any mediation and conflict prevention
effort.
Finally, we must remember that to achieve
sustainable peace and long-term development, real

16-2392745/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

inclusiveness is the key. The entire country has to be
heard, respected and involved, and including civil
society is the best way to do this. The people of Burkina
Faso showed recently how a powerful and active civil
society can be the key to maintaining stability and
democracy.
Let me conclude by affirming that the Nordic
countries are pleased to bear witness to the ongoing
process in the United Nations and by reiterating the
unique mandate and the role of the Organization in
securing a sustainable and peaceful Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): On behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of my country, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
the honour that was done him by inviting him to this
high-level meeting. However, owing to scheduling
constraints, he is unable to take part in this meeting
and has therefore instructed me to convey his regrets
and wishes of every success in our work.
I would first like to welcome this Security Council
initiative under the Japanese presidency. It provides
us with a platform for exchange and the opportunity
to share our experiences in the area of peacebuilding
with a view to promoting a stable and lasting peace,
especially in African States that have been riven and
weakened by crises.
One of the keys to the success of an effective
peacebuilding process remains the existence of a
common strategy that enjoys national ownership and has
clear priorities. In Côte d’Ivoire, which endured nearly
a decade of unrest that undermined the strength of its
main institutions, the authorities were able to refocus
on progress, relying on the Ivorian people’s capacity to
develop resilience and achieve peace. For the Ivorian
Government, social cohesion, national reconciliation
and the normalization of political life are fundamental
factors in building a climate of lasting peace conducive
to development.
With the support of the United Nations system,
my Government has put in place the national
Peacebuilding Priority Action Plan, which centres on
several programmatic areas, including the restoration
of State authority and community safety; support for
national reconciliation, social cohesion and conflictrisk reduction; and identification of and support for
46/65

28/07/2016

vulnerable populations. The first phase, covering
the period from 2011 to 2014, was funded by the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
amount of $11.15. The implementation of that phase
made it possible to rehabilitate several security and
administrative structures in urban areas, particularly
in the west of the country; to build the capacity of the
police and the gendarmerie; to register several hundred
thousand births; and to reform the Ivorian civil State.
In order to consolidate those gains and take into
account the remaining challenges, a second phase for
the period from 2015 to 2017 is under way, with funding
in the amount of $15 million, including $12 million
already mobilized by the Peacebuilding Support Office
and $3 million mobilized by the Ivorian Government.
The implementation of this phase will eventually make
it possible to iron out and resolve land disputes in rural
areas and difficulties linked to identification, among
other issues.
With regard to national reconciliation and
sustainable cohesion, in addition to creating the ministry
responsible for social cohesion and compensation
for victims, in 2011 the Ivorian Government set up
a dialogue, truth and reconciliation commission,
which was recently superseded by the National
Commission for Reconciliation and Compensation of
Victims. Moreover, the high rate of implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process — around 94 per cent — and the promising
results of security sector reform help strengthen the
defence of territorial integrity and the establishment
of the rule of law. Furthermore, the creation of a high
authority for good governance contributes to promoting
the values of public management.
Ultimately, this plan has enabled the Ivorian
Government to achieve notable results, including the
smooth running of the presidential election of October
2015, the capacity of the Ivorian justice system to
operate independently, and the promotion of youth
employment. All these achievements of the Ivorian
Government headed by President Alassane Ouattara
led the Security Council to adopt resolution 2284 (2016)
on 28 April, extending the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire for a final term, until June 2017.
The Ivorian experience can be continued and
strengthened. However, I cannot conclude my
statement without reiterating the gratitude of the
Ivorian Government and people for the invaluable role
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that the United Nations has played and continues to
play. Thanks to this serious support, Côte d’Ivoire has
resumed its forward march and is back on the path of
stability, growth and social and economic development.

S/PV.7750

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.

resolution 70/1, annex). If we are serious about building
inclusive and accountable institutions that can sustain
peace, we must ensure that traditionally marginalized
voices have a voice at the table. This means engaging
women, youth and civil society at all levels of
decision-making.

Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this
important debate on peacebuilding in Africa and its
particular focus on institution-building. We know from
experience that strengthening national institutions
is essential to managing conflict and breaking cycles
of violence and fragility. We also know that building
inclusive and accountable institutions is a long-term
endeavour.To enable local actors to meet the needs and
aspirations of African States, the process must rely on
the commitment and efforts of those actors.

In Mali, for example, Canada is supporting efforts
to strengthen the justice system by increasing access
of those affected by conflict, particularly women
and youth. Canada is also proud to be supporting the
work of Malian civil society organizations to ensure
that the criminal justice system is able to judge
cases of corruption and human rights crimes in a fair
manner. These initiatives are implemented through a
peacebuilding lens, supporting local leaders, especially
women and young people, working in reconciliation
and conflict prevention.

I would like to briefly highlight three points: the
need to support and promote African ownership of
peacebuilding efforts in Africa, the importance of
creating inclusive institutions that meet the needs of
all sectors of society, and the importance of ensuring
coherence across the United Nations system.

Thirdly, we must address the deficiencies and
shortcomings in our own approach to peacebuilding. We
know that institution-building takes time — measured in
decades, not years — yet we design mission mandates on
a short-term basis. We also know that some institutions
seem to matter more for sustaining peace, particularly
institutions that provide security to citizens, access
to justice, and jobs, yet these are the areas where we
invest the fewest resources. We know the importance
of broad engagement in laying the foundation for
sustainable peace and development, and we develop
ambitious mandates for our United Nations operations.
Yet the United Nations programmes that carry out most
of this work in-country are underresourced. There is
something fundamentally wrong with this approach,
and it needs to change.

First, supporting and promoting national
ownership — in line with the commitments to country
ownership set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States — should be an essential part of
our peacebuilding efforts in Africa. The African
Union and regional economic communities have
taken on a greater role in responding to conflict and
peacebuilding, supported by the United Nations and its
regional offices. Strengthening the capacity of these
organizations and further strengthening the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union will
contribute to ensuring effective responses to conflict
and establishing a lasting peace.
Canada is committed to supporting its partners in
Africa in further developing continental capacity in
peacebuilding. For example, Canada has strengthened
the capacities of the Tanzanian Peacekeeping Training
Centre to conduct peacekeeping training for African
peacekeepers.

In closing, let me highlight again that the
development of inclusive and accountable institutions
must be at the heart of United Nations efforts to sustain
peace. The 2030 Agenda and the recent resolutions on
the peacebuilding architecture lay out a clear road map
for how the entire United Nations system can improve
its effectiveness in support of sustaining peace. Canada
looks forward to supporting those efforts.

(spoke in English)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.

Secondly, for institutions to be effective, we know
that they must be both inclusive and accountable. This
is reflected in Sustainable Development Goal 16 (see

Mr. Radomski (Poland): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this very important
meeting.

16-2392747/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
present several comments from our national perspective.
We regard the issue of peacebuilding in Africa
as a matter of utmost importance, especially in
the light of recently adopted Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on the peacebuilding
architecture that characterize sustaining peace as a
core responsibility of the entire United Nations system.
I would like to point out a few issues that we consider
significant in the current context.
Sustaining peace cannot be achieved without
inclusive, effective and accountable institutions
and the rule of law. Institutions strongly determine
the allocation of resources, functioning of markets,
delivery of social services and management of natural
resources. They often help to find effective solutions
to conflicts, improve access to justice and protection
of human rights. Economic and social reforms are
less likely to bring long-lasting changes if they are
not anchored in a stable and transparent democratic
governmental system.
Regional and subregional organizations play
an important role in the peacebuilding process. We
appreciate the role of the African Union and the
regional economic communities in institution-building.
We believe that initiatives like the African Governance
Architecture and the African Peace and Security
Architecture help to maintain peace and security
while supporting the wider integration of the entire
continent. The challenge lies in maintaining a constant
commitment to these initiatives. It is important to
assure gradual transfer of responsibility to African
partners — also in the form of co-financing — and to
mobilize resources from external actors.
The inclusion of African women, youth and civil
society in the decision-making processes is important
for the advancement of peacebuilding efforts in the long
term. We welcome the acknowledgement by African
leaders of the role of women, youth and civil society in
Agenda 2063 and the declaration of the year 2016 as the
African Year of Human Rights with Particular Focus on
the Rights of Women.
With respect to the role of youth, let me stress
that education is essential to sustaining peace, as
it contributes to political, economic and social
transformations in society. That is why Poland has
provided financial support in recent years to educational
48/65

28/07/2016

projects in various African countries, including
Ethiopia and South Sudan.
Building the capacities of military forces and
local police, establishing a credible justice system
and fighting corruption should be high on our list of
priorities. Experience gained from various crisismanagement missions and operations indicates that
training of police and military forces should be
accompanied by proper equipment support.
It is important to strengthen the activity of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund. In this regard, we welcome the
initiative of organizing the high-level conference for
the Peacebuilding Fund under the theme “Invest in
Sustaining Peace”, to be held on 21 September 2016
on the margins of the General Assembly’s upcoming
general debate.
Much has been said today about Africa’s unique
features with regard to peacebuilding. In light of this,
I would like to conclude by expressing our confidence
that building sustained peace on the African continent
is possible, mostly thanks to the open-mindedness,
creativity and tremendous optimism of the proud
African people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important open debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
their comments.
Considered against the historical injustices
of colonialism, apartheid and other obstacles to
development, the progress in Africa has been no
small feat. By establishing democracy, rule of law and
institutions that serve citizens, a number of African
countries have fared well. Where political dialogue,
reconciliation and coexistence have been embraced,
gradual stability has led to strong economic progress.
Indeed, as in other parts of the world, Africa is not
alone in dealing with conflicts. But just as in other
situations, it is paramount that parties be supported
fully in resolving their disputes peacefully. It is also
vital that the United Nations and other partners assist
affected countries effectively in their capacity-building
and broader peacebuilding, in line with their nationally
identified priorities. The national ownership of their
peacebuilding and development is crucial.
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.7750

As a country that has itself navigated its path from
autocracy and instability to democracy, rule of law,
equitable development, harmony and a vibrant and
resilient economy, Indonesia knows well the imperative
of peacemaking and a fully owned national undertaking
for sustainable peace and development. Indonesia is
heartened that Africa stands resolutely for honouring
the desires and aspirations of African people. Many
courageous African leaders are working diligently
to bring peace and prosperity and to end discord and
poverty. They tireless in their fight against disease,
hunger, poor governance, corruption and extremism
and to hasten their citizens’ enjoyment of the rewards
of democracy.

to do so. Currently, 1,537 Indonesian troops and
police are participating in eight United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa: the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan, the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
and the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara.

We are also pleased that, just as in our own region
of South-East Asia, where the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations plays a critical rote, the African Union
(AU) has been a strong force for dialogue, peaceful
conflict resolution and cordial relations among African
countries. The African leaders’ declaration to achieve a
conflict-free Africa — a key pillar of the visionary AU
Agenda 2063 — is commendable. Indonesia supports
the five thematic priorities of the new AU Peace and
Security Architecture Roadmap 2016-2020. We also
congratulate African Governments on the outcome of
the twenty-seventh AU Summit. The operationalization
of the Peace Fund, which also fulfils Africa’s
commitment to finance 25 per cent of the cost of AU
peace support operations, is yet another concrete sign of
Africa’s determination to build embrace peacebuilding.
The United Nations and the international community
must also robustly play their roles to further assist
African countries and the AU in ushering in peace and
well-being.

My delegation hopes that the intergovernmental
momentum generated in the wake of the review of
United Nations peace operations and peacebuilding and
the global study of resolution 1325 (2000) will also be
utilized to intensify efforts in prevention, mediation,
finding credible political solutions and deepening
partnerships with the AU and its mechanisms.Following
the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016), on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture, we look forward
to a more productive partnership of the Security
Council with the Peacebuilding Commission and
other relevant United Nations and non-United Nations
entities to advance more effective peacebuilding in
Africa. It is also our expectation that the Peacebuilding
Commission will, by learning from its previous work
and optimally using all provisions of the new and past
resolutions, enable more impactful peacebuilding in
African countries.

Since the convening of the Asian-African
Conference in Bandung more than six decades ago,
Indonesia has attached high importance to Africa. At
the Asian-African Summit in Indonesia last year, the
Asian and African leaders, reiterating the unshakable
historic bond between the two continents, formulated
important, comprehensive steps to bolster Africa in
achieving its aims.
Indonesia’s support to African countries will
always be there. Our bilateral cooperation and training
programmes for civilian capacity-building and other
fields will expand further. Our National Peacekeeping
Centre provides training in multidimensional
peacekeeping and peacebuilding to personnel from
a number of African countries and will continue

Finally, Indonesia would like to underscore the
need for a comprehensive approach that incorporates
peace and security, development, and human rights to
address the root causes of conflicts. The United Nations
system must see to it that these three concerns do not
exist in unbridgeable silos and that its response is
integrated, sustained and in accordance with the needs
of the affected peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): We welcome this discussion on
peacebuilding in Africa, which is of relevance not
only to the African continent but to all of us in our
interdependent world.
India has a long-standing engagement with Africa.
We have worked together on decolonization and against

16-2392749/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

apartheid and for the rights of developing countries and
are now significant development partners.
Indian contingents have served in 22 peacekeeping
missions in 16 African countries so far, including 6
countries at present. India has engaged actively in
international peace and security issues, including in the
Security Council. India remains the largest cumulative
troop contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts and has been a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission since its inception. We appreciate the
complexity of the changing nature of conflicts and the
challenges in conflict prevention and building peace.
India firmly believes that conflict prevention and
resolution must be primarily a political activity. Also,
peace and security cannot be seen in isolation from
the wider development-related issues. A more holistic
approach is needed to prevent conflict and build peace.
The Peacebuilding Commission has not been
taken seriously enough at the United Nations so far.
Its funding is completely inadequate — not even 1 per
cent of the peacekeeping budget. We need to empower
the Peacebuilding Commission through adequate
resources, capacities to gauge the requirements on the
ground and serious consideration by the Council of its
advice.
The recent adoption of resolutions by the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the issue of
sustaining peace reflects a growing recognition by the
international community of the long-term importance
of peacebuilding efforts, an aspect that is still not fully
grasped. We especially welcome the emphasis given to
the importance of sustainable development, economic
growth and enhanced funding.
Last year we finalized the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1),
thereby underscoring the importance of sustainable
development in building peace and security. Also last
year, the African Union adopted Agenda 2063, which
incorporates a similar vision of extensive strengthening
of institutions and capacities.
The spirit displayed during the adoption of the
SDGs has not, sadly, been matched in the discussions
on the collective mobilization of resources to achieve
our common goals. That once again demonstrates a
lack of appreciation that in today’s world there cannot
be islands of peace and prosperity. We can see this all
50/65

28/07/2016

around us in the cross-border reach of terrorist groups,
the growing refugee crisis, the outbreaks of pandemics
and the spread of hate ideologies.
In the past couple of decades, the African Union
(AU) and some African regional groups have undertaken
peacekeeping initiatives in about 20 conflicts within
Africa. Coordination between the Secuirty Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
has become institutionalized. Over the last decade,
several African countries have emerged as major
troop contributors. Six of the current top 10 troopcontributing countries (TCCs) are African, and Africa
today contributes the largest number of personnel
to peacekeeping. There are 38 African countries
providing half of all United Nations peacekeepers,
60 per cent of the international civilian peacekeepers
and 80 per cent of its national peacekeeping staff. That
is in addition to the participation in non-United Nations
peacekeeping operations by our African friends, which
accounts for several thousand more. We welcome those
developments, including the recent decision by the AU
to achieve greater self-reliance in terms of its peace and
security budget through a peace fund.
The AU, regional organizations and national
Governments in Africa are best placed to address most
of the challenges facing their region. However, it is the
responsibility of the international community, in our
collective interest, to strengthen their capabilities.
The huge success of the third India-Africa Forum
Summit of last October, in which all of our 54 African
partners participated, has taken our long-standing
and growing partnership to an even higher level. It
was reinforced by a series of visits to Africa by our
President, Vice President and Prime Minister in the
first half of this year. Our cooperation with Africa has
focused on sharing expertise and resources and helping
to build capacity as per their own priorities. Our areas of
cooperation include education and vocational training,
health care, women’s empowerment, constitutional
and parliamentary processes, digital connectivity for
tele-education and telemedicine, e-governance, clean
energy, agricultural productivity, agribusinesses,
climate change adaptation, disaster management, the
blue economy, maritime security, infrastructure and
trade, investment and technology linkages.
In the past five years, India has offered nearly 25,000
scholarships for more than 300 training programmes in
more than 60 institutions in Africa. In the past decade,
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

a total of nearly $9 billion in concessional credit was
approved for nearly 140 development projects in more
than 40 African countries, with special emphasis on the
least developed countries and small island developing
States partners.
The first-ever female formed police unit was
provided by India and deployed in Liberia. It was
recognized as a role model for pursuing gender
balance. Earlier this week, a course on United Nations
peacekeeping for African partners commenced in India
in cooperation with the Government of the United
States. It is aimed at assisting in building the capacities
of African TCCs to help regional efforts to maintain
peace and security.
All those efforts have played a part in assisting
Africa in building its own capacities in terms of human
resources, institutions, appropriate technologies,
infrastructure and employment opportunities. Many
of those efforts have been in countries emerging
from long periods of conflict. All such efforts help
to promote development, improve lives and build
peace and prosperity. What continues to elude us is a
real comprehension of the importance of sustainable
development in building peace and security and, even
more importantly, of the indivisibility of peace and
security across borders in today’s world. Without that
comprehension and consequently the political will to
address these issues over the longer term, conflicts will
continue to obstruct our collective better future.
Last week, India demonstrated its commitment
to the cause of peacebuilding in the United Nations
context by making a contribution of $1 million to the
Peacebuilding Fund. We hope that other partners will
come forward to commit resources, including at the
pledging conference on peacebuilding in September.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): As we approach the end of
the month, I would like to commend Japan for its able
leadership of the Security Council.
The peoples and nations on the continent of Africa
are among the most resilient on the planet. States,
communities and families across Africa have known
decades of poverty, civil war and ethnic conflict, but
they are determined to overcome those challenges.
They are driven by the hope of a continent at peace and
by the promise of a bright future. The State of Israel is

S/PV.7750

committed to partnering with our friends in Africa in
order to achieve not only stability and security, but also
prosperity.
In order to ensure sustainable growth that will
last for generations, the international community
must work together to build the kind of peace that will
last for generations. Resolution 2282 (2016) on the
peacebuilding architecture is an ambitious statement
that challenges us to rethink how we see peacebuilding.
A comprehensive approach must address all stages
of conflict — after, during and before. Therefore
peacebuilding must not wait until the fighting begins
to take action. Bringing an end to ongoing violence and
rebuilding communities post-conflict are important to
all of us. But we need to develop prevention capabilities
in order to avoid escalation and stop conflicts before
they even start. That will require acting on several
fronts.
First, now is the time to focus our resources to
build institutions on the ground that enable States to
sustain peace and resolve tensions before they lead
to conflict and violence. Secondly, we must promote
strong mechanisms for national reconciliation,
including justice and governance and focusing on
national ownership and inclusivity. Finally, we need
to understand that in our world today, the impact of
disease, terror and conflict is no longer limited to
any one region or any one people. They are collective
challenges that must be met by collective action.
Ensuring post-conflict stability requires the full and
active participation of all actors in society. We need to
empower local communities and encourage more women
to take part in peacebuilding and conflict resolution.
Israel believes that the inclusion of women is the key to
opening the door to a sustainable peace in Africa and
around the world. Every year, in cooperation with UNWomen, Mashav — Israel’s Agency for International
Development Cooperation — organizes a workshop for
African women on political empowerment of women.
The goal is to discuss the role of and opportunities
for women in peacebuilding, mediation and conflict
resolution. Participants from several of the countries on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission have been
trained by Mashav, in Israel and abroad, in courses
on various topics including community development,
women’s leadership and economic empowerment.
We are also proud to have played a role in fighting
the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Israel was the

16-2392751/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

largest donor per capita in the international effort to
end the deadly disease. That is part of our ongoing
commitment to help bring about a safer, more secure
future for the people of Africa. A few weeks ago, our
Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, went on an
historic visit to Africa, the first visit by an Israeli Prime
Minister to the continent in three decades. At the start
of his visit, Prime Minister Netanyahu declared that
“Israel is coming back to Africa and Africa is coming
back to Israel”.
Israel is committed to strengthening old ties in
Africa and building new partnerships for the twentyfirst century. I am proud to announce today that just
last week, the State of Israel established ties with the
Republic of Guinea, and our Governments have already
started to discuss the many ways our new partnership
can be beneficial for the people of Israel and the people
of Guinea. The State of Israel looks forward to working
together with Guinea and other African nations towards
pursuing a common agenda and building a common
future.
Africa is not only rich in natural resources, it is
also rich in human talent and energy and hope. By
mid-century, 37 per cent of the world’s children will live
in Africa. The continent’s future will be shaped by its
dynamic and vibrant youth, who are more empowered
and engaged than ever before. In order to unleash
that vast potential, we need a long-term, sustained
international effort to ensure that this generation of
young people enjoys a safe and secure tomorrow.
Israel is committed to our partnership with the
people and the nations of Africa to work together to
make that future a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I hank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s debate.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. In our national
statement, we will respond to the helpful concept note
(S/2016/586, annex) by outlining four high-priority
issues that we believe need to be addressed in order to
ensure effective peacebuilding in Africa.
First, we need to tackle the root causes of conflict.
We cannot talk seriously about promoting peace
without exploring the factors that threaten it in the first
instance. That was evident during the recent processes
52/65

28/07/2016

leading to the adoption of the peacebuilding resolutions
by the Security Council and the General Assembly,
as well as last year’s negotiations of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) — especially SDG 16.
The need to understand the drivers of conflict is
nowhere more present than in countries emerging from
crisis. In such cases, peace is at a stage of such fragility
that it is more easily destroyed than sustained. As we
in Ireland have seen through close engagement with
our partner countries such as Liberia and Sierra Leone,
multi-stakeholder conflict analyses must ensure that
peacekeeping mission drawdowns are backstopped by
the technical and financial support needed to build the
capacity of national institutions to sustain peace.
I am happy to say that we are moving in the
right direction. Last Tuesday in this Chamber (see
S/PV.7747), we heard the Permanent Representative
of the Central African Republic welcome the renewal
of the innovative mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, which is tailored to
specific national priorities. Moreover, a focus of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on transitional
settings and the provision of catalytic, post-conflict
funding through the Peacebuilding Fund has also
yielded very encouraging results. Those are the kind
of initiatives that we need to see more of if SDG 16 and
the objectives of the peacebuilding resolutions are to be
achieved.
A second high-priority issue is conflict
prevention. For many years, conflict prevention has
been underresourced and underevaluated. The case
of Burundi has reinforced for us the urgent need for
investment in conflict prevention. During this year
mediators in that country have dealt with roughly 430
cases a month, receiving requests for interventions
from community members, local authorities and, in
some cases, provincial governors.
The financial resources needed to empower a
mediator to intervene in one conflict are almost
inconsequential compared to the enormous costs
arising from dealing with the fallout of conflict after
it has escalated. Ireland has been pleased to support
such mediation through investment in the Global
Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action, which was called
for by the Global Study on resolution 1325 (2000).
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.7750

We also welcome the work already undertaken by
the current and past Chairs of the PBC in forging a
stronger role for the Commission in conflict prevention,
particularly through its potential for interaction with
the Security Council. We look to advance such progress
and explore how it can bolster other United Nations
activities, such as the Secretary-General’s Human
Rights Up Front initiative.

Not only must we break down silos so as to forge
a whole-of-United Nations approach to peacebuilding,
we must do that in a way that supports Africa’s own
policies and objectives. That is no mean feat, and we
welcome initiatives like today’s debate. They afford us
an opportunity to share experiences on how we have
been doing so far but, more importantly, to listen to
ideas on how we can do better.

Thirdly, as other speakers mentioned, we must
include youth and women. Thus far, we simply have
not done enough to include women and young people
in peacebuilding. The global study on resolution 1325
(2000) showed us that the inclusion of women in peace
processes has led to a 20 per cent increase in peace
agreements lasting at least two years, which rises to a
35 per cent increase over 15 years. We also saw at first
hand the crucial role for women in building peace on
our own island of Ireland. The lessons we learned have
informed our efforts to advance the women, peace and
security agenda both nationally and internationally and
have also been shared with partner countries, such as
Liberia.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.

The case for supporting the youth, peace and
security agenda is just as clear, particularly in Africa.
According to some sources, by the end of this century
almost one half of the world’s youth will be African.
Ireland is exploring ways to answer the call of the
peacebuilding resolutions to increase the participation
of youth in building peace in Africa, including through
our trade and development links.
Finally, we must prioritize African ownership of
Africa’s peacebuilding. There will be no peace in Africa
that is not led by Africans. Similarly, African economic
growth will only be sustainable if it is driven from
within. We firmly believe that efforts to strengthen the
United Nations peacebuilding engagement in Africa
will succeed only if they are designed and implemented
in full cooperation with African stakeholders and with
the full participation of all African States.
Increasingly, the strength of such collaboration is
being harnessed. Examples include the ground-breaking
partnership between the Peacebuilding Fund and the
AU Commission in Burundi, as well as the growing
focus of the PBC on building stronger ties with the AU
and African sub-regional organizations. Region-toregion initiatives, such as the Africa-EU partnership,
which can be seen in the form of the African Peace
Facility, are also encouraging.

Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on peacebuilding in
Africa.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. In addition, I wish to make several
remarks in my national capacity.
Where violent conflict breaks out, development
is arrested, and the impact, especially on the poor,
can be devastating. The recently adopted Sustainable
Development Goals have reinforced the consensus
within the international community that security, peace
and the rule of law are indispensable to sustainable
development. Key to the transition from conflict to
peace and sustainable development is an effective and
accountable system of security based on the rule of
law. The notion that security, development and the rule
of law are inextricably linked has resonated in United
Nations policies and debates for more than a decade. The
link between a responsive, effective and accountable
security sector, including through its reform, and
peace and stability is widely accepted among Member
States and experts alike, and has been acknowledged
repeatedly by the Security Council, including in its
resolution 2151 (2014).
On 21 June, the co-Chairs of the United Nations
Group of Friends of Security-Sector Reform, Slovakia
and South Africa, in cooperation with the United
Nations Security Sector Reform Task Force, along with
its secretariat and the Security Sector Reform Unit at
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, facilitated
a high-level dialogue on building support for key
security-sector reform priorities in the Central African
Republic. That event provided a unique platform for
a discussion among high-ranking representatives of
the Government of the Central African Republic, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Head of the United Nations Multidimensional

16-2392753/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, as well as representatives of key partners,
including the United Nations, the European Union, the
World Bank and bilateral donors.
The dialogue focused on two priorities. First,
speakers reflected on the elements of the national
security-sector reform process that are needed to
secure lasting peace and prevent a relapse into conflict.
Secondly, there was a focus on immediate and long-term
reform needs pertaining to security-sector institutions,
including the police, gendarmerie, military, and
relevant civilian control and oversight bodies. The role
of local communities and their capacity to meaningfully
participate in the provision of security and fulfil their
democratic oversight role were noted, as well.
In order to be an effective tool in peacebuilding,
security sector reform needs to be truly representative
of a State’s people. Particular emphasis was therefore
placed on the key elements of national ownership and
the importance of national responsibility and political
consensus in that regard. Throughout the high-level
dialogue, security sector reform was highlighted as
a key tool for preventing relapse into conflict and, as
such, the need for a strategic approach to security-sector
reform in the Central African Republic was stressed
by many speakers. In the coming days, the co-Chairs
will present the outcome of those deliberations to the
Secretary-General, the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the wider membership.
With the adoption of the two resolutions on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture (resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/268),
the Organization has taken a decisive step forward
and has generated promising momentum. Together,
we must now champion those changes and create a
peacebuilding architecture that will deliver on the
critical, ever-evolving peacebuilding tasks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Byaje (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, and your
delegation for organizing this important debate. Allow
me also to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Her
Excellency Ms. Amina Mohamed, Cabinet Secretary
for Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Kenya;
and His Excellency Ambassador Smail Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU), for their briefings.
54/65

28/07/2016

This debate is indeed timely in the light of the
numerous relapses and the two conflicts raging in our
beautiful continent, Africa. We therefore believe that
recommendations generated by discussions of this nature
can significantly contribute to the improvement and
streamlining of practices in peacebuilding and provide
stakeholders with adequate responses aimed at curbing
the proliferation of conflicts. The parallel reviews of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture — the
report of the Advisory Group of Experts (S/2015/490)
and the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) — and the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
coupled with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), afford the United Nations with the opportunity to
rethink how to adequately and strategically engage in
the effort to sustain peace.
If we look at the trajectory of my own country,
Rwanda, during the past 22 years — that of a failed
State in a post-conflict situation, which has become
one of the many contributors to peacekeeping
operations — we can rightly state that peacebuilding
is an important process, not only in dealing with the
aftermath of conflicts but also in laying the foundations
that sustain peace, thereby contributing to long-term
conflict prevention. However, as the recently concluded
review of the peacebuilding architecture has indicated,
peacebuilding is both a political and technical process
and the United Nations continues to struggle to close
critical gaps as it tries to apply existing top-down
technical strategies to the political realities on the
ground, which has led to its inability to fill the gaping
hole identified in 2005.
For countries on the Peacebuilding Commission’s
(PBC) agenda, as well as for other countries in which
peacebuilding activities are ongoing, the relapses into
conflict lead one to question whether local political
mechanisms, capacities and conflict dynamics have been
taken into account in the formulation of peacebuilding
programmes. The deteriorating developments in some
countries in Africa are, unfortunately, very concerning,
especially with regard to those that had achieved a
degree of progress earlier. There is a need for the
international community, in general, and the United
Nations, in particular, to adopt targeted post-conflict
measures that address the root causes of a particular
conflict, while, at the same time, respecting the
specificity of each situation.
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We share the views expressed in the concept
note (S/2016/586, annex) relating to how supporting
institution-building and ensuring national ownership
have helped to lay the foundation for sustainable peace.
We also believe that the processes of democratization,
the rule of law, unity and reconciliation, as well as
inclusive social economic development, help to build a
society resilient to conflict and should be viewed as key
pillars when addressing the root causes of conflicts.
It is regrettable, however, to note that the Council
tends to react more to ongoing conflict rather than deal
effectively with vital aspects such as prevention. While
other United Nations specialized agencies have played
a greater role in those areas, the Security Council
could still play a more proactive role, especially in
countries on its agenda and/or where peace operations
have been deployed. In that respect, the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts summarily concluded
that sustaining peace is not a peripheral activity for
the United Nations, but a core task implicit in the
Charter of the United Nations, which should be applied
across the whole United Nations spectrum. The report
further states, in its conclusion, that the Peacebuilding
Commission needs to be revitalized so as to increase
its ability to better support efforts to find sustainable
and durable solutions. Those include the enhancement
of its advisory and coordination role, the marshalling
of resources and continued advocacy on behalf of the
countries on its agenda, as well as acting as a bridge
between the principal organs of the United Nations,
including the Council.
We therefore call for continued advocacy on behalf
of the countries on the agenda and deem it imperative
to help underscore the political and socioeconomic
progress made to attract assistance and/or investment
aligned with national priorities. However, such priorities
cannot materialize without predictable and sustainable
financing. It is deplorable to note that in some of the
countries on the agenda, many of the peacebuilding
projects have either collapsed or failed owing to the
absence of a sustained funding model, as many of them
had short financing cycles that could not be pursued
beyond the immediate aftermath of the conflict. To
offset this problem, we hope to see a more enhanced
and more flexible Peacebuilding Fund playing a greater
role in this regard.
Despite the challenges in specific country
configurations, we are nonetheless encouraged by the
efforts deployed by the country-specific configuration

S/PV.7750

Chairs, particularly the increased number of
visits to countries on the agenda to interact with
various stakeholders. These practices could provide
opportunities to increase awareness of the situation at
hand and where necessary contribute to the accuracy
of the information at the disposal of the United Nations
that could lead to taking appropriate action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I wish to thank
Japan for having convened this open debate, which is
extremely pertinent and timely.
A large number of African countries continue to
struggle with cycles of poverty and refugee issues as a
result of conflicts that have undermined socioeconomic
development efforts and afflict millions of men, women
and children. The international community must take
a stand and face this challenge. The continuous effort
to implement sustainable peace in Africa has to be a
common endeavour.
The peacebuilding concept introduced at the
United Nations in 1992 remains to be fully developed.
The recent review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture represented important progress. By
extending the scope of peacebuilding to encompass
every stage, from conflict prevention to post-conflict
reconstruction, it has shown that peace can be better
preserved if it is understood as an integrated and
systemic concept that goes beyond the mere cessation
of hostilities. In fact, only by jointly engaging the three
pillars of the United Nations and avoiding silos can the
peacebuilding approach succeed.
Africa has been at the heart of the United
Nations peacebuilding system since its inception.
African countries are currently the sole focus of
the Peacebuilding Commission’s (PBC) agenda and
therefore the main beneficiaries of the Peacebuilding
Fund. They are also the primary recipients of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. At the same time, and
this is seldom underlined, Africa has reason to be a
central actor in terms of peace and stability both inside
its borders and at the global level. Africa is a contributor
of about half of the total number of peacekeepers
deployed worldwide. Africa has developed the African
Peace and Security Architecture, a unified structure at
the continental scale endowed with peace-consolidation
instruments.

16-2392755/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Africa has a number of regional institutions that
go beyond economic integration to focus also on
peace and security, and Africa has proved to be a
pre-eminent security provider, developing a number
of important peacekeeping operations, increasingly
through partnerships between the African Union (AU)
and other international stakeholders, including the
European Union.
In this regard, the African continent and the
European Union have set up a strategic partnership
enshrined in the joint Africa–European Union strategy
adopted in Lisbon in 2007. This partnership of equals
is unique among its kind in terms of its dimension, its
strategic scope and its ambitious goals. The partnership
has already produced tangible outcomes that are visible
in terms of not only conflict prevention and resolution,
but also in bridging post-conflict reconstruction
and incentives to deal with the underlying causes of
strife, particularly in the field of good governance,
accountability and sustainable development.
If we take stock of the evolution of Africa in
recent years as concerns peace, security and economic
development, we have to conclude that the progress made
is quite remarkable. Inter-State warfare has declined
and economic prospects have steadily increased,
despite sluggish world growth and commodity-price
volatility. Nevertheless, it is also true that the continent
still faces major unresolved challenges. Devastating
conflicts endure and the incidence of relapses into
conflict remain worryingly high.
One of the main principles that should underpin
our common endeavour is that sustaining peace and
preventing the recurrence of conflict should not be seen
as requiring exogenous solutions to African problems
but as a joint effort between African countries and
the international community, essential for the full
ownership and effective sustainability of the solutions
to be found.
As an active member of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Portugal knows full well the important role that the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture plays in
supporting peace and stability in African countries
and in keeping them on the international agenda.
The Senegalese Minister this morning referred to the
crucial role that the Economic Community of West
African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau is playing
in that country and the importance of EU support in
56/65

28/07/2016

this regard. This is a good example of what we can do
jointly. But the Guinea-Bissau experience also tells
us that the responsibility of African States to provide
peacebuilding efforts in their own jurisdictions cannot
and should not be diluted.
The United Nations should increasingly engage
with the relevant African regional and subregional
organizations in a spirit of partnership and
complementarity of efforts and resources. We should
not only derive profit from the existing structures
implemented by the African Peace and Security
Architecture but also strive to enhance the capabilities
of the regional economic communities and other
relevant regional mechanisms, many of which have
developed security and early-warning instruments.
In this respect, initiatives such as the joint United
Nations–AU framework for enhanced partnership
in peace and security or the recent, inaugural direct
funding provided by the PBC to the AU Commission to
support human rights observation in Burundi may well
be the way forward. The principle of African ownership
should also direct our attention to the importance of
the local and community level in peacebuilding efforts.
Academic studies and political practice coincide in
identifying the root of lasting peace and social stability
in the political foundations and public culture of the
society. If local communities and civil society are not
centrally engaged in a peacebuilding intervention, it
will surely face the risk of bearing the taint of political
illegitimacy. No strategy to address the drivers of
violent conflict can be disconnected from the general
framework of sustainable development. It therefore
needs to be framed by the United Nations Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1) Goals, in articulation with African
blueprints connecting peace, security and development,
such as the African Union’s Agenda 2063. It also means
that greater attention should be paid to the processes
of transitional justice in the aftermath of clashes
with a strong ethnic or communitarian component.
The promotion of healing and reconciliation is key to
minimizing the risks of relapse into conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I congratulate Japan
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I thank Japan for organizing this
open debate on peacebuilding in Africa. I would also
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

like to thank the Secretary-General, Cabinet Secretary
Amina Mohamed and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security for their insightful briefings on
the initiatives at the continental and regional levels in
Africa.
At the outset, let me convey the apologies of the
Honourable Samura M. W. Kamara, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, for his absence due to unavoidable
circumstances.
On behalf of the President and the Government of
Sierra Leone, I would like to register the deep gratitude
of my delegation to this Council for the support and
assistance rendered to Sierra Leone in sustaining hardwon peace and security. I wish to take this opportunity to
also express our profound appreciation to the members
of the Sierra Leone Configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission through the Chair, Ambassador MarcAndré Blanchard of Canada, for his relentless advocacy
and for demonstrating strong support in the pursuit of
peace, security and stability in Sierra Leone.
Resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262, both unanimously adopted in April,
demonstrate quite clearly our collective commitment
towards a comprehensive approach to transitional
justice and an accountable security sector. Both of
these are prerequisites for consolidating peace and
reducing poverty, as well as for preventing countries
from relapsing into conflict.
In June, we were honoured to receive in Sierra Leone
the presence of Ambassador Macharia Kamau, Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and his team on a factfinding visit. We were heartened by his inspiring words
and his comments concerning the remarkable progress
Sierra Leone has made, especially in identifying and
resolving tensions and threats of potential conflicts.
It is a fact that Africa has made tremendous efforts
in strengthening its capacity to prevent and resolve
conflicts. However, it is imperative that we, the United
Nations, maintain the global solidarity required to
continue to develop Africa’s capacity in preventive
diplomacy. We need cooperative and coordinated true
partnerships to strengthen capacities in order to ensure
that we can respond better to tensions and threats of
conflict.
This year marks 14 years since the conflict in
Sierra Leone was officially declared over. Since then,
with the support of the United Nations, we have made
outstanding progress in charting the path for a peaceful,

S/PV.7750

secure, democratic Sierra Leone. We have also reduced
our international risk profile as a post-conflict country
and, in turn, increased confidence for foreign direct
investment.
Sierra Leone has made the transition from a nearfailed State on the agenda of the Security Council to
a nation that is regarded as a storehouse of lessons on
how to successfully move away from war to peace, from
despair to hope. Since the closure of the peacekeeping
mission, Sierra Leone has made considerable progress
in identifying and resolving tensions and threats of
potential conflict, in monitoring and promoting human
rights, and in consolidating a series of good governance
reforms. We have learned through the painful lessons
and no longer bear the stigma of being a blood-diamond
nation.
Preserving these gains and achieving the
country’s sustainable development objectives require
an unshakable and never-ending commitment to
consolidating and empowering our democratic
institutions. Sierra Leone remains committed to a
strong partnership with the United Nations system
and the donor community. We urge the international
community to continue to invest in the achievement
of our economic development. We ask for support
for our poverty-reduction strategy — the Agenda for
Prosperity, which is anchored on the New Deal that is
championed by the g7+ States.
The Government of Sierra Leone is mindful
of the challenges of the twin shocks of the Ebola
virus — recently vanquished — and of the shock
of the drop in commodity prices. Accordingly, we
have maintained, we have harmonized, the povertyreduction strategy with the promotion of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the post-Ebola recovery
strategy. On the basis of lessons learned, and the lessons
that we continue to learn in Sierra Leone, let me make
a few observations.
Sierra Leone is aware of the critical need to ensure
fair and transparent institutions that would prevent
relapse into conflict and ensure sustainable peace.
Institutions such as anticorruption commissions must
be consolidated and strengthened with true national
ownership and meaningful inclusiveness. An integrated
and coordinated approach to peacebuilding is required
to ensure the catalytic support of all national processes,
sustainable development priorities and economic
revitalization.

16-2392757/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Sustaining peace must be every citizen’s business
and should therefore continue to be at the core of the
work of the United Nations system. Women must be
fully included in all peacebuilding processes. Women,
as has been learned, can play an important role in
ensuring that peace processes are kept on track and
reach their successful conclusions. Women can also
play a role in governance and economic recovery. It is
quite simple — a nation that empowers its women is a
nation that empowers itself.
The capacity of the State should be built to create
an enabling environment for the private sector, which
would lead to the growth we all want. It is important
that all citizens benefit from that growth.
Finally, we also recognize the fact that building
the necessary alliances at the subregional and regional
levels is important to ensure that transnational criminal
activities such as drug trafficking, illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons and mercenary activities are
curtailed. Sierra Leone fully subscribes to the call
contained in the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490) that better coordination between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
is desirable. The two institutions must work together
in a more focused manner, utilizing their comparative
strengths.
The Peacebuilding Fund has proven itself to
be an essential instrument of support of critical
peacebuilding processes in many post-conflict areas
and communities. However, unpredictable, inadequate
and fragmented financing for peacebuilding continues
to impede the effectiveness and consistency of
critical catalytic interventions. We must all support
the pledging conference for the Peacebuilding Fund
to be held in September and respond positively. The
Peacebuilding Commission must also be supported,
together with the Peacebuilding Support Office. In
particular, the Peacebuilding Support Office should not
be left to scramble for funds, resources and personnel.
If we believe in the cause of peace, we must invest in
the cause of peace.
In conclusion, the Government of Sierra Leone
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to promoting
sustainable peace and security within its borders and
reaffirms its resolve in advocating and promoting
peace in the subregion. Sierra Leone and its people
have embarked on a journey from fragility to stability.
58/65

28/07/2016

The Government of Sierra Leone believes that with the
commitment and support of its partners, Sierra Leone
and Africa can develop the necessary institutional
resilience to create, embed, deepen and sustain the
peace we all desire.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Ms. Gaudey (Ethiopia): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on peacebuilding in Africa in connection
with the agenda item “Peacebuilding and sustainable
peace”. For obvious reasons, this agenda item is
critical to the African continent. Our region is one of
the most conflict-affected continents in the world and
a place where the United Nations deploys the highest
percentage of its peacekeepers. Over 70 per cent of the
Security Council’s agenda items concern Africa and
all the countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission are African.
My special thanks goes to Her Excellency
Ms. Amina Mohammed and His Excellency Mr. Smai1
Chergui for taking part in this important meeting and
for the briefings that they presented so eloquently. My
delegation fully endorses those statements. Let me also
join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing.
It is safe to say that the 2015 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, which led to the
adoption on 27 April of the identical General Assembly
resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution
2282 (2016) on the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, was a significant achievement. The next
big challenge is going to be sustaining and further
expanding that political momentum and implementing
the review’s key recommendations, especially those
parts that pertain to Africa.
The primary step for translating the words of the
resolutions into action involves strong partnerships
and coordination. In order to sustain peace in Africa,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) should build
stronger links with the African Union and the
subregional organizations and enable them to exercise
their comparative advantages and play complementary
roles in a coherent manner. In that regard, the United
Nations has to devise its peacebuilding strategies in
a manner that supports and complements Africa’s
own peacebuilding efforts such as the Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework and the
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

African Solidarity Initiative. The African Union and
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture have
much to learn and benefit from each other’s approaches
and experience, and from seeking greater synergy,
cooperation and complementarity. At this juncture, we
would like to add our support for the proposal made by
Mr. Chergui for the Peacebuilding Commission and the
African Union Commission to develop a 10-year joint
strategy to enhance the peace dividends in Africa.
Secondly, the mindset that equates peacebuilding
with a mere post-conflict process has to change for
good. Sustaining peace requires the determination to
address the root causes of conflicts. It is critical that
we adopt comprehensive and integrated approaches that
tackle the challenges of peace, security, human rights,
good governance and development in a holistic manner.
The United Nations engagement with the continent
should be more strategic and focus on activities that
are essential for sustainable development and poverty
eradication. We need to strengthen the links between
United Nations peacebuilding efforts, the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), as they provide blueprints for addressing root
causes and drivers of violent conflict.
Whatever we profess will achieve no significant
result unless we are ready to implement what we say
and address the obstacles facing efforts to ensure
predictable and sustained funding for peacebuilding
activities. Peacebuilding efforts in Africa have
been significantly hindered by the ad hoc nature of
financing, which is often directed towards emergency
responses. Therefore, addressing the unpredictability
and inadequacy of peacebuilding funds and resources
is the main task, and our concerted efforts are required
to prevent the outbreak, escalation and recurrence of
conflict in Africa.
In that regard, we look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the General Assembly at its next
session on options to increase, restructure and better
prioritize funding allocated to peacebuilding activities,
including through assessed contributions. We also must
look into other means of funding, including through
cooperation with multilateral financial institutions,
such as the World Bank and the African Development
Bank, engagement with the private sector, and
maximizing effective domestic resource mobilization
capacity.

S/PV.7750

Let me conclude by urging Member States to
sustain and increase the political momentum gained and
to make every effort to ensure lasting peace in Africa.
Strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is vital in that regard.
Let us, therefore, strategize our peacebuilding efforts
in Africa alongside the Post-Conflict Reconstruction
and Development Framework; the African Solidarity
Initiative; African Union’s goal of Silencing the Guns
initiative for a conflict-free Africa by 2020; the African
Peace and Security Architecture 2016-2020 Roadmap;
the African Union’s Agenda 2063; and the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): The Bangladesh
delegation wishes to congratulate the Japanese
delegation for its successful presidency of the Council
this month. We also appreciate this initiative to focus
on peacebuilding in Africa and the detailed concept
note (S/2016/586, annex) prepared for that purpose.
The Secretary General’s Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture gave,
in its report last year (S/2015/490), due emphasis to
reorienting our thoughts on peacebuilding based on the
experience and knowledge gathered through work in
Africa over the past decade. It was perhaps only logical
that the nearly identical resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly (resolution 70/262) and the Security
Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) on the peacebuilding
architecture review earlier this year devoted particular
attention to further streamlining and energizing the
United Nations peacebuilding activities in Africa.
Against that backdrop, it is encouraging to
follow the good tidings from the African Union (AU)
with regard to the further sharpening of its focus on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace under the aegis of
the African peace and security architecture. In parallel,
several initiatives are afoot to accelerate the pace of
regional and subregional economic integration for
sustainable development in Africa. The convergence of
such priorities between the AU and the United Nations
makes it particularly good news for peacebuilding,
which will gain further momentum, especially in the
conflict-affected least-developed xountries presently
on the Peacebuilding Commission’s (PBC) agenda.
It is important to recognize that the United Nations
peacebuilding work in Africa over the past ten years

16-2392759/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

has been critical in reaching consensus on the notion of
sustaining peace. The agreed definition of sustaining
peace justifiably broadens the traditional and rather
restrictive notion of peacebuilding, and underscores
the importance of sustained political accompaniment
across the entire spectrum of conflicts, including
relapses into conflict. We stress that that notion should
be duly acknowledged by all principal organs of the
United Nations and all other relevant stakeholders in
order to give peacebuilding a real chance to deliver
on its potential in national, regional and multilateral
contexts. In that connection, we wish to reiterate the
importance that we attach to five critical issues.
First, the centrality of national ownership and
leadership in peacebuilding must be valued and
preserved, including in all affected African countries.
It is of paramount importance to foster an environment
for inclusive peacebuilding in which a diverse set of
national actors with legitimate voices and interest have
the opportunity to participate and contribute.
Secondly, we feel encouraged to see some positive,
ongoing efforts within the United Nations, including
on the ground, to break down the silos in sustaining
peace. It must remain a constant preoccupation for
the PBC, through its convening and advisory roles,
to further consolidate such efforts, particularly those
aimed at bringing the security and development actors
closer together without undermining their respective
mandates and competence. The PBC’s country-specific
configurations have certain good practices in that
regard that can be suitably replicated or scaled up
across the system.
Thirdly, we welcome the upswing in the PBC’s
interaction with the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, especially in Africa, and its growing
focus on regional, cross-cutting issues. The PBC’s
value-added work can seek to make a difference
in addressing various relevant and emerging
issues of concern, including the seminal task of
institution-building. In that context, we recognize the
important work being done by Japan on viable and
long-term institution-building in countries emerging
from or at risk of conflict.
Fourthly, the PBC’s gender strategy and discussions
on young people’s role in peacebuilding are valuable
contributions to promoting the inclusive agenda of
sustaining peace. We look forward to the expected
adoption of the gender strategy in September, which we
60/65

28/07/2016

believe can be a useful contribution to advancing the
women, peace and security agenda, including in Africa.
Fifthly, and perhaps most importantly, the issue of
financing for peacebuilding remains a major stumbling
block to reaching its potential. We hope the unequivocal
emphasis on increased, predictable and sustainable
financing in this year’s peacebuilding architecture
resolutions will help garner sufficient political support
towards mobilizing much-needed resources, including
for the Peacebuilding Fund. We look forward to creative
ideas from the Secretary-General on mobilizing
finances, factoring in both assessed and voluntary
contributions. The underfunded mechanisms within the
African Union also merit the international community’s
added attention.
Bangladesh remains an ardent believer in
peacebuilding and will continue to remain engaged in
further strengthening the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, with particular focus on Africa. Our
Government has recently taken an initiative, with the
assurance of support by the Japanese Government, to
establish a peacebuilding centre in Dhaka. We believe
the centre will add to regional and international efforts
in this regard through substantive research and training
activities. We invite interested partners from Africa
and elsewhere to come forward in making this initiative
a success.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): Uganda’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs, the Honourable Sam Kutesa, sends
his sincere apologies for not attending this open debate
due to previously planned national obligations that
required his presence. However, he is with us in spirit,
and I deliver this statement at his behest. Our mission
appreciates Japan’s convening of this open debate and
its promotion of peace and development in Africa. As a
country located between the Great Lakes and the Horn
of Africa regions, Uganda fully appreciates the theme
of this open debate.
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
mandates the Organization to maintain international
peace and security and, inter alia, to take collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace. Indeed, the Security Council is mandated to
follow up on the latter part of the Article, and it is doing
so by hosting this open debate, as we are witnessing
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

today. Today’s global turmoil could lead one to conclude
that the world is experiencing its most unstable period.
However, the actual reality is that the overwhelming
majority of national and international relations are
being conducted peacefully. For instance, there
are more democracies in the world now than there
have been at any other time in human history, it is
wealthier, and there are more educated people living
longer lives. Crucially, enabling social, political and
economic architectures and infrastructures exist in
those countries and regions where peace prevails. For
instance, in North America, there has been no war for
the last century because its countries have evolved
democratic, inclusive and competitive political systems
and trade freely among themselves.
Critically, the United States, as a super-Power,
guarantees North America’s security. Similarly, in
Europe, the creation of the United Nations — coupled
with the victorious Allied Powers’ avoidance of the
vindictive approach to Germany adopted after the First
World War — consolidated the peace. Other contributing
factors include the balance of terror between the world’s
two main military powers, the benefits derived from
the Marshall Plan that reconstructed Western Europe,
and the creation of the present-day European Union,
which within the context of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, has enabled European countries to access
each other’s markets without resorting to war, as was
the case in the past.
Even in today’s Africa, our reality is not all
characterized by doom and gloom because, for the
first time in many years, with the exception of Western
Sahara, the people of Africa have achieved their
self-determination, as required by the Charter of the
United Nations. That is a prerequisite for sustained
peace. Today, unlike in the 1960s, when military coups
were the order of the day, most African countries are
democracies, meeting another vital requirement of
sustained peace.
Regional integration is another important
dimension. Africa has some of the most vibrant
regional integration entities on this planet, such as the
East African Community, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Southern African
Development Community. These entities structurally
entrench peace and development. Even socially and
economically, Africa is on the rise. Recent statistics
from the African Development Bank indicate that the

S/PV.7750

continent currently raises up to $450 billion annually as
domestic revenue, while external funding amounts to
approximately $50 billion annually. This positive trend
points towards sustained peace on this continent.
One instance of the continent’s sustained economic
transformation and development is the investment by
the Dangote Group, an African private sector company,
of $15 billion in the construction of one of the biggest
oil refineries in the world in Nigeria. The aim is to
address fuel shortages in Nigeria and West Africa. The
refinery will be refining up to 650,000 barrels of crude
oil a day, and it is expected to create approximately
100,000 much-needed jobs.
This is not a stand-alone African development. With
funding from China’s Export-Import Bank, a standard
gauge railway line is being built to connect East Africa,
Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda and South Sudan to the sea
and world trade, at an estimated cost of $3.8 billion.
Uganda and Tanzania will soon begin construction
of a 1,400-kilometre oil pipeline from Uganda’s oil
belt in Hoima to the Indian Ocean port of Tanga, in
collaboration with the French Total oil company. The
investment amounts to at least $4 billion.
Within this exceedingly vibrant region, this is
not all. Unfortunately, time does not permit me to
discuss the other stories from the region and elsewhere
in southern Africa and other parts of the continent.
However, the point to note is that Africa is on the move
and full of promise for its people and the world. Cases
of persistent conflict on the continent have not been
been due to inexplicably bad luck. Their causes can be
scientifically explained and ideas and efforts can be
contributed to the process of finding and implementing
a solution.
For instance, colonialism, the arbitrary partition of
Africa, internal militarism and Cold War rivalry and
manipulation were key in precipitating the collapse of
the Somali State. Furthermore, we all vividly recall
the causes of the current crisis in Libya. Similarly, the
conflict in South Sudan is no accident. Colonial and
post-colonial marginalization over the last century
before its self-determination firmly laid the foundation
for this tragedy. If we are to resolve the conflicts that
exist in Africa, we do not need to reinvent the wheel.
Let us draw from the best practices elsewhere and
adopt and adapt them accordingly in South Sudan, the
Central African Republic, Libya and Somalia.

16-2392761/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

There will be a need to avoid quick-fix solutions, as
these may do more harm than good in the final analysis.
The Security Council should apply a consultative
approach to resolving the crises in these countries, for in
order to achieve durable peace, we must craft legitimate
political solutions. Consultations must therefore have
the support of the legitimate leaders of these countries.
We need to create armed forces that are effective and
yet fully subordinate to the legimitate civil authorities.
These countries have a rich natural endowment.
The international community should enable their
citizens to benefit from those resources through
policies that promote economic productivity and social
and economic transformation. Africa is an emerging
and vibrant market with plenty of potential to offer its
people and the world community. The international
community should follow the lead of China, the Obama
Administration in the United States, Japan and other
economies by investing in the interesting economic
prospects we have in Africa, for our mutual benefit.
Doing so will consolidate sustained peace on this
continent and in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

28/07/2016

areas of trade and investment, peace and security,
rural development, empowerment of young people
and women, infrastructure and transportation. In this
framework, we allocated $300,000 last year to support
the Eastern African Standby Force and the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture.
Regional endeavours within Africa should be
encouraged and supported by the international
community. The decision by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the African Union on 18 July
in relation to the African Union’s peace and security
budget constitutes an important step in this regard.
This is also in line with the African Union’s principle
of “African solutions to African problems”.
I would also like to share a few examples of
Turkey’s concrete action in favour of peacebuilding
in Africa. Turkey hosted the National Independent
Electoral Commission of Somalia in 2015 for an
event that featured experience-sharing and capacitybuilding. The delegation also had the chance to observe
the Turkish general elections of November 2015. In
addition, Turkey provided financial assistance to the
National Election Commission of Burkina Faso in 2015.

The impact of global challenges to Africa has been
profound due to the lack of institutional capacity and
resilience in many parts of the continent. The challenges
are of a transnational character, so our response needs
to be holistic. With this understanding, the United
Nations has acknowledged, through General Assembly
resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282
(2016) of 27 April, the importance of peacebuilding
efforts at the national, regional and international levels
and of addressing all phases of the conflict cycle. I
would like to stress the necessity of implementing these
resolutions with a special emphasis on Africa.

We have also been providing training to the
military personnel of African countries. By the end of
2014, some 2,202 African personnel received training
in Turkey. The number of trainees in these programmes
has increased significantly in recent years, reaching
to 600 in 2015. The Turkish International Cooperation
and Coordination Agency established a vocational
training centre in the Sudan, which graduates over 300
technicians every year. Similar centres are planned
for other African countries. We also share knowledge
on protecting and promoting small- and medium-size
enterprises with least developed countries in Africa. In
this regard, a unit of the Turkish Small and Medium
Business Development and Support Administration
organizes training programmes and field trips to
Turkey for its African counterparts.

Turkey provides personnel and contributes
financially to seven of the existing nine peacekeeping
missions in Africa and takes part in five out of six
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission. In addition, since 2011, we have
co-chaired the Horn of Africa Working Group within
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum with the European
Union. Since 2008, Turkey has been providing financial
assistance to the African Union for projects in the

The Turkish-Sudanese Hospital with a 150-bed
capacity was opened in 2014 in Nyala, Darfur, and
the Turkey-Somalia Hospital with a 200-bed capacity
was opened in January 2015 in Mogadishu. These
training and research hospitals are jointly run with
the local authorities. The Turkish Ministry of Health
has initiated a project for creating a nationwide patient
database in 20 sub-Saharan African countries. The
$3-million project, to be implemented over the next four

Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Like many of my predecessors,
Mr. President, I thank you for organizing today’s
meeting.

62/65

16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

years, consists of establishing the system, training the
health personnel and providing consultancy services.
Furthermore, Turkey has been providing a substantial
number of higher education scholarships to African
students. There are currently 5,500 students in higher
education and 116 visiting professors from African
countries currently residing in Turkey.
International efforts in peacebuilding in Africa
should be scaled up since some countries of the continent
will have elections this year and in 2017. During this
delicate process, the international community cannot
allow the recurrence of conflicts and humanitarian
tragedies. Turkey will continue to assist Africa in its
efforts to overcome the existing difficulties.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union. However, I would like to deliver the following
remarks in my national capacity as the representative
of Cyprus.
First of all, I wish to thank the Japanese presidency
of the Security Council for convening today’s important
meeting and for circulating a very useful concept note
(S/2016/586, annex).
Africa continues to be the priority with respect
to peacebuilding activities. Nonetheless, it is very
difficult indeed to talk about peacebuilding in Africa
as a unitary object, due to the diverse challenges with
which the continent is faced. While some States are
peaceful, secure and growing, others are in the process
of institution- and capacity-building following their
emergence from long conflicts, whereas many others
remain plagued by various problems such as violent
extremism, conflict, poverty and inequality.
There is no simple or single answer to these
challenges. Based on its own experience, Cyprus
firmly believes that nationally-owned processes
provide the best responses to existing and potential
crises, as national ownership can reflect the interests
and needs of local populations. Inclusiveness is also
key to advancing national peacebuilding processes
and objectives in order to ensure that the needs of all
segments of society are taken into account, and we
stress that civil society can play an important role in
advancing efforts to sustain peace.

S/PV.7750

In this regard, it is crucial for the international
community to support multidimensional national and
regional strategies, addressing political, security and
developmental aspects. Priority should be given to the
regional dimension of building sustainable peace, as
well as providing a platform to promote the perspectives
of regional actors, most notably the African Union.
Cyprus welcomes the call made in both recent United
Nations review processes on peacebuilding and
peacekeeping for greater United Nations cooperation
with the African Union, and we firmly believe that such
enhanced cooperation could significantly contribute to
the prevention of the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict.
As peacebuilding encompasses a wide range of
political, development and human rights programmes
and mechanisms, it is of critical importance for the
international community to assist Africa in its efforts
to implement the Sustainable Development Goals and
targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1) and promote poverty eradication, social
development, national reconciliation and unity through
inclusive dialogue and mediation, accountability, good
governance, democracy, accountable institutions,
gender equality and respect for and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
Last but not least, we underscore the importance of
African women’s enhanced participation in all efforts
aimed at maintaining and promoting peace and security
and the need to increase their role in decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and resolution and
peacebuilding. It is equally significant to consider ways
to increase meaningful and inclusive participation of
African young people in peacebuilding efforts.
I thank you once again, Mr. President, for this
important and timely initiative that today’s meeting
represents, which Cyprus fully supports, both in its
national capacity and through its membership in the
European Union. Supporting peacebuilding in Africa
is a large part of our collective efforts to sustain peace
and security and promote development and prosperity
for the benefit of all of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to warmly congratulate Japan both for the choice
of this highly important topic, which offers us today
the opportunity to respond to the substantial question

16-2392763/65

S/PV.7750

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of how institution-building can consolidate peace and
prevent a relapse into conflict, and for its successful
chairmanship of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
Working Group on Lessons Learned.
It is precisely one of the first lessons learned
that good governance and strong and accountable
institutions are essential for easing tensions, reducing
poverty and having a positive impact on development.
The development of a democratic process based on
strong democratic institutions whose workings function
properly, as well as on sound knowledge and respect for
the rule of law and human rights, is a key determinant of
the failure or success of any post-conflict State-building
project after a conflict or any political transition. Strong
institutions are the basis of the restoration of trust
between the State and the citizen, which is the sine qua
non for anchoring the country in lasting peace. Citizens’
confidence in the ability of the State to defend the
common good is an equally fundamental prerequisite
for the establishment of the rule of law, which is not
only an instrument of Government, but a principle to
which all society, including the Government, is bound
to advance democracy.
There is no State without authority, workers,
politicians or civil servants. If the State wants to regain
the trust of citizens, it must be accessible and near at
hand. It should be able to offer justice and to be the
sovereign guarantor of social cohesion and guardian
of the integrity of its territory. As a multidimensional
process that is long-term and requires huge financial
and human investments, institution-building in the
framework of peacebuilding needss the sustained
mobilization of all the political forces of the country
concerned, regional and subregional partners,
international financial institutions and the international
community as a whole.
In the African context, especially in countries
emerging from conflict, where almost everything
needs to be rebuilt, institution-building is much more
like a State construction project than one of the reform
and consolidation of existing State structures. This
demonstrates the vast scope of the task that faces a
fragile African country and all stakeholders involved
in peacebuilding.
Beyond the re-establishment of state authority and
the implementation of efficient and rational reforms
of the security and justice sectors, the success of any
64/65

28/07/2016

institution-building project makes it essential to take
the following elements into account.
The
effectiveness
and
sustainability
of
institutional capacity-building is directly related to the
institutionalization of the role of capacity-management
at the national level. A body consisting of representatives
of various sectors and spanning all areas concerned
can support, advise and monitor institutional capacitybuilding processes. Legislation based on the promotion
of good governance and human rights would result in
the development of policies respectful of human rights
by the State, civil society and the population.
Transparency
in
the
development
and
implementation of public policies requires the public
to have access to social services and to demand that
their rights be protected. Facilitating public access
to information can in some cases be an effective
strategy to improve the state of public spending and
protect economic and social rights. Efforts to educate
the public and heighten its understanding of political,
economic and social issues provoke debate, promote
informed social dialogue and strengthen awareness
among citizens of their rights.
Strengthening the obligation of public officials to
account for their actions through sound accountability
legislation allows a balance to be struck among
institutional power systems and creates mechanisms
providing redress to victims of human rights violations.
Efforts to protect and promote human rights are
essential elements of the transition from conflict to
peace. Governance reforms that promote human rights
can be implemented even in the midst of insecurity and
conflict, as well as during transition periods that follow
political oppression and conflict.
Good governance encourages public participation in
Government, allows civil society to be actively involved
in policy development and the interests of society to be
well represented in the institutional process. Policies
that respect cultural diversity and minorities contribute
to the resolution of social conflicts, ease tensions
and help to lower the barriers of inequality, poverty
and marginalization.
Public participation in local development must be
institutionalized and given a central role in designing
and implementing genuine development policies in
the context of a participatory local administration.
The political representation of women in political
institutions and processes must be strengthened so
16-23927

28/07/2016

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that they are able to defend the adoption of laws and
initiatives to their benefit.
Respect for human rights must be enhanced
and conflicts managed through a participatory,
inclusive and transparent constitutional process that
promotes public confidence in the new constitution.
Allowing ordinary citizens to express their opinion
on constitutional issues helps the development of a
legitimate document that would be owned by the people.
The political participation of indigenous communities
must be promoted by protecting their right to define
and establish their own public policy priorities.
Governance, transparency and accountability in
the management of public and private resources must
be strengthened because there can be no satisfactory
development where corruption is rife. Unproductive
public expenditure, and in particular excessive military
expenditure, must be abandoned so asto allow the
increase in the social spending that Africa badly needs.
It is essential to stabilize macroeconomic stability
so as to sustainably increase the private savings and
investment necessary to establish a liberal and stable
economic and regulatory environment.

S/PV.7750

Debt relief is directly linked to the fight against
poverty. When debt burdens the national budget, it
undermines the ability of a Government to provide its
citizens with the basic social services. Aware of the
magnitude of this constraint for African economies.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI decided in 2000 to
cancel the debts of African least-developed countries
to Morocco and to lift all tariffs imposed on products
imported from those countries. This decision was based
on Morocco’s belief in the need to uphold and enshrine
the spirit of solidarity and on its African identity.
The efforts of countries in fragile situations to
develop and implement national plans and reforms to
strengthen their institutions and entrench the rule of
law should be encouraged, notably by providing them
with appropriate financial assistance. The merit of the
identical resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
and the Security Council on peacebuilding is that they
highlight the inadequacy of the assistance mobilized
by the international community with respect to the
real needs of vulnerable country. It up to us to give
substance to the ambitious project of implementing the
recommendations of the review. Peace in Africa and
around the world depends on it.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

16-2392765/65
