VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Appeals to all States, United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and international and national nongovernmental organizations to step up their activities in
enhancing public awareness by denouncing the crimes
committed by the racist regime of South Africa;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts, through appropriate channels, to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
view to promoting further ratification of or accession to
the Convention;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution
3380 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/57.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and resolution 41/104 of 4 December 1986 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 2 as well as its other
relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 30
Reiterating the importance of the Convention, which is
the most widely accepted human rights instrument
adopted under the auspices of the United Nations, as well
as of the contribution of the Committee to United Nations
efforts to combat racism and all other forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin,
Welcoming the report of the Committee covering its
1986 and 1987 sessions,3 1
Reiterating once again the need to intensify the struggle
for the elimination of racism and racial discrimination
throughout the world, especially the elimination of apartheid in South Africa and Namibia,
Mindful of the obligation of all States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Recalling the urgent appeals made by the SecretaryGeneral, the General Assembly, the eleventh meeting of
States parties to the Convention and the Committee itself
to the States parties to honour their financial obligation
under the Convention,
Gravely concerned that, in spite of all the urgent appeals
for payment of assessed contributions under the Convention, the situation impeding the proper functioning of the
Committee continues to deteriorate,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of financing the expenses of the members
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, 32
l. Expresses its profound concern at the fact that a
number of States parties to the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
have not fulfilled their financial obligations under the Con-

185

vention, which led to the cancellation of the August 1986
session and the curtailment by two weeks of the August
1987 session of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Expresses once again its concern that such a situation prevented the Committee from submitting an annual
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session as
required by the Convention and led to further delay in discharging its substantive obligations under the Convention;
3. Commends the Committee for its work with regard
to the implementation of the Convention and the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee covering its 1986 and 1987 sessions;
5. Calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligations
under article 9, paragraph l, of the Convention and to submit in due time their periodic reports on measures taken to
implement the Convention;
6. Strongly appeals to all States parties to fulfil without
delay their financial obligations under article 8, paragraph
6, of the Convention so as to enable the Committee to continue its work;
7. Calls upon States parties to explore, at their next
meeting on 15 January 1988, all appropriate avenues and
to take a decision that would enable the Committee to
meet regularly in the future;
8. Invites the States parties to consider, pending a fully
satisfactory solution to the current financial difficulties,
the possibility, as an exceptional measure, of the Committee holding one extended session per year;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the financial situation of the Committee;
10. Decides to consider the report at its forty-third session under the item entitled "Elimination of all forms of
racial discrimination".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/58.

Implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and United
Nations Decade of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its pertinent resolutions, including resolution 37/52 of 3 December 1982, by which it adopted the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, 33 and resolution 37 /53 of 3 December 1982, by
which it, inter alia, proclaimed the period 1983-1992 the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 41/106 of 4 December 1986 and
reaffirming all of its provisions,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987 /43 of 28 May 1987, in which the Council, inter alia,
requested the Secretary-General to make all appropriate
efforts to mobilize international support and action for the
Decade,
Further taking note of the Guiding Principles for Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes in the
Near Future, 21 adopted by the Interregional Consultation

30 Resolution 38/14.
31 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Suff1ement No. 18 (A/42/18).
A/42/468 and Corr. I and Add. I.

13 A/37 /35 I/ Add. I
and
recommendation I (IV).

Add. I/Corr. I,

annex,

sect. VIII,
