th
MEETING:

26 MARCH

$982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

, .. , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14917) . . . . . , . . . , . , . , (. . . . . , ,(. . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . , . , *. . . . . .

I

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2338)

Adoptionoftheagenda

SlPV -2338

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quartet-1 y Srpplernents
of the O~fwial Rctwds c?fthe SwuriTy
Council.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolr~tions
crnd
Dwi.kns
of the Secrlrity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2338th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 26 March 1982, at 6.10 p.m.
Pr~sidmt:

Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of Amer1
ica, Zaire.
Provisional

which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Chartel
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2338)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14917)

of the agenda

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter
dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/f4917)
I.
The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the 2334th meeting, I invite the representative
of Israel to take a place at the Council table. I invite
the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table.
I invite the representatives of Egypt, Pakistan, Senegal and the Syrian Arab Republic to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that 1 have received letters
from the representatives of Morocco and Turkey in

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them documents S/14923 and S/14924, containing the text of two letters dated 24 March from the
representative
of Jordan to the President of the
Council.
4. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The situation in the
occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem, continues to deteriorate and oppression goes on. For the
eighth day running, life in the tyrannized occupied
territories has come to a dangerous standstill; streets
are totally deserted; life is decimated and no longer
normal, The only outward sign of life is the rumbling
of Israeli tanks, armoured vehicles and artillery in a
deliberate display of occupation terrorism and oppression, which is the last remaining option that the rvthless Israeli occupation can resort to, as it has categorically and totally failed to impose on the lawful
inhabitants of the occupied territories an acquiescence
in their own perdition and self-annihilation
through
massive colonization, despoliation and eventual expulsion and annexation.
Israeli spokesmen have been
attempting to portray the increasing turbulence as a
consequence of goading by either Jordan or the PLO.
The question arises here whether people who confront
the impending
prospect of destruction
need any
goading from anybody, even from their closest kin.
This is an insult to the intelligence of the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories, for whom Palestine
has been the ancestral habitat for 7,000 years, in a
continuity and a melting-pot with perhaps few parallels
in history. It is no less the focal point for hundreds of
millions of people in the Arab and Islamic worlds and
for many, many more in all the great nations and
peoples who believe in human dignity, human rights,
justice and legality.
5. I totally concur with the statements made by the
highest Israeli officials today that what is happening in
the occupied territories
is the most decisive and

important thing that Israel has faced since it obtained
its independence
in 1948, even though Israel has
greatly expanded since the adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947,
which is the only legal basis so far for its international
legitimacy.
I have been requested by the Permanent
Observer of the PLO to bring the Council up to date,
upon instructions
from Chairman
Yasser Arafat,
about the events in question.

and another was killed in Jenin. Four children and a
youth were seriously wounded in Rafaa-in the south
of Palestine-by
Israeli bullets. They are Bnssum
Marzouq Al-Najjar,
13 years old: Malkieh Sbeih.
I4 years old; Sawsan Radwan, I2 years old: Firyal Ahu
Teir, I3 years old: and Abu Latif Abu Douraz, I8 years
old.
12. In Khan Yunis, also in the south-to the south
of Gaza-three
youths were seriously wounded. The
names of two of them are: Mohammad Khalil. 20 years
old: and Samir Anwar Ismail, 24 years old. Radio
Israel yesterday reported an additional
13 people
wounded in the occupied Gaza Strip.

6. Today, Mayor Bassam Shaka’a of Nablus, who
had both of his legs amputated by Israeli bombs, and
Mayor Karim Khalaf of Ramallah,
who also was
bombed and lost one of his feet, were arrested and
removed from their legally elected offices. To add
insult to injury, those who came to remove him told
Mayor Shaka’a that he is only half a man, referring
to the adversity which he had suffered as a result of
the amputation of both his legs.

13. It was also reported yesterday on Radio IsraeI
that more than 29 shopkeepers were arrested in Jerusalem as Israeli troops attempted to break the general
strike which is now in its eighth day, Today another
three shopkeepers were arrested. And as representatives may have read in the papers today, a lady
pharmacist was threatened that unless she opened
her pharmacy it would be closed for two to three
months.

7. Speculation
has it that the arrests of Bassam
Shaka’a and Karim Khalaf precede their forcible
deportation and exile from Palestine. Members of the
Nablus municipality
and a number of Bassam Shaka’a
supporters were summoned to the office of General
Menahem Milson-who
at present has apparently put
on civilian clothes, so as to appear not as a military
governor but as a civilian governor-and
were threatened with severe repercussions should they allow the
situation
in Nablus to deteriorate.
Israeli Statelicensed terror and brutality
continue to pervade
the occupied Palestinian territory. Israeli tanks, helicopters and paratroopers are now being used against
the Palestinian people in a desperate but futile attempt
to subjugate and control them. Tank and troop reinforcements have been sent to the Palestinian towns’
of Nablus, Ramallah, Jerusalem, Hebron and other
locations.

14. The resistance of the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory reflects the determination of the people as a whole. It reflects their rejection of the so-called civilian administration
and their
continued resistance to Fascist military occupation
of their land. Our Palestinian people under occupation are resisting and will continue to resist any and
all attempts at their physical extermination.
15. As conveyed in a message yesterday, Mr. Arafat
wishes to reiterate that there is a limit to our patience,
and given the racist and violent aims of the Zionist
entity, the PLO will take all necessary measures to
protect and safeguard the lives of the Palestinian
people.

8. Two hundred and fifty students were arrested
today in the town of Qalqilya. There are several casualties reported in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The casualties know so far are: in Hebron, Muhammad Abed Rabbo, 15 years old; in Zahiriya, Bassam
Abu Sharkh, I2 years old: in Gaza, Khalil Habboush,
70 years old, Muhammad Habboush, 30 years old, and
Omar Habboush, 28 years old.

16. News dispatches late today have reported
that the Palestinian people’s protests have extended
to Nazareth, Acre and other towns and villages. I had
promised to present a draft resolution this evening
so that it could be discussed by the Council and, we
hope, supported. Regretfully, I must state that the
new draft has not been finalized. I do hope that I Will
be able to present it at the next meeting, at the discretion of the President and with the concurrence of the
Council.

9. In Jabalia camp-meaning
refugee camp-there
were violent demonstrations
near the Faloujha school.
Four youths and a .50-year-old woman were arrested,
Israeli troops viciously beat up five students in Barakeh
Abu Rashed in the Gaza Strip.

17. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Morocco. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

10. The killing, wounding and maiming of Palestinians by Israeli troops and Fascist Zionist settlers
continue unabated, as do the mass arrests of children
and youths.

ZENTAR
(Morocco) (intcr~VPt~!Madam President, at the outset
I should like to extend our thanks to you, as Well as
to the members of the Council, for allowing me to
speak during this debate on the situation in the Occupied Arab territories.

I I. Yesterday, Zionist settlers from Kiryat Arba shot
and killed Farhan Al-Mansar,
an l8-year-old
youth
from Bani Naim. Two other Palestinian
youths fell
victim to Israeli bullets in the occupied Gaza Strip,
2

18. Mr.

MRANI

tiol? fi~rn

Fwwh):

19. I should also like to express to you my delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the
Council at a moment when it is considering such a
dramatic situation,
when a people already suffering
and deprived of its rights is confronting blind repression which, this time, is taking as its principal target
those values most dear to you personally as well as to
your country-that
is to say, the rare symbols of the
democracy still remaining in the occupied Arab territories. They have also taken as a target the liberty and
the blossoming
of the Palestinian youth, who, like
all youth, have ambitions for the future--that
youth
(O whom you have in the past devoted, as you continue to devote, the very best of yourself. In such circumstances your presidency takes on all that significance and a human symbolism which has not escaped
the speakers who preceded me, who saw in it, as I do,
the guarantee of a constructive result of the Council’s

24. Now too the elimination of these last pale public
vestiges of the Palestinian personality in the occupied
Arab lands is being undertaken with the clamour of
weaponry and behind a smokescreen of repression.
Today the martyred Palestinian people still finds the
energy to rise up to confront. in a climate of insurrection, the arbitrary rule of the Israelis. Democratically
elected officials and youthful patriots are once again
facing a hard trial, its victims already beyond number,
as we have just been shown by the detailed statement
of our friend Mr. Nuseibeh.
25. I should like to say that my country proclaims its
total admiration for the self-sacrifice of the Palestinian
people and for its resistance. On behalf of my Government, I assure it of our complete solidarity.
At this
time I could certainly do no better than to read out,
in this prestigious Security Council chamber, the text
of a message from His Majesty King Hassan II, current
President of the Summit Conference of Arab States and
Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee, which is a direct
outgrowth of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference. This message has just been addressed to the
entire world, primarily through the Secretary-General
of the United Nations. It is also addressed to the
Secretary-General
of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, to the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States and to Mr. Arap Moi, current President of
the Organization
of African Unity. The message
reads as follows:

work.

20.

I should also like to pay a tribute to Sir Anthony

Parsons, representative
of the United Kingdom, for
the talent with which he guided the work of the Council

last month.
21. Israel’s current behaviour can no longer surprise
anyone but those who blindfold themselves so as to
see nothing, for it lies right on the course followed
by all the policies through which Israel has for decades
continued to defy the Palestinian people, neighbouring
Asab States and the whole of the international community.
Those policies have as their inexorable objective the annexation of the occupied Arab territories
and above all, in the framework of their annexationist
goals, the total elimination of the authentic populations
which have lived in those territories since the dawn
of time.

“Following
the protest demonstrations
by the
fraternal Palestinian people in the occupied territories against the attempt of the Zionist authorities
to dissolve its elected and legitimate
municipal
councils and to impose by force Israeli civil administration and authority with the aim of supporting
and consolidating
the Zionist occupation-having
previously
declared the Holy City of Jerusalem
capital of Israel for ever and annexed the Golan
Heights-and
in view of the savage methods employed by the Zionist armed forces against innocent and defenceless Palestinian citizens, involving
the murder of Palestinian youths, the arrest of their
demonstrators,
the destruction of their homes, the
confiscation of their lands and businesses and the
closing of their schools and universities, I wish to
inform you that in my capacity as President of the
Summit Conference of Arab States, I condemn such
unjustified
repressive and inhuman acts, which
are contrary to international
law and international
are distressing to all human conconventions,
sciences and tend to erode the heritage of our civilized world and its noble spiritual values.

22.

There is no use reminding Israel of the principles
law or the obligations incumbent upbn
all the States of our community under the Charter of
the United Nations, with the aim of leading the Zionist
State to modify its massively illegal, misguided and
blind attitude.
of international

23.
AS long as Israel remains unbridled,
no bit in its
mouth, and with all the support it has at its disposal,
we, unfortunately,
know the dismal fate that awaits
the entire Middle East region, that awaits, furthermore,
international
peace and security. The Holy City of
Jerusalem
has already been made the spectacular
victim-but
the victim none the less-of Israeli expansionism; then recently the Syrian Golan Heights
suffered an identical fate as a result of an arbitrary
uniiateral
decision. More recently still-today-the
high-handed
replacement of the mayors and municipal
councils of Al-Birch, Nablus, Halhoul and Ramallah
by Israeli soldiers and officials derives from that
same philosophy and is designed eventually to achieve
the same aim of changing profoundly
the genuine
historic Arab nature of the occupied territories, as a
preliminary
step towards their final annexation by
force.

“I request you to convey my disapproval to all
Members of the Organization
and to use all the
power at your disposal to put an end to this organized
and premeditated
aggression by the Zionist forces
against the Palestinian people.” [See S//4952.]
26. The first measure to be taken to put an end to
this new act of aggression by Israel is for the Secu3

rity Council to declare the Israeli measures null and
void and demand that they be rescinded and to condemn any Israeli action that would not make possible
the restoration of peace and justice in the region
founded on the restoration of and respect for the
inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
people to its
national territory and the unconditional
withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories, including the
Holy City of Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights.

taken to annex the Golan Heights,
Syria.

32. An increasingly dense network of militarized
Israeli settlements is creeping like a cancerous growth
throughout
the territory of the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip, and the indigenous Palestinian population
ruthlessly and methodically is being squeezed out ofthe
most fertile lands and deprived of access to water. With
the direct support and connivance of the occupying
authorities,
armed Jewish settlers are widely using
scare tactics and terrorist methods against the Palestinians so as once and for all to establish themselves
in the lands seized from the Arabs. Officially,
Tel
Aviv and various Zionist organizations have widely
advertised their plans to settle over the next few years
in the West Bank and Caza thousands and thousands
of new Jewish immigrants and to establish there large
urban and industrial complexes.

27. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubIics)(intr~p~CtC~tion.~ot?z
Russinr~): Although
the month is drawing to an end, I have not yet had
an opportunity
to congratulate you, Madam, on your
assumption of the post of President of the Council and
to wish you all success in carrying out this difficult
task.
28. I should like also to express appreciation to Sir
Anthony Parsons, who so ably guided the Council’s
work last month.

33. The purpose of all those actions is perfectly clear:
the Israeli authorities are using their policy of creeping
annexation in order once and for all to perpetuate their
occupation of the ancestral Arab lands and to create
the pseudo-legal preconditions for open annexation
and implementation
of their idea of the “Greater
Israel” with which they are so obsessed. And all that
is being done under cover of talks on the so-called
administrative
autonomy as an integral part of the
Camp David deal.

29. Today the Council, once again for the umpteenth
time, is returning to a consideration
of the situation
in the occupied Arab territories. Over the last three
years no other single item has been considered so
frequently in the Council-and
that is quite understandable and logical,
30. The fact is that the Israeli authorities are increasingly, openly and cynically imposing their kind of
order in the occupied Arab territories, On IS March
this year, they carried out another action of provocation against the indigenous population of the West
Bank of the Jordan River in dissolving by force the
Municipal
Council of the town of Al-Bireh and removing by force from the municipal
buildings the
legally elected mayor, Mr. Ibrahim Al-Tawil. A few
days later similar measures were taken against the
mayors of Nablus and Ramallah. A wave of protests
arose among the Palestinians living in the West Bank.
A general strike was declared and it is still continuing.
The Israeli authorities used troops to crush the mass
demonstrations
of Palestinians and on several occasions firearms were used against them. This is a policy
of State terrorism in action. To date there have been
22 victims of these barbarous actions from among the
local population and 6 of them have already died from
their wounds. Over the last few days and even hours,
as the Council considers this item on the situation in
the West Bank, these tragic figures are continuing to
grow.

34. The statement made by Israel’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Shamir, is typical. It was quoted
in T/IL’ Nc\\* York Tirncs of 2.5 January this year. He
stated outright.
“We want peace, but only in conditions that will
enable us to continue our existence, and this means
the Golan Heights, Judea and Samaria within the
boundaries of the land of Israel.”
35. Here it would be appropriate to recall that just
over three years ago at the conclusion of the Camp
David accords, the Soviet Union warned of the serious
consequences that would result from such secret
manoeuvres and separate agreements. At that time
some people tended to assume that such fears were
a little extreme or that there were simply no grounds
for them. But today we are all witnesses of the truly
tragic events and consequences that have become a
natural and inevitable outcome of the Camp David deal.
36. Thus, today the Council is faced with the fact
that, despite the many resolutions and appeals from the
Council and the General Assembly to Israel to halt its
policy of annexing the territories of others and to
rescind decisions taken in that connexion, the GOVernment of Begin is stubbornly continuing its policy
of seizing the ancestral Arab lands. Surely it is clear
that Tel Aviv would hardly have decided on such
actions were it not for the comprehensive support of
its protector and senior partner. This is something that

3 I. Such actions by Israel must be considered against
the background of all the preceding measures taken by
the Israeli Government designed to strengthen Israel’s
position in the occupied Arab territories and, in the
final analysis, to bring about annexation.
Suffice it
to recall here just the most recent and the most outrageous of these measures. In August 1980, Jerusalem
was declared the “eternal,
sole and indivisible”
capital of Israel. In December 1981, a decision was
j,
!
I
/
I

which belongs to

4

k~ecannot fail to mention today. Suffice it to recall
that Israel has virtually unlimited access to the ar~OXIIS of the most modern United States weaponry.
that every year it receives an average of $3 billion aid
from the United States and that in November 1981
it signed an agreement of so-called strategic co-operation with the United States, thereby consolidating
its status as a strategic ally of Washington in the Middle
East.

East. This is not an accident, The international
community is confronted with a defiant Israel. which, with
brutal consistency, pursues a policy of annexation of
the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories, together
with a policy of aggression against Arab States. The
annexation of Jerusalem, the decision to implement
Israeli laws. jurisdiction
and administration
in the
Syrian Golan Heights-which
is undoubtedly
tantamount to annexation-the
Israeli attack on the Iraqi
nuclear installation
and the frequent incursions into
Lebanon prove the intransigence and bad faith of the
Israeli Government.
So long as Israel persists in its
present path and so long as the Council finds it impossible to take appropriate action against Israel, we are,
I am afraid, likely to have many more meetings in this
chamber on this subject.

37. It is not surprising that, relying on such comprehensive support and virtual complicity on the part
af Washington,
the Israeli Government,
without the
slightest embarrassment,
should continue its aggression and expansion against the Arab countries and
peoples. It is not surprising that this policy should
increasingly frequently elicit outbursts of anger and
outrage on the part of the population of the occupied
territories
and also in neighbouring Arab States.

43. The recent events in the West Bank and Gaza
are not isolated incidents of repression, but constitute
another link in the long chain of Israel’s policy of
Folexpansion, illegal settlements and annexation.
lowing Israeli actions purporting to change the status
of Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights, Israel
now appears to have turned its attention to the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. As will be recalled, Israel’s
illegal actions concerning Jerusalem and the Syrian
Golan Heights have been condemned by the international community
and the Security Council and
Israel’s decisions have been declared null and void.
We are confident that Israel’s decision to disband the
Al-Bireh elected Municipal Council and to replace it
by direct Israeli rule, and the further decision to dismiss the Palestinian mayors of Nablus and Ramallah,
as well as Israel’s ruthless oppression of the Palestinian
people, will also be condemned by the Council. Unless
the present trend is arrested and reversed, the world
may be faced with a general conflagration in the area.

38. The delegation
of the Soviet Union considers
that, in the present extremely diflicult and dangerous
situation, the Council must demand that Israel, as the
occupying Power, rescind its illegal decision to dissolve the municipal
councils, that it must condemn
that Government
for these continuing acts of terrorism,
which have been elevated to the level of State policy,
and demand an immediate halt to such actions. The
United Nations-and
primarily the Security Council,
as the organ bearing primary responsibility
for the
maintenance
of international
peace and security and
endowed
as it is with the necessary powers for thismust take such measures as would place a strong
harrier against any further creeping annexation on the
part of the Israeli authorities, ensure a speedy withdrawal of Israeli troops from all occupied Palestinian
find other Arab territories, and staunchly protect the
inalienable
rights of the Arab people of Palestine.

44. Israel’s policy of annexation, accompanied by its
brutality against innocent unarmed people under its
occupation,
is dangerous enough. But there is yet
another equally serious dimension to the recent events
in the West Bank and Gaza. Israel, it appears, aims
not only at the annexation of territory which belongs
to the Arab Palestinian
people: Israel also seems
determined to liquidate the legitimate national aspirations of the Arab Palestinian people. Need we remind
Israel that this is not only a futile path but one which
altogether eliminates the prospects of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East, which
can be achieved only when Israel withdraws from all
the Arab and Palestinian territories it occupied in 1967,
including Jerusalem?

39. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Turkey. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
40. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey): Madam President, I should
like to begin by expressing our warm felicitations to
You on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the current month, Turkey and the United
States of America enjoy very close and very happy
relations.
We are confident that the deliberations of
the Council this month will benefit from your proven
wisdom and leadership,
41. 1 should also like to express our deep appreciation to your predecessor, Sir Anthony Parsons, a wellknown and distinguished
diplomat in my country,
who SO effectively served as the President of the
Council last month and who has made an indelible
contribution
over the years to the work of the United
Nations.
I am sure we shall all miss him.

45. Furthermore,
without the full restitution
of the
inalienable
rights and legitimate
aspirations
of the
Arab Palestinians,
including their right to establish
their own sovereign State in Palestine, there can be
no just and lasting peace in the Middle East. If Israel
believes that the Arab Palestinian people can be erased
from the equation of a Middle East settlement, then
the international
community is obligated to show Israel

42. For years now the Council has been more or less
continuously
seized of the question of the Middle
5

.:

that it is making a truly fundamental
mistake with
crucial consequences and that it must deal with the
inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people on the
basis of justice, honour and equality.

of Jordan has donned yet another, additional hat, that
of the terrorist PLO, since it was in the name of that
terrorist organization and its boss that he opened his
statement.

46. The PLO is the sole legitimate representative of
the Arab Palestinian people. It is no wonder, then, that
there is a natural and instinctual affinity between the
PLO and the Arab Palestinians living under Israeli
occupation in the West Bank and Gaza. The valiant
Arab Palestinian people will not abandon their struggle
just to suit Israel’s designs.

53. May I just refresh the memory of the representative of Jordan by recalling some of the remarks that
have been made by his King regarding the murderous
PLO.
54. In an interview granted to AI-Nrrhor of Beirut,
on 4 September 1972, King Hussein said the following:

47. In conclusion,
it is clear that Israel has once
again -in complete disregard of international law, and
in particular of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
of the relevant United Nations resolutions-created
a very dangerous and explosive situation in the territories under its occupation.
The Council must ask
Israel to put an end to this hazardous situation and to
its armed repression and coercion of the unarmed
civilian population of the occupied territories, rescind
its illegal decisions and reinstate the duly elected
officials of the Arab Palestinian people. A resolute
stand by the Council would, we hope, impel Israel to
come to terms with the inevitable reality of the Arab
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights.

“As for this small group that does not want to be
a party to any solution and that wants to preserve
the problem as ,it is for another 200 years, I have to
tell the members of that group that it is very easy
to talk like that while living well by exploiting the
problem in order to achieve personal gains.”
In another interview, granted to The I~rntrtionrrl
Herd/d Tribfrne on 17 April 1972, King Hussein said:
“They
are dangerous, but dangerous to the
cause of the Palestinians as much as anything else.
They give an image of hijackers of planes and
embezzlers of money.”

48. Turks during the Ottoman Empire contributed
to a large extent to saving Mediterranean
Jews from
the intolerance and exactions of the Inquisition.
Turks
have also deeply deplored and condemned the Nazi
persecution of the Jewish people. It is therefore for
us an extremely sad spectacle now to observe the same
people who suffered so much from injustice and
intolerance trying to suppress the freedom and basic
rights of another people in its homeland.

Yet another quotation from King Hussein, this time
speaking in an interview with LIS Ne1rt.s t/n& World
Report of 8 January 1973:
“It would be a mistake not to make a distinction
between the mass of Palestinians and that very
small minority
belonging to some of the armed
organizations who may be Palestinians in name but
have always identified themselves with all the contradictions that exist in the Arab world, much more
so than with the Palestinian cause itself. Their prime
target was to destroy the unity of our people and
at the same time to destroy this country.”

49. The Arab and Muslim character of the Palestinian homeland was preserved and safeguarded entirely
intact to the limits of its strength, and despite many
inducements to the contrary, by the same Ottoman
Empire even in its period of decline. That the Muslim
and Arab character of Palestine was so zealously pro‘tected under Turkish rufe is a glorious chapter in the
annals of the history of the Turkish nation.

55.

As we have already had occasion to state-at
first of this series of Council meetings ]23-?44rl?
meptirlg]-the
events that are now occuring in Judea
and Samaria were launched by the terrorist PLO and
were, more surprisingly, supported by the Jordanian
Government.
The PLO and the Jordanians have the
well-understood
fear of losing their capability to exert
through fear the submission of the Palestinian Arab
inhabitants of these areas to the diktats of incitement
and subversion.
the

50. For those reasons, the Turkish nation faithfully
believes that unless the right to independence
is
recognized for Arab Palestinians
there will be no
.lasting solution of the Middle
East problem.
My
Government considers it the highest historical, moral
and brotherly duty to support the legitimate struggle
of the Arab Palestinian people, and it urges Israel to
renounce such policies of violence, which will certainly be detrimental to its own vital interests,

56. There exists today among the Palestinian Arabs
a strong inclination to move towards a reconciliation
and greater understanding with Israel. As we all know
and fully appreciate, although perhaps for entirely
different reasons, the promise of peaceful coexistence
between Jews of Israel and Palestinian Arabs of Judea,
Samaria and the Gaza District spells a new departure
and holds in store a better future, perhaps, for all concerned. That is precisely the reason for the strenuous

5 I. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I call upon him.
52. Mr. LEVIN
(Israel): It is remarkable
to note
that today the representative of the Hashemite King
6

and eriminnl efforts at agitation, incitement and saboIW engendered by the PLO and seconded by the
Jordanian authorities.
What we are witnessing is a
t~~o-ph:\sed manoeuvre
designed, on the one hand,
tocreate unrest in Judea and Samaria and, on the other,
lo raise the subject in the Council. Both these phases
art: geared to reinforce and echo one another. Israel,
however, does not intend in any way to relinquish
its responsibility
towards the inhabitants of Judea and
%unaria, and it will strive to stop the agitation and the
subversion in order to promote its basic goal ofbringing
about lasting peaceful coexistence between Jews and
Palestinian Arabs,

in the knowledge that they have the power to put an
end to any abuses and, on the other hand, it prevents
public officials and judges who have been retained
from using their authority in a manner detrimental
to the occupying Power, as they would otherwise be
liable to be removed.”
60. That opinion is shared by most reputable jurists
and is repeated in appropriate form in most textbooks
which deal with the topic and in such authoritative
publications as the manuals of military law of the
different countries.
61. Mr. Bassam Shaka’a. the former Mayor of
Nablus, is an extreme and uncompromising agitator.
The representative of Jordan is in an excellent position to attest to this, since Mr. Shaka’a, as one of the
leaders of the Baath Party in Samaria, actively opposed
the Jordanian rCgime, which imprisoned him, after
which he escaped to Syria.

57. Israel’s approach has always been guided by
concern for the cause of peace and for the welfare of
the population.
58. The members of the Council will recall that in the
years 1972 and 1976 municipal elections, freely and
democratically
conducted,
were held for the first
lime ever in Judea and Samaria. One cannot cease to
wonder at the Jordanian representative,
who now
bemoans the fact that some of the area’s mayors
-who were elected, unlike the oppressive Jordanian
habit of appointing mayors-have
now been dismissed
for disturbing the peace, which is, by the way, entirely
in keeping with Jordanian law and procedure in force
in Judea and Samaria. May I recommend that the
representative
of Jordan consult the annals of the
Jordanian
administrcltion
to find the relevant pre-

62. In 1958, the Jordanian Government sentenced
Mr. Shaka’a to a four-year prison term. Eventually.
he was pardoned under a Jordanian act of clemency
in 1965.
63. Mr. Shaka’a, since the free and democratic election which put him into the mayoralty of Nablus in
1976, has endorsed the stage-by-stage PLO theory
according to which a PLO State in Judea, Samaria and
the Gaza District would precede the ultimate liquidation of the State of Israel. Mr Shaka’a has repudiated
both the Israel-Egyptian peace treaty and the concept
of autonomy outlined in the Camp David framework
for peace in the Middle East and has dedicated himself
to the establishment of a united front to ensure their
failure. Moreover, Mr. Shaka’a has threatened anyone
willing to accept autonomy or to co-operate with Israel
with a death sentence.

cedents.

59. Concerning the former mayors, I should like to
describe to the Council some of the highlights of the
bnckground
that led to their dismissal, which was
carried
out, as I have said, in accordance with the
provisions
of Jordanian law in force in Judea and
Samaria, as required by international
law. Without at
this stage again going into the whole issue of the applicability
of the so-called fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949’ in Judea and Samaria, concerning which our
position is well known, I would draw the attention of
the members of the Council to the last sentence of
article 54, on judges and public officials. That provision reads:

64. The other individual concerned, Mr. Karim
Khalaf, the former Mayor of Ramallah, has gained
notoriety by identifying himself with extremist factions of the terrorist PLO. Mr. Khalaf has boasted of
his activities as a member of the so-called National
Guidance Committee, which during a two-year period
brought about, in his own words, “the public stoning
of the Israeli army”.

“It” -that
is to say the general provision of that
article--”
does not affect the right of the Occupying
Power to remove public officials from their posts.”

65. Mr. Khalaf has personally incited students to
engage in unauthorized strikes, demonstrations and
street riots, the timing of which was co-ordinated
between the PLO, the municipality and the National
Guidance Committee. The basic aim of such demonstrations is to gain maximum media exposure, of
course.

In that connection I would refer to the authoritative
commentary
of the International
Committee of the
Red Cross, edited by M. Pictet, which on Page 308
of volume IV states:
power to remove officials of any kind from
their posts at any moment is a safeguard accorded
to the occupying Power. That safeguard helps to
ensure the hontr fi& application
of the Present
article as a whole, since, on the one hand, it allows
the occupying authorities to behave fairly generously
“The

66. Mr. Khalaf has been strongly advocating the use
of terror against Arab residents who refuse to toe the
terrorist PLO line. He has denounced and boycotted
moderate Palestinian personalities. He has rejected
the concept of Palestinian Arab coexistence with
7

Israel. In his own words, “the only solution is war”.
“In a number of years”, Mr. Khalaf declared, the
Palestinians
“shall be the victors and Israel will no
longer exist”. This was reported by the Vienna daily
Dil> PIXXSC of 2 July 1980. Mr. Khalaf elaborated on this
theme to AI-Hlrr@r of 15 September 1980 that

73. At this moment 1 recall a large advertisement
which appeared in 1948--I think it was in T/lc> N~JII~
Ywk Tirncs -signed by such persons as Albert Einstein
and which opposed, and protested against, a landing
permit or visa for a terrorist, a Nazi who had adopted
Fascist methods. His name was Begin. He is now
being represented at the other end of this table. That
advertisement
was published in 1948; since then,
Begin has not changed as a terrorist: he remains a
terrorist committing
many more acts of terrorism
against children, women and innocent civilians.

“the return of Jerusalem,
Ramallah,
Nablus,
Bethlehem and Hebron necessitates the return of
Jaffa, Haifa and Urn el Fahm. We call upon our
brethren to work together with us for the liberation
of Palestine, from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea”.

74. I have never heard of people who tried to liberate
the Palestinians
from the fear of coming under the
grip of the PLO by sending their tanks, tear-gas grenades and bullets against those people. It was alleged
that the PLO feared losing control of the Palestinian
people and that such criminal tactics were being used
by the PLO.

67. One could ask why, with this kind of reputation,
Messrs. Shaka’a and Khalaf were not dismissed sooner
by Israel from their public office. The answer is very
simple. Israel has been doing its utmost to afford every
opportunity
imaginable
to officials elected to public
office to discharge their duties in a normal manner with
a view to promoting the interests of the Palestinian
Arab inhabitants
who elected. them to their public
positions.

75. The tanks, the aircraft, the uniforms furnished
by the Americans, and the American citizens in Israeli
uniforms shooting at our people in our towns-the need
for all this is a sign that we have no fear whatsoever
of losing the support and the solidarity of our own
people in our own country under occupation. 1 need not
name all those American citizens dressed in Israeli
uniforms and shooting at our people.

68. Messrs. Shaka’a and Khalaf were advised on
numerous occasions to refrain from agitation and to
desist from contributing
to the deplorable hatred and
enmity, all of which had been, until 1967, a part of the
official public policy of the Jordanian rigime against
Israel. Not only did this advice go unheeded but the
former mayors Khalaf and Shaka’a wilfully supported
the present campaign of violence and agitation both in
Judea and in Samaria. Consequently,
Israel decided
to dismiss them in order to root out the agitation at
one of its sources.

76. Something was said about peaceful coexistence.
What peaceful coexistence? Is it the peace of the
graveyard? No. Peaceful coexistence should be a
viable peace, peace among human beings, peace which
we enjoyed in Palestine before the Zionist invasion
and occupation of our country.

69. We are today in the midst of a campaign designed
to disrupt daily life, tranquillity
and order in Judea,
Samaria and the Gaza District.
This campaign is
orchestrated, financed and maintained by the terrorist
PLO and supported by Jordan.

77. “The mayors were disturbing peace”--1 wonder
what people would say now if we referred to the
leaders of the resistance against the Nazi occupation
forces in Europe, the Maquis for example? I wonder
if the French would dare say now that these people
were agitators and criminals. And those who rose in
rebellion in the Warsaw ghetto: can we say that they
were terrorists? They were people who defended theil
freedom and we honour their memory every day,
because that is the way we should oppose nazism and
fascism,

70. We expect that the members of the Council
will not lend a hand to this subversion and disruption
by in any way condoning this ongoing campaign.
Nothing can be gained through violence. Everything
can be gained through creating an atmosphere
of
understanding and conciliation.
71. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization
has asked to make
a statement in reply. I call on him.

78. Yes, the Palestinian people under occupation
are being provoked. The fact that an elected municipal
council refuses to deal with a military governor-that
is its right. I wonder how the members of the Council
would feel if any municipality
in their respective
countries refused to meet with the Minister of the
Interior. The municipality
has some sort of an autonomy in its dealings. And in this case the municipality
is not getting any federal aid; on the contrary, it is
suffering because of the occupation forces, the forces
that are stealing its own water-depriving
the inhabitants of the village or town of the main source of
their livelihood,
which is water.

72. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation
Organization):
Sometimes one wonders whether it is an admission
of guilt when people go immediately
on the defensive.
This attempt at character assassination of the elected
representatives
of the Palestinian
people only leads
us to believe that those who are committing
those
crimes against our people are admitting
that they
are indeed guilty of what is going on in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
8

79. The people are being provoked. In Bethlehem
the people decided to 60 on strike, as is their right,
to protest against the forces of occupation. Now what
did the forces of occupation, the military, do? They
selected a shop belonging to the Mayor of Bethlehem,
Mr, Friej, and sealed it up. So from among all the
shops of the area they came to the shop owned by the
Mayor and sealed it up. Is that not some sort of a
provocation?

84. Be that as it may, this is not the time to discuss
juridical concepts; this is the time to take immediate
action. People are being killed, armoured cars and
tanks are in the streets and people are being shot at,
their economic development is being hindered. I heard
you say earlier, Madam President, that you welcomed
the concern for economic development of some countries. Well, I wonder. how much concern does the
Government of the United States have for the economic
development of the Palestinians under occupation,
when their water is being taken away from them?

80. But I think this is best explained by a statement
attributed to Begin, who said that this crack-down
would continue until the PLO is eliminated. I wish
the Council to know that the PLO can only be eliminated when the last Palestinian is eliminated, because
the Palestinians are the PLO and the PLO is the Palestinians.

85. Maybe you have not been to my beautiful Jerusalem; maybe you do not know what this means to us.
Every single drop of water means a lot to us: it is life
to US. We do not have the East River, we do not have
all these rivers and floods that you have in this country. Yet our economic development is maliciously
hindered by the forces of occupation.

81. Madam President, I was listening to some statements in the other meeting this afternoon. I was so
happy to hear you, the representative of a permanent
member of the Council, currently the President of the
Council, expressing your admiration for the upholding
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
expressing your solidarity with people who fight and
want to maintain their independence;
affirming you
respect for self-determination
and national independence.

86. I appeal-as Chairman Arafat has done in his
letter to the Secretary-General-for
an immediate
intervention by the Council to put an end to those
crimes committed against our people. Maybe the solution would be to terminate the state of occupation. The
Council has repeatedly said that the occupation should
be terminated and that Israeli troops should withdraw.
There are many resolutions on that. Now, how many
Israelis have withdrawn? Instead of doing that, they
are consolidating their presence in the occupied territories-thanks,
naturally, to the billions of dollars
they are getting from the United States. Something
should be done at the level of the Council and every one
of its members should see to it that its support does
not encourage and entrench the criminal actions against
our people.

82. I wonder whether you maintain the same ideas
when we deal with the question of the Palestinian
people? Is it not really odd and inconsistent for yout
Government to send billions of dollars’ worth of arms
and armaments to kill my people? Why? Because they
want to live in peace in their own towns and villages:
they want to be happy; they want to exercise what
everybody talks about, self-determination.
I think that
good old Woodrow Wilson must be turning in his
grave now when he sees how his descendants are
behaving.

87. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Jordan, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.

83. The Palestinian people, with the PLO leading
their struggle, have opted to come to the Security
Council immediately
after the commission
by the
Israeli forces of occupation of these violations and
atrocities against our people. We came here because
we want to believe-and
I stress the word “want”that the Council is a resort and can resolve the problem, not exacerbate it by lengthy discussions and big
fights over whether or not this or that world should be
included in a resolution. We want to believe that the
members of the international
community accept and
carry out the resolutions adopted by the Council.
Unfortunately,
we are being disillusioned. HOW many
resolutions have been adopted concerning these same
mayors who now are ousted from their posts? The
Council did adopt a resolution [r.c.soll~tion 471 (lY80)l
condemning
the attempt at assassination and requesting the forces of occupation and the Government
of Israel, as the occupying Power, to apprehend
the culprits and bring them to justice. Well, to the best
of my knowledge those criminals have not been
arrested.

88. Mr, NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Before rebutting what
the spokesman for Israel has said, I should like to start
with a note which reflects my upbringing in a united
Palestine where the Palestinian Arabs and the Jews
lived in peace and mutual respect. As a matter of fact,
just after the partitioning of Palestine, my neighbour
was an engineer of the Jewish faith; his name was
Mr. Segvi and he had leased the ground floor of the
house in which I lived. Even in my office the typist
was a girl of the Jewish faith. Contrary to the Israeli
spokesman’s claims, we never felt any enmity until
we recognized that what the Israeli Zionists were out
to achieve was to obliterate our very existence. That
has so far been largely achieved. I believe it is a human
instinct-in
fact it is an animal instinct-that
one should
fight for one’s survival.
89. Now the spokesman for Israel has talked about
terrorism, about Jordan and about the PLO. I must
say in all candidness that I am always baffled when
I hear an Israeli spokesman talk about terrorism. Do
9

in every field with ~1view to performing their
task of libe-ating the occupied territories. It So happened
that because of the starting of i\ libel’atioll
movement, with the resultant rapid growth. misunderstandings
and incidents took place. Whatever happened
in the tragic events of 1970, which we very
deeply
regret,
happened
because there were misunderstandings
as a result of basically outside forces who
tried to disseminate false information
about the ilttitude of the two parties in regard to one another. But
this is something, as I said, which happens within
every family, and it has long since been forgotten.
It was a mistake-a
tragic mistake-in
which all
parties
participated,
and they admit having done SO
publicly,
But I can assure the Council that the CallSe
of Palestine is the cause of every Jordanian-indeed.
of every single Arab throughout the Arab world.
gether

they not recognize that it was the Zionist Israelis,
starting in the midst of the Second World War, when
the entire world was fighting the Nazis and the Fascists
in Europe, who introduced and institutionalized
organized terrorism, that they were the founding
fathers of organized terrorism, which we had never
known before? I have seen ghastly scenes of all those
terrorist acts with my own eyes. I saw the bulldozers
pulling the corpses of innocent civilians from beneath
the debris of the King David Hotel-which,
incidentally, was not the military headquarters of the British
army, which had just one little floor of that hotel, but
-which was the location of the Secretariat of the Government of Palestine, the British Government
of
Palestine, the majority of whose civil servants were
Palestinian Arabs, including Jews. And yet I read
the other day, to my amazement, that Mr. Begin and
the man who planted that barrel of explosives that
blew up the hotel and killed over 100 people are nostalgic about that ghastly event and find spiritual sustenance in going to the hotel and feeling pride in what
they achieved.

94. The Israeli spokesman said that for the first
time jn history there had been free elections for the
municipal council in the West Bank, and he asked for
my testimony. Now, 1 happen to have been in government throughout that period. between 1948 and this
moment. And I know that elections for the municipal
councils throughout the West Bank, the East Bank and
Jerusalem were always free. It was only the mayor
himself who-after the elected councillors had recommended the name of the most capable among themwas appointed by the Minister of Municipal
Affairs.
This was a continuing practice from the days of the
British Mandate, when there were also municipal
elections.

90. I saw remnants: little children-seven
or eight
years old, boys and girls-who were not massacred
at Deir Yassin because they were spared so as to be
paraded in Zion Square and other Jewish quarters to
show the valour of what the troops had done. I was
the first to see them. My brother was Chairman of the
National Committee in Jerusalem. I saw those shaky
children, and I escorted them. I said, “Where do you
come from?“, and they described what had happened
to 250 people-their
fathers and mothers and uncles
and everybody else in the village. Those corpses were
thrown into the wells of the village, even thought that
village had decided, and declared, that it would have
no part in any fighting between the Palestinians and the
Jews-who were then called Jews, not Israelis.

95. My late father was a member of the Jerusalem
Municipal Council. The British Government,
in consultation with members of the Council, chose as
mayor the most capable person. But as for the elections in the municipalities,
they were always free:
they were the people’s elections. I know that, and
I think the Israeli spokesman knows it. I do not remember a single case in which a municipal
council
was dissolved, even though under Jordanian law a
recommendation
could be made to the Minister for
Municipal Affairs that new elections be held in cases
of corruption, abuse of power or public disenchantment
with a municipal council. That is the case in every
country in the world,

91. And that terrorist activity was directed not only
against the Palestinian people, but also against the
British troops-British
troops who were doing their
normal duty. ,We were still in the immediate aftermath
of the Second World War; they had not yet been
repatriated. Of course, they had to be demobilized and
repatriated in an orderly fashion.
92. Now, the Israeli representative should be discomfited-andjustifiably
so-if I inform him that the
relationship between Jordan and the PLO is at its
best. Indeed, they have lived side by side and theil
objective has always been to work together towards
the restoration of the full rights of the Palestinian
people. As a matter of fact, in 1968 they shed their
blood heroically at the battle of Kureime, when the
Israelis attacked the East Bank of the Jordan in an
attempt to liquidate the freedom fighters of the PLO,
and the Jordanian army played a cardinal role in
defeating that aggression.

96. TO claim that it was the Israelis that instituted
the first free elections for municipal councils is an
absolute distortion of the facts. Let me remind the
spokesman of’ Israel that the Palestinian people have
alWaYS
been masters of their fate, even when they
have been a part of a larger conglomerate.
This is
because they are universalist in outlook; they are a part
of the Arab nation.
97. What have the Palestinians been? As my COIleague the representative of Turkey said, every single
city and town in Palestine had to elect two representatives to the seat of power in Istanbul. Indeed, these
People held cabinet posts-the
Prime Ministry,
the

93. Indeed, up to 1969-even early 197&the Jordanian Government and the PLO were working to10

commandership
of the army, and every other postaccording to their abilities and qualifications.
In all
the other empires of which we were a part we were
2t the centre of events. We were never ruled by any>ody: we were always the rulers of our own fate. It is
>nly since 1948 that we have lost control over our
destiny, over our land, over our freedom and over
mr dignity.
28. The spokesman of Israel regards the statement
ibout the Palestinians’ right of return to Jaffa, Urn
El-Fahm and Acre as an incitement to rebellion: he
s unaware that every year the United Nations reit:rates a United States-sponsored resolution-General
9ssembly
resolution
194 (III&-that
mandates the
‘eturn of every single Palestinian refugee to his homeand or, should he decide not to return, compensation
br the property he left behind. That property conitituted 94 per cent of the total land area of Palestine.
‘t is not a crime to ask for the house that one built
with one’s own toil, by long years of saving. It .is
unacceptable under any system, under any “ism”, that
anyone should take over the property, the house, the
‘urniture
and other belongings of another without
lue process of law.
99. The spokesman of Israel knows full well that
jetween two thirds and 70 per cent of West Jeru;alem is Palestinian-owned-not
to mention East
erusalem. It has been given free of charge to Israeli
mmigrants,
who come from all parts of the world.
n the newspapers we read of immigrants from all over
he world who are asked, “Why have you taken the
and of this poor farmer near Ramallah?”
and who
eply, “Oh, the weather is gorgeous. It is wonderful:
here is no pollution.”
As though the United States
vere not a continent which has every kind of weather,
which has 100 million acres of State domain reserved
‘or posterity and not utilized. Yet these people covet
he tiny territory earmarked
by the international
:ommunity
as a homeland for the Palestinian people.
Phis is quite apart from the inalienable-indeed
elenental-right
of anyone to return to his home.
00. If a woman gives birth to a child on an American
)hip, that child is automatically entitled to become an
American citizen. If anyone, from any country, spends
ive or six years in the United States with a “green
:ard”, he is entitled to become an American citizen.
r’et those Palestinians have been living in Palestine
br 7,000 years-1 am not exaggerating: proof is found
n the inscriptions on clay being dug out by archaeIlogists in Alba in northern Syria-and
are the cousins
)f the Canaanites and of the Jebusites, who founded
erusalem. Does not 7,000 years entitle a people to
emain in its homeland?
01.
We are not asking the impossible. We are not
aying that we should not exist in peace and dignity
vith our Israeli neighbours. On the contrary, we are
.dvocating a peaceful settlement. But that peaceful
ettlement should be based on justice, on right and on

equality. Unfortunately,
Israel has thus far followed
a path which, I regret to say, will lead to the destruction of the cradle of civilization, which all of us would
abhor. No matter the outcome, no matter who wins
and who loses, all of us are going to be destroyed.
102. We tried in 1949 to bring about a peaceful solution under the Palestine Conciliation
Commission.
The Arab delegations as well as the Israeli delegation
signed the Lausanne Protocol,’
which would have
resolved the Arab-Israeli conflict which was ubiquitous
in United Nations forums even as far back as 30 years
ago.
103. In fact the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East was
established to bring relief to the refugees under the
impression that its mission would end by 1950, when
every refugee would be able to return to his home.
But, unfortunately,
and even after initialling
that
document which would have solved the entire ArabIsraeli conflict for good, the Israelis reneged on the
Lausanne Protocol.
104. Finally, I shall quote from a 1952 statement
by Mr. Ben-Gurion-even
though, by the standards of
the modern leadership, I think he was a more farsighted man and later on might have pursued other
policies. What he said in 1952 must have been in the
euphoria of having taken over four fifths of Palestine
from the Palestinians in 1948. As reported in The NLJII~
York Times of 15 December 1952, he said that there
could be no cession of territory, no refugee repatriation, and that Jerusalem could not be an issue of negotiation.
105. There is one point that I feel compelled to
touch on because it has been repeated so often by
so many persons-remember
that we have been discussing this problem for more than three decades, The
Israelis have been telling the world that when Jordan
and the Palestinians of eastern Palestine decided on
unity-without
prejudice to and pending a final solution
of the Palestine problem-under
the General Armistice
Agreement,-’ there was a special provision inserted because of a request which the Palestine Conciliation
Commission had made of the Arab States-Egypt,
Jordan, Lebanon and Syria; that is, a pledge to make
all the Holy Places accessible, without distinction as
to nationality,
race, creed or any other criterion.
I have the declaration-I
shall not read it now-of the
Arab States on this matter. They said that they were
willing to make that pledge, whether the territories
were under their control or when they came to a settlement of the problem. The same question was addressed
to the Israeli representative, Mr. Eytan, and he said
that the Israeli Government felt that the question
should be given further consideration by the General
Assembly and that he was in no position to make a
similar pledge.
106. The reason was, of course, that, in the deal, the
water to East Jerusalem would be restored, the elec-

’
:
,,I.
12

‘1

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dcs Nations
Unies
mande entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes.
New York
ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sont en vcnte dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

L;ls publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes
del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
liom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section,
New York or Geneva.

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estrin en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirljase
a: Nacioncs

643300

UNIES

et lcs agences
a : Nations

depositaims
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Section de Ventas,

XX-609X9-April

IYXY-2.050
