S/2017/1011

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 December 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 2 September to 14 November 2017)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2327
(2016), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 December 2017 and requested me to report on
the implementation of the mandate every 90 days. The report covers developments
from 2 September to 14 November 2017. A special report will be submitted to the
Security Council on the outcomes of the strategic review of UNMISS that I
requested in September.

II. Political and economic developments
2.
The implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan (peace agreement) remained minimal during the reporting
period. Concurrently, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
consulted with representatives from all parties to the peace agreement, armed
opposition and other stakeholder groups, in preparation for its convening of a high level revitalization forum. These consultations were aimed at discussing concrete
measures to restore the permanent ceasefire, fully implement the peace agreement
and develop a revised and realistic implementation schedule towards a democratic
election at the end of the transition. While key stakeholders have expressed support
for the initiative, there is still little consensus on what “revitalization” of the peace
agreement actually entails.
3.
The Transitional Government of National Unity has continued to prioritize
reconciliation efforts through the national dialogue, which is scheduled to be
concluded by April 2018. Initial consultations at the subnational level have
commenced in the largely Government-controlled areas of Central Equatoria,
Northern Bahr el-Ghazal and Upper Nile. Challenges persist in ensuring inclusive
participation, however, as many stakeholders perceive that the Government is using
the national dialogue to override the implementation of the peace agreement.
Meanwhile, the economy continues to deteriorate, with punishing implications for
much of the population.

17-21013 (E)

051217

*1721013*

S/2017/1011

National political developments
4.
On 25 September, the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission organized
an evaluation workshop to consider reports prepared by its six working committees
evaluating progress towards implementing the thematic chapters of the peace
agreement. At its 20th plenary meeting, on 18 October, the Chair of the Commission
provided a summary of the findings, observations and recommendations contained
in the reports and reiterated that the status of implementation was modest, at best
given that the implementation of the peace agreement was disrupted in July 2016,
and very little progress had been made in the delivery of its key provisions. The
Transitional Government of National Unity presented its response to the
Commission’s status reports separately, noting that chapters one and two of the
peace agreement had been implemented, at 78 per cent and 63 per cent, respectively,
while progress was being made towards the implementation of the remaining
chapters. The plenary agreed to share the reports with IGAD to inform pre parations
for the high-level revitalization forum.
5.
On 6 October, the National Dialogue Steering Committee submitted a
preliminary report to the President, Salva Kiir, outlining its work to date, the root
causes of the current conflict and the reforms needed to consolidate peace and
stability. Thereafter, the Steering Committee subcommittees commenced local
dialogue forums, which, to date, have been limited to Government -controlled areas,
including Yei, Morobo, Kaya, Lainya and Jubek in Central Equatoria ; Aweil, Aweil
East and Lol in Northern Bahr el-Ghazal; and Malakal, Upper Nile. Participants,
including traditional and religious leaders, women, youth and local authorities,
raised numerous issues related to peace and security, good governance and
institutional, public sector and constitutional reforms. While the discussions have
largely been frank and open, some participants expressed concerns about the timing
of the national dialogue while the implementation of key aspects of the peace
agreement were still outstanding, and with the presence of Government security
forces at some consultations.
6.
From 10 to 12 October, the Steering Committee leadership and secretariat
attended a retreat hosted in South Africa by the Deputy President of the country and
Special Envoy to South Sudan, Cyril Ramaphosa, with technical support provided
by the United Nations. While in South Africa, the Steering Committee leadership
tried once again to reach out to the leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition, Riek Machar, who declined to receive
them. Political opposition leaders in exile continued to maintain that a genuine
national dialogue would only be possible after the conflict had ended and a new
peace process involving all stakeholders had begun.
7.
Following the Government’s stated intent to hold elections within the timeline
outlined in the peace agreement, on 9 September, the National Elections
Commission announced the start of the pre-election period. This announcement
stands in contradiction to the evaluation of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission of 27 September, that credible elections would not be feasible at the
end of the current transition period because of mass displacement, severe food
insecurity and lack of institutional and constitutional infrastructure. Similar
concerns have also been raised by civil society organizations.
8.
On 7 November, at an extraordinary meeting, the draft Transitional
Constitutional Amendment Bill was tabled before the Council of Ministers by the
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The draft amendment incorporates the
2015 peace agreement into the 2011 Transitional Constitution. The Council of
Ministers has directed the Minister to incorporate several changes into the draft bill
prior to presenting it to the Transitional National Legislative Assembly for adoption.
2/18

17-21013

S/2017/1011

Regional and international engagement
9.
On 20 September, on the sidelines of the seventy-second session of the United
Nations General Assembly, the African Union Peace and Security Council held a
ministerial level meeting and issued a communiqué on the situation in South Sudan,
reiterating that the peace agreement remained the only viable option for the
achievement of sustainable peace. The Council warned that it wou ld consider
necessary steps, including sanctions measures, should the South Sudanese parties
continue to delay the full implementation process of the peace agreement. It also
stressed the importance of an all-inclusive, independent and transparent national
dialogue process.
10. On 21 September, I co-facilitated, with the African Union and IGAD, a high level event on South Sudan to agree on collective measures to support the
revitalization of the political process in South Sudan. Participants reaffirmed thei r
united support to the IGAD-led high-level revitalization forum process and urged all
parties to the peace agreement, as well as opposition groups, to engage
constructively in the process.
11. On 17 October, the IGAD Council of Ministers completed preliminary
consultations with parties to the conflict, including the Transitional Government of
National Unity and opposition groups in Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa, the Sudan
and Uganda, among others, in preparation for the high -level revitalization forum.
According to IGAD, all parties accepted the process as the basis for discussions and
agreed to declare a ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. IGAD is now reflecting on
the outcome of these consultations and written contributions and is developing
options for the revitalization process. Differing views persist among the parties on
what the revitalization process will entail. While the Government maintains that the
revitalization initiative is a review of the implementation of the peace agreement
and not a renegotiation, opposition factions consider it to be an opportunity to
renegotiate and resuscitate important parts of the agreement. The leaders (former
detainees) of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) have also not ruled
out a partial renegotiation of the peace agreement.
12. From 16 to 18 October, several opposition groups, including the leaders
(former detainees) of SPLM outside the Transitional Government of National Unity,
the National Democratic Movement, the National Salvation Front, the So uth Sudan
National Movement for Change and the Federal Democratic Party of South Sudan
met in Nyahururu, Kenya, to harmonize their positions. Participants agreed to
principles and a framework document for cooperation and to cease hostilities and
negative propaganda towards each other. Representatives of the pro -Machar
SPLM/A in Opposition, the United Democratic Republic Alliance and the People’s
Democratic Movement expressed their intent to participate in future meetings. In an
18 October press statement, the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition group reiterated
its readiness to engage in a transparent peace process, while questioning the
impartiality of the high-level revitalization forum.
13. The African Union High Representative, the former President of Mali, Alpha
Oumar Konaré, continued his engagement in support of the peace process. During
the first two weeks of November he travelled to Ethiopia and South Africa to
engage with the Chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat,
and the President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma, to discuss how to advance the recent
decisions of the African Union Peace and Security Council to bolster political
support for the peace process. On 3 and 9 November, he also convened tripartite
meetings of the African Union, IGAD and the United Nations, as called for by the
Peace and Security Council.

17-21013

3/18

S/2017/1011

Other political developments
14. On 6 September, the United States Department of the Treasury announced
targeted sanctions on three South Sudanese officials for their roles in threatening the
peace, security and stability of South Sudan The Office of Foreign Assets Control
designated Malek Reuben Riak Rengu, Deputy Chief of Defence and Inspector
General of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA); Michael Makuei Lueth,
Minister of Information, Communications Technology and Postal Services; and Paul
Malong Awan, former Chief of General Staff of SPLA. The Government dismissed
the action as unjustified and unhelpful to the peace process. On 3 November, the
Government of Canada, acting under the Justice for Victims of Corrupt Foreign
Officials Act, also announced targeted sanctions against the above-named
individuals.
Economic developments
15. South Sudan faces serious economic challenges. Inflation and the depreciation
of the South Sudan pound continue to undermine household purchasing power. For
the twenty-third consecutive month, October 2017 registered triple-digit inflation,
with the annual consumer price index increasing by 131.9 per cent. While food
prices stabilized, basic services, including water, education, health and transport,
showed significant price increases. Agricultural production continues to be
hampered by insecurity and displacement, with the national output estimated to
have declined by 6.3 per cent. The Government continued efforts at formulating a
three-year national development strategy for the period from July 2018 to June
2021, aimed at consolidating peace and stabilizing the economy. In addition,
consultations are ongoing with regard to the introduction of fuel subsidy reforms to
ease fuel shortages and improve accountability.

III. Security situation
16. The security situation in greater Upper Nile remained tense, with reports of
clashes between SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition. Intercommunal
violence in Lakes and in the greater Bahr el-Ghazal region also resulted in civilian
fatalities. Continued violations of the cessation of hostilities agreement also resulted
in additional civilian displacement and human rights violations and increased
humanitarian needs.
Greater Upper Nile region
17. On 11 September, clashes between SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLM/A in
Opposition took place close to Adodo, south of Aburoc, on the west bank of the
Nile. On 28 September, SPLA launched an offensive on the pro -Machar SPLM/A in
Opposition in Atar, Panyikang County. In retaliation, SPLM/A in Opposition
reportedly shelled SPLA positions in the Pagak area on 3, 9 and 11 October.
18. In Unity State, the security situation remained volatile, with reports of clashes
between SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition in the central and
southern areas of the State. On 6 September, SPLM/A in Opposition reported
clashes in Patit and Lingpuot. Rumours of such attacks resulted in at least 500
persons seeking shelter at the UNMISS Temporary Protection Area in Leer. Between
9 and 13 September, SPLA and pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces clashed
in Bieh, Koch County. On 18 September, it was reported that SPLA in Opposition
had temporarily captured Nhialdiu town, leading to an unknown number of
casualties, including civilians. Multiple sources reported clashes between the two
forces in Nhialdiu and Nyeong, Rubkona County, on 24 and 25 September, resulting
4/18

17-21013

S/2017/1011

in the withdrawal of Government officials and SPLA forces and the displacement of
civilians. On 4 November, the two forces clashed in Ngop and Tarkhan, near
Nhialdiu, with casualties on both sides. In Bentiu, armed groups exchanged fire near
the eastern side of the UNMISS protection of civilians site, with some rounds fired
directly towards UNMISS military personnel, who returned fire.
19. In Jonglei State, pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition and Lou Nuer youth from
Nyirol and Akobo counties attacked SPLA in Waat on 1 October, followed by
intermittent clashes throughout October. Multiple sources reported that SPLA used
attack helicopters against SPLM/A in Opposition positions on the Waat airstrip on
7 October. SPLA claimed to have remained in control of Waat after pushing back
Opposition forces. Intermittent clashes between the two forces were also reported at
the end of October.
Greater Equatoria region
20. In Eastern Equatoria, insecurity and criminal activities persisted in and around
the town of Torit, resulting in displacement. Although organized forces conducted
patrols to reduce criminal activities in the town, the local population reported that
SPLA soldiers on night patrol harassed and physically assaulted a civilian on
21 September. Subsequently, on 25 September, an UNMISS patrol to Gonyoro
village was stopped at an SPLA checkpoint in Ifwotu and denied passage.
21. In Central Equatoria, intermittent clashes between SPLA and pro-Machar
SPLM/A in Opposition forces continued. On 4 September, SPLA officials in Yei
alleged that there had been an Opposition attack on their bases in Ombaci, Yei
County, and in Jambo and Kaya, Morobo County. SPLM/A in Opposition denied
these allegations and accused the Government forces of attacking their base in
Ombaci. Clashes between the two forces in mid -September led to civilian casualties
in the Mugwo and Morobo areas. Renewed clashes in Kajo -keji County were
reported on 17 and 31 October. On 18 October, the National Salvation Front
reportedly attacked a pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition position in Bori, Liwolo
County, killing three soldiers and allegedly looting military supplies.
22. Insecurity also persisted in Juba and its environs owing to criminal activity
and the harassment of civilians. In an unexpected turn of events, tensions increased
in Juba in early November, as some 200 SPLA forces surrounded the residence of
former SPLA Chief of General Staff Paul Malong, following a presidential d ecree
mandating the disarmament of his bodyguards. On 14 November, the Presidency
announced that Paul Malong had agreed to the disarmament of his bodyguards and
that he had been released from house arrest to seek medical attention in a third
country. Efforts by senior Dinka leaders contributed to de-escalating tensions
sparked by these developments.
23. In Western Equatoria, insecurity persisted and the presence of opposition
elements was reported in some areas. In Yambio, on 10 September, the Commander
of the South Sudan National Liberation Movement was killed, together with an
unknown number of his bodyguards and family members, by Government forces
reportedly attempting to arrest him. Meanwhile, incidents against the staff of
non-governmental organizations increased, with armed robberies of staff members
travelling between Tambura and Yambio on 25 and 26 September. A
non-governmental organization compound in Yeri was also looted on 26 September.
On 28 September, four civilians were reportedly abducted and tukul houses were
burned down in Mudubai village by armed men. On 7 October, an alleged attack by
the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition on the SPLA position in Lui, Mundri East
County, led to civilian displacement due to fear of further clashes. On 16 and
20 October, clashes between the two forces occurred in Farasika and Bahr -Olo on
17-21013

5/18

S/2017/1011

the Maridi-Mundri road. Following reports of an Opposition presence in Mvolo and
Mundri, SPLA continued to mobilize its forces from Gbudwe, Rumbek and Juba. On
27 October, Opposition forces allegedly ambushed an SPLA patrol in the village of
Araka, Maridi County, resulting in two civilians injured. Between 1 and
2 November, the two forces also clashed in Kotobi and Yeri near the town of
Mundri, leading to civilian displacement.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
24. On 26 September, an SPLA vehicle was ambushed in Western Bahr el -Ghazal
near the town of Mangayat, reportedly resulting in the death of one SPLA soldier,
two missing and two civilians injured. UNMISS conducted patrols t o areas south of
Wau town previously inaccessible owing to Government restrictions. On
28 September, the villages along the Wau-Bisselia road were reported as being
largely deserted, with only SPLA forces present in Bussere and Taban. The area
beyond the town of Taban, including Bazia, was reportedly under the control of the
pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition. On 12 October, an UNMISS patrol to Baggari
Payam observed many houses destroyed and no civilian presence along the
Wau-Baggari road. While SPLA maintained its positions at Bringi, Boma,
pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces claimed control over the Baggari area.
On 18 October, an SPLA vehicle was attacked by armed men on the road from the
town of Raga to Boro Medina, resulting in eight SPLA soldiers dead and nine
injured.
25. In Warrap State, the Government-led voluntary civilian disarmament exercise
continued in Tonj and Gogrial as part of the state of emergency declared by the
President on 17 July. In Ajugo, on 3 September, SPLA soldiers reportedly kill ed two
armed youth who refused to surrender their weapons. A civil society organization
and community leaders reported that SPLA forces were harassing and looting
civilians during the civilian disarmament exercise in the Aguok and Apuk areas. On
10 November, the Government extended the state of emergency in Wau, Tonj,
Gogrial and Aweil East for three months to facilitate disarmament processes.
26. In Lakes, there were several security incidents involving armed men along
major roadways. On 6 September, two trucks belonging to an international
non-governmental organization were ambushed and robbed between Cueicok and
Patre, Rumbek East County. A civilian vehicle travelling from Wulu County to the
town of Rumbek was fired upon, injuring four passengers. On 19 S eptember, armed
men reportedly from Panyijar County attacked a vehicle travelling from Shambe to
the town of Yirol, killing one police officer. An international non -governmental
organization vehicle travelling from Rumbek to Aduel on 21 September and a pub lic
bus travelling from Wulu to Rumbek on 30 September were ambushed and robbed,
resulting in injury to two passengers.
Intercommunal conflict
27. Intercommunal tensions continued to affect the security environment,
particularly in the greater Bahr el-Ghazal region, with reports of cattle-raiding,
revenge killings and land disputes. Tensions escalated in Lakes among subsections
of the Dinka Agar, with deadly clashes resulting in at least 23 casualties. Despite the
deployment of SPLA forces, intercommunal violence continued in Warrap, with
clashes between armed youth of the Kuac and Apuk communities reported on
4 and 5 September, resulting in at least 21 casualties. Intercommunal violence also
continued between armed youth from Kuac South and Kuac North Counties, with
deadly attacks reported in a village in Apuk South County as well as in Apuk West
County. In Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, clashes between the Misseriya and the Dinka
Malual along the border with the Sudan on 2 October resulted in six deaths and
6/18

17-21013

S/2017/1011

civilian displacement. Meanwhile, in Unity, a major cattle -raiding incident allegedly
perpetrated by armed youth in Pakur, Gany County, resulted in 28 killed and
35 injured.

IV. Humanitarian situation
28. The humanitarian crisis continued to deepen due to the impact of armed
conflict, rapidly deteriorating economic conditions, flooding in some parts of the
country, disease, intercommunal violence and displacement. Some 4 million South
Sudanese have been forced to flee their homes: some 1.9 million ar e internally
displaced and another 2.1 million have sought refuge in neighbouring countries,
including the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan and Uganda. As at 15 October, Uganda alone hosted
more than 1 million South Sudanese refugees, most of them women and children.
The South Sudan refugee crisis remains among the fastest-growing refugee
situations in the world.
29. On 6 November, the United Nations released the findings of the Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) for the period from September 2017 to
March 2018. The harvest season in South Sudan began in September 2017, with
6 million people (56 per cent of the total population) estimated to be severely food
insecure, out of which 40,000 were classified as being in “Famine/Humanitarian
Catastrophe” at the household level (IPC Phase 5) and 2 million facing
“Humanitarian Emergency” (IPC Phase 4) food insecurity. Post -harvest gains from
October to December are expected to reduce the number of severely food insecure
people to 4.8 million, with 25,000 classified in IPC Phase 5 in Catastrophe phase.
However, it is anticipated that earlier than normal start of the lean season will result
in an estimated 5.1 million people being classified as severely food insecure from
January until March 2018, with 20,000 people in Catastrophe phase. An estimated
1.1 million children are acutely malnourished, including close to 280,000 children
suffering from severe acute malnutrition.
30. The ongoing conflict and the rainy season have increased susceptibility to
disease, with more than 1.57 million malaria cases and nearly 2,500 related deaths
reported since January 2017. More than 77,500 people are infected by malaria every
week, the majority of whom are children under five years of age. Since June 2016,
South Sudan has experienced the deadliest cholera outbreak since gaining its
independence in 2011. Cumulatively, as at 3 November, 21,426 cholera cases,
including 441 deaths, with a case fatality rate of 2.06 per cent, have been reported in
26 counties in South Sudan. An estimated 1,070 cases of measles, with 24 deaths,
have been reported, mostly affecting children under the age of 5. As at 8 October, an
estimated 2,173 cases of kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis), a deadly parasitic
tropical disease, have been reported in 2017, with 47 related deaths and a case
fatality rate of 2.2 per cent.
31. In addition to constraints created by the rains and poor road conditions, active
hostilities, access incidents and bureaucratic impediments continued to seriously
curtail humanitarian access. The reported number of monthly access incidents
totalled 101 in September and 116 in October, 44 and 57 per cent of which,
respectively, were attributed to State actors. Two aid work ers were killed, bringing
the total number of humanitarian workers killed in 2017 to 19. Clashes and
insecurity continued to negatively impact the timely delivery of humanitarian
assistance, including by forcing humanitarian workers to be relocated for ext ended
periods of time. In September, at least 89 aid workers were forced to relocate,
hindering humanitarian operations. For example, in Koch County in Unity, partners

17-21013

7/18

S/2017/1011

relocated and suspended food airdrops and distributions following reports of
insecurity, affecting nearly 25,000 people in need. In a positive development, after
active humanitarian negotiations, humanitarian partners were able to reach more
than 12,000 people around Baggari outside Wau in Western Bahr el -Ghazal and
about 14,000 people in Lainya County in Central Equatoria with life-saving
assistance for the first time in nearly a year. Rent-seeking behaviour by authorities
also continued, including requests for costly payments for work permits from
international organizations.
32. Despite these challenges, humanitarian operations in South Sudan have
reached more than 4.7 million people with assistance and protection since the
beginning of 2017, against a targeted 6.7 million in need. As at 30 September, this
included 4.6 million people who received food and livelihood assistance, more than
2.1 million people who were able to access improved water sources, nearly
1.2 million people who received humanitarian protection services, more than
600,000 people, including 160,000 children, who were treated for malnutrition and
1,692,963 children aged between 6 and 9 months vaccinated against measles.
33. The Humanitarian Response Plan for 2017 remains underfunded, with a 30 per
cent, or $500 million, gap in the required $1.6 billion.

V. Implementation of the mandated tasks of UNMISS
A.

Protection of civilians
34. UNMISS continued to follow a three-tiered approach to the protection of
civilians. Under the first tier, protection through dialogue and political engagement,
my Special Representative exercised his good offices to engage national and local
authorities, including the President, the First Vice -President, key line ministers and
senior military officials, as well as local authorities in Western Bahr el -Ghazal and
Jonglei States. In those engagements, he stressed the Government’s responsibility to
protect civilians and the need for all parties to observe the ceasefire and to ensure
unhindered access for UNMISS and humanitarian actors. In Wau, he engaged with
local officials specifically on improving cooperation with UNMISS and
humanitarian partners to create an enabling environment for the voluntary return of
displaced civilians. UNMISS also delivered 28 workshops at the subnational level
on conflict management, reconciliation, social cohesion and promotion of the role of
women and youth in peacebuilding, reaching 10,799 participants from UNMISS
protection of civilians sites, state and county officials, traditional leaders and youth
and women’s representatives across the country. UNMISS continue d to provide
support to a pastoral migration border committee established between Amadi, Gok,
Eastern Lakes, Western Lakes and Terekeka States, and facilitated a dialogue for
Murle leaders in Kuron, Eastern Equatoria, which was mediated by the South Sudan
Council of Churches, as well as a dialogue conference of Murle leaders and
communities in Pibor, Jonglei, to advance intra-Murle reconciliation. In Rumbek,
UNMISS collaborated with local authorities to facilitate dialogues between subclans
involved in the Rup and Kuei/Pakam conflict. In addition, UNMISS delivered two
workshops on national identity for state parliamentarians, women and youth and
traditional and religious leaders in Bentiu.
35. Under the second tier, protection of civilians under threat of p hysical violence,
as at 9 November, UNMISS continued to protect 209,885 internally displaced
persons in six protection sites. This included 112,140 in Bentiu, 38,113 in Juba,
24,424 in Malakal, 651 in Melut, 2,532 in Bor and 32,025 in Wau. A temporary
protection area in Leer, southern Unity, also continued to host more than 1,000

8/18

17-21013

S/2017/1011

displaced persons. To reinforce the civilian character of the sites, UNMISS
maintained weekly meetings with community leaders and established town hall
meetings in the Bentiu, Malakal and Wau sites to share the Mission’s responses to
security incidents and to promote active community involvement in curtailing
criminal activity.
36. UNMISS conducted 216 search operations in protection of civilians sites,
which resulted in the confiscation of prohibited items such as weapons, ammunition,
illicit drugs and stolen United Nations property. As at 14 November, a total of
29 persons suspected of being responsible for serious security incidents within the
protection sites were detained in the UNMISS holding facilities in Bentiu, Juba and
Malakal. A total of 366 crime and security incidents were recorded within the
protection sites during the reporting period, with the highest incidence reported in
Juba (119 incidents) followed by Bentiu (107 incidents) and Malakal (65 incidents).
The most prevalent security incidents recorded were assault (64) followed by theft
(45). Of particular concern is the significant increase in serious security incidents in
and around the UNMISS protection site in Bentiu, with reports of suspected
abductions (on 6 and 13 September and 9 October), robberies (on 22 September and
10 and 11 October) and armed men firing into the protection site (on 13 and
26 September). The last incident resulted in the death of one residen t and three
injured residents. On 15 October, UNMISS attempted to stop five armed men from
exiting the Bentiu protection site as they tried to breach the perimeter berm. During
a subsequent search operation in the site, UNMISS peacekeepers were fired upon by
the same five armed men. Peacekeepers returned fire, injuring two of the
perpetrators, who subsequently died from their injuries. In response, UNMISS
intensified its patrols in and around the protection site, while working with site
residents to improve security. In the same reporting period, the Government agreed
to investigate two incidents of sexual violence involving six suspects currently in
UMISS holding facilities and to determine whether to pursue criminal charges
through the formal justice system.
37. UNMISS also continued to focus on deterring and mitigating violence against
civilians in areas beyond its protection of civilians sites. During the reporting
period, a total of 46,137 patrols were conducted, including regular patrols outside
the protection of civilians sites in Juba, Bentiu, Bor, Malakal and Wau. The
weapons-free-zone concept, currently being implemented around the protection sites
in Juba, is now being introduced in Bentiu in order to deter the incursion of criminal
elements and the introduction of weapons into the protection sites. Efforts also
included continued proactive deployment and patrolling to areas affected by or
threatened by conflict, including dismounted integrated patrols comprising military,
police and civilian personnel to assess the situation and facilitate engagement with
host communities and displaced persons. UNMISS also conducted patrols to
SPLM/A in Opposition-held Akobo, in north-eastern Jonglei, and held discussions
on the re-establishment of an UNMISS presence in the area, in an effort to deter and
mitigate conflict, and to create an environment conducive for humanitarian
assistance and the eventual return of internally displaced persons. In the protection
of civilians sites in Juba, Bentiu, Malakal and Bor, sensitization campaigns
reminded women to adhere to the schedule of regular firewood patrols conducted by
UNMISS peacekeepers to reduce the threat of sexual assault.
38. Under the third tier, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS
continued engaging with national and local authorities and civil society, including
through weekly meetings on protection-focused tasks in protection sites and
sensitization campaigns in areas without protection sites. The Mission, together with
humanitarian partners, facilitated visits for displaced civilians in Bor who were
willing to return to their homes. The Mission also worked with humanitarian actors
17-21013

9/18

S/2017/1011

to support the return of displaced civilians from the Melut protection site, and has
engaged in Wau with local authorities and community representatives on the
development of an action plan to create a protective environment for return. Within
the framework of the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security, UNMISS
held meetings across the country over a set of recommendations on women’s
participation, prevention of conflict, protection of women and girls from sexual and
gender-based violence and enhancing livelihoods. UNMISS, with support from the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), led a viability study to g auge
existing capacities within the national justice system to promote access to justice for
conflict-related crimes against women and children. Preliminary information
suggests that adequate legal and structural frameworks exist to support the
establishment of a dedicated unit to investigate and prosecute these crimes.
UNMISS also provided technical assistance on a practice-based manual funded by
UNDP to guide national investigators and prosecutors and participated in a
sensitization workshop for national police on the investigation and prosecution of
sexual violence cases.
39. On 25 October, the United Nations Mine Action Service commenced clearance
operations in Yei, Central Equatoria, on land earmarked for the establishment of an
additional UNMISS operating base. The Mine Action Service also handed over
cleared land in Bentiu, Upper Nile, for a collective settlement site for displaced
civilians and returnees, as requested by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In collaboration with UNMISS, the Mine
Action Service also accompanied joint patrols in Eastern Equatoria, Jonglei and
Western Bahr el Ghazal. Explosive detection dog teams were also deployed to Bor
and Wau to enhance safety control procedures for entering the res pective Mission
premises and protection of civilians sites.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
40. The human rights environment in South Sudan continued to deteriorate.
Ongoing military hostilities continue to impact civilians, who were subjected to
indiscriminate and targeted killings, conflict-related sexual violence, looting and
destruction of their properties. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded the
killing of 134 civilians, including 42 women, and 79 injuries, including to
21 women, as a direct result of conflict-related and intercommunal violence.
Limitations inherent to the operating environment, including denial of access by
authorities, continued to adversely affect the Mission’s ability to investigate alleged
human rights violations and abuses. In September, human rights teams experienced
12 incidents of denied access by SPLA soldiers at various checkpoints.
41. Both Government and opposition forces were responsible for reported
violations and abuses. For example, at least four female civilians were allegedly
killed by pro-Government forces in Adodo, Upper Nile, during the clashes on
11 September. In Aburoc, Upper Nile, pro-Government soldiers occupied a women’s
centre and three primary schools that were sheltering displac ed civilians. UNMISS
also documented 16 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence in the country
against at least 35 female civilians, including 14 children, between August and
October. Eight incidents were attributed to SPLA, four to the pro -Taban Deng
faction of SPLM/A in Opposition, one to the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition
and three to unidentified gunmen. To date, there is no information to indicate that
any of these incidents have been prosecuted.
42. Conditions of detention in police and prison facilities do not meet minimum
international human rights standards and therefore remain an issue of concern. The
practice of prolonged and arbitrary detention continued, with documented cases of

10/18

17-21013

S/2017/1011

SPLA detaining civilians in military facilities in Western Equatoria, and incidents in
which the National Security Services and a local Governor have arrested members
of the legislative assembly in Cueibet, Gok and Yirol East Counties in Lakes
without charge.
43. Concerns about the administration of justice in So uth Sudan persist. UNMISS
recorded 31 death penalty cases, including 20 in Wau, 9 in Renk and 2 in Maban. As
most criminal defendants in South Sudan lack legal representation, including in
death penalty cases, the circumstances surrounding the imposition o f the death
penalty raise concerns about fair trial rights and, thus, compliance with international
standards. On 8 September, the General Assembly of Justices and Judges ended the
judicial strike initiated in May, following reported assurances that their grievances,
including the dismissal of 14 judges pursuant to the presidential decree of 12 July,
would be looked into. At least 74 judges resumed their duties. To date, however,
none of the 14 dismissed judges has been reinstated. Moreover, one of the affe cted
judges filed a complaint before the East African Court of Justice on 13 September,
challenging the legality of the dismissal. From 25 October to 1 November, the
special tribunal constituted to try those accused of committing various crimes and
human rights violations at the Terrain hotel compound in July 2016 held its hearings
in closed session, which UNMISS and other observers continued to monitor for
compliance with national and international human rights standards. Victims are
reported to have testified before the tribunal, some in person and others via video.
The most senior-ranking suspect in the case was reported to have died in custody on
20 October, allegedly due to illness. Hearings continued in November with the
remaining 11 accused soldiers.
44. On 16 October, the Transitional National Legislative Assembly unanimously
voted in favour of ratifying the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa. South Sudan signed the Protocol
on 24 January 2013. The vote requires endorsement by the President.
45. During the reporting period, UNMISS continued to conduct public -awareness
campaigns and to carry out training sessions on human rights, reaching over
4,510 individuals, including 1,951 women. For example, from 20 September to
14 October, UNMISS organized public awareness-raising events in Juba, with the
aim of reducing ethnic polarization and promoting social cohesion.
46. Between 4 and 8 September, members of the Commission on Human Rights in
South Sudan, established by the Human Rights Council, visited Juba and several
locations in Eastern Equatoria, meeting with Government officials, representatives
of civil society and the diplomatic community. An interactive dialogue on the
human rights situation in South Sudan was convened on 18 September during the
thirty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council. The secretariat of the Commission
on Human Rights, located in Juba, supports the work of the Commission.
47. During the reporting period, the United Nations country task force on
monitoring and reporting documented 99 incidents of grave violations affecting
1,682 children (1,007 boys, 653 girls and 22 individuals whose sex is unknown), of
which 44 were verified. These included incidents of killing and maiming, the
recruitment and use of children and attacks on and use of schools and hospital
facilities for military purposes. A total of 16 schools remain occupied and are being
used for military purposes, and four health facilities have been attacked and l ooted
by armed groups. The United Nations continued to advocate at different levels for
armed elements to vacate these civilian premises. UNMISS and the United Nations
Children’s Fund continued to engage with the parties to the conflict on child
protection measures and supported the efforts of the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission to screen and verify children
17-21013

11/18

S/2017/1011

reportedly affiliated with armed groups in Yambio, Western Equatoria. In addition,
UNMISS conducted 4 training sessions on child protection for SPLA personnel,
benefiting 258 officers, including 16 women, as well as 24 training sessions for
1,502 participants (including 155 women) from among UNMISS personnel and civil
society.

C.

Creating the conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
48. UNMISS continued to provide force protection to humanitarian partners to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance to communities across South
Sudan. UNMISS also improved the conditions of main supply r oads, enabling
humanitarian actors to deliver assistance to remote areas. In mid -September, in
response to the situation in Adodo, south of Aburoc in Upper Nile, UNMISS
coordinated force protection for the evacuation of humanitarian workers from
Aburoc to Malakal and subsequently carried out regular dynamic air patrols to
Kodok and Aburoc to assess the security situation for the return of humanitarian
actors and to show its presence in order to promote the safety of humanitarian actors
working in the area. In mid-October, UNMISS helped to create secure conditions
through long-duration patrols and force protection to enable the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in the Magwi area and along the Magwi -Torit road, southeast of Juba.
49. During the reporting period, the United Nations Mine Action Service removed
and destroyed one item of unexploded ordnance discovered within the UNMISS
Pibor base and provided technical advice to the Mission on planned engineering
works along the Juba-Yei road. As requested by humanitarian actors, explosive
hazards were destroyed in Kodok and Aburoc, Upper Nile. The Mine Action Service
deployed 27 mine action teams to survey and clear roads, airstrips and helicopter
landing sites to enable security and humanitarian access. In addition, 678,912 m 2
were surveyed and released and a further 2,466 explosive hazards and 2,990 small
arms and ammunition were removed and destroyed.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
50. Implementation of the peace agreement remained minimal. My Special
Representative utilized his good offices to advocate for the full implementation of
the peace agreement, and underscored the importance of the IGAD -led high-level
revitalization forum, including through regular meetings with President Kiir and
national leaders in Juba, as well as with state and local actors. He also held a series
of direct bilateral engagements with representatives of key donors and Member
States in New York on the sidelines of the General Assembly to further highlight the
current situation on the ground, including speaking at a high -level event organized
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. In addition, my Special
Representative addressed the meeting of the African Union Peace and Secur ity
Council, where he reiterated the support of the United Nations for regionally led
peace efforts. UNMISS also continued supporting the work of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission by facilitating a forum to align the positions of
international partners ahead of the Commission’s plenary meetings and by
participating in the Commission’s working committees.
51. UNMISS continued to support the operations of the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism by providing forc e protection,
facilitating the movement of the Mechanism’s 16 monitoring and verification teams

12/18

17-21013

S/2017/1011

and participating in integrated patrols during field visits. UNMISS also provided
planning support for the ongoing redeployment of the monitoring and verificati on
teams and deployed liaison officers from its military, police and security
components to the national Joint Operations Centre established in Juba in October
2017, mandated to coordinate the activities of security forces within a 25 -km radius
of Juba.
52. In support of the establishment of the Joint Integrated Police, UNMISS
continued to work with the joint management team comprising officers from the
South Sudan National Police Service and the pro-Taban Deng SPLM/A in
Opposition. Of the 1,230 Joint Integrated Police recruits who graduated in June,
917 (including 174 women) successfully completed the training supported by the
United Nations police, in cooperation with UNDP, and were deployed in nine areas
within Juba. United Nations police personnel offered advisory support to the newly
deployed recruits, while providing remedial training to the remaining 336 officers in
line with the human rights due diligence policy.
53. There has also been minimal progress in the establishment of transitional
justice mechanisms under chapter V of the peace agreement. In September, the
technical committee created to support the establishment of the Commission for
Truth, Reconciliation and Healing initiated sensitization activities and media
broadcasts, including broadcasts in local languages. From 16 to 21 October, with
UNMISS logistical and technical support, the technical committee conducted
sensitization campaigns in Bentiu, Leer, Yei, Mundri, Aweil, Kuajok, and Renk to
raise awareness of the mandate of the Commission. The Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Affairs has submitted the draft legal instruments for the establishment
of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan to the Council of Ministers for approval. The
legal instruments are still pending approval.
54. In addition, the United Nations has begun implementation of a joint project in
support of reconciliation efforts at national and community levels, with a financial
contribution from the Peacebuilding Fund of $3 million. Project implementation is
closely coordinated with related national, regional and international efforts.

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment
55. As at 12 November, the strength of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,663,
including 878 international staff members (225 women, 26 per cent), 1,385 national
staff members (195 women, 14 per cent) and 400 United Nations Volunteers
(126 women, 32 per cent).
56. As at the same date, UNMISS police strength stood at 1,667 of the authorized
2,101 officers, including 614 individual police officers (115 women, 19 per cent),
987 personnel in formed police units (133 women, 13 per cent) and 66 correction
officers (18 women, 27 per cent). The arrival of a Ghanaian formed police unit of
170 officers in Wau and the deployment of the all-female Rwandan formed police
unit in Juba is expected in February 2018.
57. During the reporting period, UNMISS troop strength stood at 12,933 military
personnel, including 159 military liaison officers (8 women, 5 per cent),
357 military staff officers (28 women, 7 per cent) and 12,417 military contingent
personnel (424 women, 3 per cent).
58. Out of the authorized 4,000 regional protection force troops, 742 have been
inducted to date, including 11 out of the 55-person headquarters element, full
complements of the Bangladesh Engineering Unit and the Nepalese High Readiness

17-21013

13/18

S/2017/1011

Company, and the advance infantry companies of the Ethiopian and Rwandan
Battalions.
59. UNMISS continued to implement a conduct and discipline programme focused
on the new approach regarding special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse outlined in the report of the Secretary -General (A/71/818 and
A/71/818/Corr.1). UNMISS conducted refresher briefings for all personnel, aimed at
raising awareness of the new approach, emphasizing the principles of zero tolerance
and no excuse for sexual exploitation and abuse, and adding that there is “no second
chance”. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 15 conduct and discipline
allegations, bringing the current total number of open allegations to 107. In
addition, UNMISS continued to undertake risk assessments and established
community-based complaint mechanisms to provide local community members with
a channel to report alleged sexual exploitation and abuse and other serious
misconduct by United Nations personnel. The UNMISS-appointed advocate and
focal point for victims’ rights also continued to coordinate the Mission’s support for
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations personnel
60. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 47 incidents involving
violations of the status-of-forces agreement. Of particular concern was an incident
that occurred in Juba on 21 September, involving an UNMISS convoy returning to
the Mission’s Tomping base near Juba International Airport, which was stopped by
National Security Service officers at a checkpoint and directed to move to the
second UNMISS base in Juba at United Nations House. While negotiations were
ongoing, more than 100 National Security Service officers surrounded the UNMISS
convoy and assaulted the UNMISS commander, drawing their weapons. The next
morning, the same convoy was stopped by National Security Service officers at the
same location. Following the intervention of senior UNMISS and Government
officials, the UNMISS convoy was allowed to move to the U NMISS Tomping base
later in the day. In a letter addressed to the UNMISS Force Commander dated
26 September, the Minister of Defence apologized for the physical assault of the
contingent commander and indicated that the Ministry would investigate the
incident.
61. In total, 30 incidents involving restrictions of movement affecting UNMISS
operations were recorded; nine cases of interference with the implementation of
UNMISS mandated tasks, in particular with monitoring and reporting on the human
rights situation; and five new cases of arrest and detention of UNMISS personnel. In
four cases, release of personnel was secured within a day. In the fifth case, the staff
member, who was held for two days, reported ill treatment while in detention. The
whereabouts of two other staff members arrested in 2014 remains unknown. Despite
multiple requests directed at the highest levels of Government, UNMISS has been
denied access to visit the two staff members since 2015.
62. In line with a trend observed in earlier reporting periods, new cases involving
violations of the obligation to facilitate entry into South Sudan were also recorded,
which affected the deployment of incoming UNMISS Military Staff Officers.
Furthermore, visa fees were imposed on 27 newly recruited UNMI SS personnel by
officers of the Directorate of Nationality, Passports and Immigration upon arrival at
Juba International Airport. In addition: there were nine recorded cases of UNMISS
personnel and contractors being harassed, threatened or assaulted; three recorded
cases of searches of UNMISS vehicles and one attempted search; and three recorded
14/18

17-21013

S/2017/1011

cases of UNMISS property being seized or impounded. All these incidents resulted
in disruptions and delays to UNMISS operations.
63. Six incidents involving the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition were recorded.
Three incidents (two in Upper Nile and one in Jonglei) entailed violations of
freedom of movement, and three involved disregard for the inviolability of
UNMISS premises.
64. The Mission continues to notify the Government of violations through notes
verbales as well as through in-person meetings with relevant officials. A monthly
matrix of incidents also continues to be provided to the Government.
65. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan continued to impleme nt security
risk management measures to prevent and mitigate threats to United Nations
personnel, premises and assets. These measures included the enhancement of the
physical protection of United Nations premises, the use of alert and revised staff
tracking systems and closer cooperation, information-sharing and liaison with
Government security agencies. These security measures are designed to improve
early warning capabilities and to enable a timely and effective response to security
incidents.
66. To promote understanding of the UNMISS mandate, the Mission enhanced its
communications and outreach strategy by increasing multimedia content production
and engagement with the local population, showcasing, in particular, the
peacekeepers’ active support for building durable peace and protecting civilians.
Daily and weekly radio programmes broadcast by Radio Miraya, the Mission’s radio
station, continued to promote national and local dialogue and peace initiatives from
across South Sudan.

VIII. Financial aspects
67. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/308, appropriated the amount of
$1,071,000,000 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2017
to 30 June 2018. As at 10 November 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the
UNMISS Special Account amounted to $120.5 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to
$1,812.9 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made
for the period up to 31 August 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of
contingent-owned equipment has been made for the period up to 30 June 2017, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

IX. Observations and recommendations
68. The revitalization of the South Sudan peace process takes on even more
urgency as the conflict, which has left no part of the country unscathed, enters its
fifth year. As shown by this report, political and security dynamics continue to
outpace regional and international efforts to facilitate a resolution of the crisis.
Hostilities between SPLA and pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces persist
across strategic areas of the greater Upper Nile and the greater Equatorias, while
intercommunal violence and rising tensions within the Government and among its
elite have negatively affected the security environment in the greater Bahr
el-Ghazals and in the capital, Juba. The Government is moving forward with its
national dialogue process, while at the same time selectively implementing some
parts of the peace agreement. Even more worrisome is the push by the Government
towards elections at the end of the transition. Meanwhile, the economy is in crisis,
17-21013

15/18

S/2017/1011

humanitarian needs are deepening and civilians continue to be subject to appalling
levels of violence and atrocities.
69. Given the apparent unwillingness of the parties to renounce further military
advances, despite repeated calls by the region and international community to do so,
I now fear that more violence and upheaval is to be expected with the imminent start
of the dry season and as various political struggles are triggered by a push to end the
transition in 2018 and hold elections. Further hostilities and political discord will
only bring more human suffering. I therefore appeal, once again, to all South
Sudanese stakeholders to fully embrace the revitalization process, cease all
hostilities and engage in an inclusive, transparent and constructive dialogue, and
make the compromises necessary to achieve sustainable peace in the country. As the
past four years have already proved, only an inclusive political solution will allow
the people of South Sudan to return to their homes, re-establish their livelihoods,
and enjoy durable peace, development and a life in dignity
70. It was with this dire outlook in mind that in September, on the sidelines of the
General Assembly, I hosted a high-level event on South Sudan, co-facilitated by
IGAD and the African Union, to agree on collective measures to support the
revitalization of the political process in South Sudan. I was encouraged by the
African Union’s call for the region to speak with one voice and its expression of
intent to consider punitive measures against those who seek to spoil the peace
process. I also wish to commend the efforts made by IGAD ministers to engage all
parties in advance of the high-level revitalization forum. While this unity of purpose
is encouraging, much more will need to be done if we are to sustain a coordinated
strategy to influence a change in trajectory for South Sudan. Under the leadership of
my Special Representative in South Sudan and my Special Envoy based in Ethiopia,
the United Nations remains committed to working with all South Sudanese
stakeholders, and in support of efforts of the African Union, IGAD and other
regional and international partners, to secure a peaceful resolution of the conflict. I
urge the Security Council to respond in kind, utilizing all tools at its disposal to
support an immediate end to this conflict.
71. I am appalled by the staggering toll this conflict has taken on the civilian
population. With tireless dedication, humanitarian partners have delivered life saving assistance and protection to at least 4.7 million people in 2017. However,
humanitarian workers are faced with an increasingly difficult operating environment
as a result of insecurity. Humanitarian compounds and supplies have been looted
and vandalized, and humanitarian actors increasingly face violence and incidents of
armed robbery. At least 86 humanitarian workers have been killed in South Sudan
since December 2013, including 19 in 2017 alone. I call on all parties to
immediately cease their attacks on humanitarian actors and ensure their safe and
unhindered access to all areas of the country in order to avert the spread of famine
and ensure that life-saving assistance can be provided to vulnerable populations.
72. I am encouraged to note that UNMISS has further intensified its active
patrolling in areas affected by or at risk of conflict to protect civilians from physical
violence and establish a protective environment. At the same time, the Mission and
its humanitarian partners continue to face numerous security incidents, including
harassment and the obstruction of patrols. I welcome the continuing deployment of
the regional protection force, which will enhance UNMISS capacity and free the
Mission’s peacekeepers to further extend their presence, particularly in the
Equatorias. In that regard, I renew earlier calls for troop -contributing countries to
expeditiously deploy the remaining capabilities, which are critical to enable
UNMISS to effectively deliver on its mandate. Similarly, I call upon the
Government to abide by its commitments to remove obstructions and other
violations of the status-of-forces agreement, to facilitate UNMISS operations,
16/18

17-21013

S/2017/1011

including the rapid deployment of the full authorized strength of the regional
protection force, and to allow all UNMISS and humanitarian operations unfettered
access.
73. The human rights situation in the country continues to raise extreme concern.
Extrajudicial killings of civilians, arbitrary arrests and detentions, conflict -related
sexual and gender-based violence, the repression of the media, and the harassment
of political opponents continue unabated. These violations must stop and concrete
actions must be taken to hold perpetrators accountable, including through the
establishment of the transitional justice mechanisms envisaged under the peace
agreement.
74. As the Security Council is due to consider the extension of the UNMISS
mandate, and given that the strategic review of UNMISS is currently under way, I
recommend that the Mission’s current mandate be extended for two months to allow
for the completion of the review and your consideration of its recommendations.
75. Finally, I wish to express my sincere appreciation and gratitude to UNMISS
personnel, who, under the able leadership of my Special Representative, David
Shearer, continue to work courageously to protect hundreds of thousands o f
civilians, safeguard human rights, facilitate the work of humanitarian actors to
deliver much-needed assistance, and promote an inclusive political process. I
particularly thank the troop- and police-contributing countries that have provided
essential uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I further commend the
United Nations country team and non-governmental organization partners for their
tremendous courage and sacrifice in providing vital humanitarian assistance to the
population, under increasingly arduous conditions. I also thank my Special Envoy,
Nicholas Haysom, for his support to the peace process at the regional level, and I
commend the efforts of the African Union, IGAD and the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission to partner with the United Nations in helping the people of
South Sudan to fulfil their longstanding aspirations for peace and security.

17-21013

17/18

S/2017/1011

18/18

17-21013
