96

General Assemhly-Twenty-first Session

ties to the Statute oí the International Court oí Justice
and States that the General Assembly decides specially
to invite, to participate in the coníerence;
5. Invites the States reíerred to in paragraph 4
above to include as far as possible among their representatives experts competent in the field to be considered;
6. Invites the specialized agencies and the interested
intergovernmental organizations to send observers to
the coníerence ;
7. Ref ers to the coníerence the draft articles contained in chapter II of the report oí the International
Law Commission on the work of its eighteenth session
as the basic proposal for consideration by the conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
conference all relevant documentation and recommendations relating to its method of work and procedures,
and to arrange for the necessary staff and facilities
which will be required for the conference, including
such experts as may be necessary;
9. Invites Member States, the Secretary-General
and the Directors-General of those specialized agencies
which act as depositaries of treaties to submit, not later
than 1 July 1967, their written comments and observations on the final draft articles concerning the law of
treaties prepared by the International Law Commission;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate such
comments so as to facititate the discussion of the subj ect at the twenty-second session oí the General Ássembly;
11. Decides to include an item entitled "Law of
treaties" in the provisional agenda oí its twenty-second
session with a view to further discussion oí the draft
articles in order to facilitate the conclusion oí a convention on the law oí treaties at the coníerence of plenipotentiaries convened pursuant to the present resolution.
1484th plenary meeting,
5 December 1966.

2167 (XXI). Reports of the International Law
CommiHion
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the reports oí the International
Law Commission on the second part oí its seventeenth
session and on its eighteenth session,2
Recalling its resolutions 1686 (XVI) of 18 December 1961, 1765 (XVII) of 20 November 1962, 1902
(XVIII) oí 18 November 1963 and 2045 (XX) oí 8
December 1965, by which it recommended that the International Law Commission should continue its work
oí codification and progressive development of the law
of treaties, State responsibility; succession of States and
Governments, special missions and relations between
States and intergovernmental organizations,
Emphasizing the need for the further codification and
progressive development of international law in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing
the purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2
oí the Charter oí the United Nations and to give increased importance to its role in relations among nations,
2 /bid.,

Supplement No. 9 (A/6309/Rev.1).

N oting with satisfaction that at its eighteenth session the International Law Commission adopted the
final text oí its draft articles on the law of treaties and
also made progress in the codification and progressive
development oí the international law relating to special
missions,
N oting further with appreciation that the United
Nations Office at Geneva organized in May 1966, during the eighteenth session oí the International Law
Commission, a second session oí the Seminar <;>n International Law for advanced students and young government officials responsible in their respective cquntries
for dealing with questions oí international law and that
the Seminar, which was made possible by the-generous
collaboration of members oí the Commission, was wetl
organized and functioned to the satisfaction oí att,
l. Takes note oí the report oí the International Law
Commission on the work oí the second part of its seventeenth session and oí chapters I, III and IV of the
report on the work of its eighteenth session ;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Internationat
Law Commission for the work it has accomplished;
3. N ates with approval the programme oí work for
1967 proposed by the Intemational Law Commissionin chapter IV of the report on the work of its eighteenth session ;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should :
(a) Continue the work of codification and progressive development of the international law relating tospecial missions, taking into account the views expressed at the twenty-first session of the General Assembly and the comments which may be submitted by
Governments, with the object of presenting a final'
draft on the topic in the report on the work of its
nineteenth session ;
( b) Continue its work on succession oí States and
Governments, State responsibility and relations between
States and intergovernmental organizations, taking into
acco~nt the views and considerations referred to in
General Assembly resolutions 1765 (XVII) and 1902"
(XVIII);
5. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars be organized which should continue to,
ensure the participation oí a reasonable number of nationals from the developing countries ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to theInternational Law Commission the records oí the discussions at the twenty-first session oí the General Assembly on the reports of the Commission.
1484th plenary meeting,
5 December 1966.

2181 (XXI). Consideration of principies of international law conceming friendly relationa
and co-operation among State1 in accordanee with the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963 and
2103 (XX) oí 20 December 1965, which affirm the
importance of the yrogressive development and codification of the princ1ples of international law concerning
friendly relations and co-operation among States,

Reaolutions adopted on the reporta of the Sixth Committee

Recalling further that among the fundamental purposes
of the United Nations are the maintenance of international peace and security and the development of
friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principies of international Iaw concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations is of paramount importance for the maintenance of international peace and
security and the improvement of the international situation,
Considering jurther that the progressive development
and codification of those principies, so as to secure
their more ·effective application, would promote the
realization of the purposes of the United Nations,
B earing in mind that the Second Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which met at Cairo in 1964, recornmended to the
General Assembly the adoption of a declaration on these
principies as an important step towards their codification,
B eing convinced of the significance of continuing
the effort to achieve general agreement in the process
of the elaboration of the seven principies of international
law set forth in General Assembly resolution 1815
(XVII), but without prejudice to the applicability of
the rules of procedure of the Assembly, with a view to
the adoption of a declaration which would constitute a
landmark in the progressive development and codification of those principies,
Having considered the report of the 1966 Special
Committee on Principies of Intemational La.w concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation , among
States,8 which met in N ew York f rom 8 March to 25
April 1966, and having considered specifically that it
was noted in that Committee that the differences between
the various points of view on the fqrmulation of the
principies had been materially reduced and that among
the factors which hampered the achievement by the
Committee of a greater measure of agreement was lack
of sufficient time for additional deliberation and negotiation,
l. Takes note of the report of the 1966 Special Committee on Principies of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States;
2. Expresses its appreciation to that Committee for
the valuable work it has performed;
3. Takes note also of the formulations of the 1966
Special Committee concerning the principie that States
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered and the principle of sovereign equality of States, and of the Special
Committee's decision that with reg-ard to the principie
of non-intervention it will abide by General Assembly
resolution 2131 (XX) of 21 December 1965;
4. Decides to ask the Special Committee, as reconstituted by General Assembly resolution 2103 (XX),
to continue its work;
5. Requests the Special Committee, in the light of
the debate which took place in the Sixth Committee
during the seventeenth, eighteenth,. twentieth and
twentv-first sessions of the General Assembly and in
the 1%4 and 1966 Special Committees, to complete the
formulations of:
a !bid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 87,
document A/6230.

97

(a) The principie that States shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity and political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations;
( b) The duty of Sta tes to co-operate with one another in accordance with the Charter;
(e) The principie of equal rights and self-determination of peoples ;
( d) The principie that States shall fulfil in good
faith the obligations assumed by them in accordance
with the Charter ;
6. Requests the Special Committee to consider proposals on the principie concerning the duty not to intervene in matters within the domestic jurisdiction of
any State, in accordance with the Charter, with the
aim of widening the area of agreement already expressed in General Assembly resolution 2131 (XX);
7. Requests the Special Committee, having considered, as a matter of priority, the principies referred
to in paragraphs 5 and 6 above, to examine any additional proposals with a view to widening the areas of
agreement expressed in the formulations of the 1966
Special Committee concerning the principle that States
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered and the principie of sovereign equality of States;
8. Requests the Special Committee, having regard
to the work already accomplished by the 1966 Special
Committee, as specified in paragraph 3 above, to submit to the General Assembly at its twenry-second session a comprehensive report on the principies entrusted
to it for study and a draft declaration on the seven
principies set forth in Assembly resolution 1815
(XVII) which will constitute a Iandmark in the progressive development and codifi.cation of those principies;
9. Requests the Special Committee to meet at Geneva
or at any other suitable place for which the SecretaryGeneral receives an invitation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate
with the Special Committee in its task and to provide
ali the service.s, documentation and other facilities
necessary for its work;
11. Decides to include an item entitled "Consideration of principies of intemational law concerning
friendly relations .and co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations" in
the provisional agenda of its twenty-second· session.
1489th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.

2182 (X.U). Question of methods of fact-finding
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1967 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963 and 2104 (XX) of 20 December 1965 on
the question of methods of fact-finding,
N othing with appreciation the two reports submitted
by the Secretary-General in pursuance of the abovementioned resolutions, 4
4 !bid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda items 90 and 94,
document A/5694; ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda
item. 87, document A/62'28.
