TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 18 JULY I.969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 148 6) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . , . , . , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 15 July 1949 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/933 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1486

NOTE
Symbols o-f United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council(symbo1 S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of @e Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOUlRTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND EIGHTY-SIXTH

MEETING

on Friday, 18 July 1969, at 3 p.m.
&radon, stated at the Council’s meeting on 1 July: “1 have
little comfort to offer him”-in reference to you, Sir“except to report to him that my careful inquiries indicate
that there are several highly placed representatives who
hope that July will be a month devoted more to bilateral
than international diplomacy.” f1483rd meeting, paru. 26.]

President: Mr. Ibrahima BOYE! (Senegal).
&sent:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet SociaIist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

6. It is, therefore, with greatest reluctance that we had to
call for this meeting of the Security Council to discuss the
recent serious Portuguese violations of my country’s territorial integrity and, in particular, the lastest brutal bombing
of one of our villages, Since our request for a meeting of
the Security Council, many of our colleagues have been
wondering whether this request was in respect of the widely
reported incidents which took place between 30 June and
3 July 1969, and, if so, why we did not strike the iron, so
to speak, while it was red-hot. I regret that, while we had
hoped to come to this Council to discuss only those
incidents which took place between 30 June and 3 July,
there has been yet another armed attack on innocent and
unarmed Zambian civilians by Portuguese soldiers, this time
in the Balovale District in the North-Western Province of
Zambia, As of the moment I have no details, but it has been
reported that Portuguese military forces have crossed into
Zambia in the last few days and attacked one of our
villages, killing two persons. I have no doubt, however, that
before this debate is over, I shall be in a position to give the
Council more information regarding the latest incident.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/14861
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9331).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9331 )
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In a telegram dated 16 July 1969 [S/9335],
the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Portugal has requested that the representative of Portugal be invited to participate in.the debate of
the Security Council on the question before it. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to invite
the representative of Portugal to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council.

7. Mr. President, you too may be wondering why it has
taken us this length of time to raise this serious matter in
the Security Council. The answer, Sir, is very simple. My
Government has all along held the view, in regard to
matters of this nature, that it is wiser to settle them on a
bilateral basis. This is especially so when one reaiizes that in
all such cases international morality and traditional international practice among States would indicate that the
element of compensation cannot be ruled out. That being
the case, we felt that we should not burden the Council
with the intricacies of compensation-determination
in
respect of the damage done to Zambian life and property as
a direct result of Portuguese attacks, The Portuguese,
however, have become intransigent, and, as the latest
incident would indicate, they have continued to be triggerhappy.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. de Miranda
(Portugal) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): The Council will now examine the complaint submitted by the
representative of Zambia in his letter dated 15 July 1969
[S/9331].
3. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Zambia. I now call on him to make his statement.
4. Mr, MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, I wish to
express my thanks to you and all the members of the
Security Council for accepting our request to convene this
meeting.

8. Up until two weeks ago, that is to say, in the period
between 18 May 1966 and 30 June 1969, there have been
no fewer than 60 Portuguese military incursions into the
Republic of Zambia. There have been 9 such incursions in
the Barotse Province, 3 in the Central Province, 1 in the
Southern Province, 12 in the North-Western Province, and
10 in the Eastern Province, making a total of 35 land

5. Representatives will recall that in words of congratulations to you, Mr. President, upon the assumption of your
high office, the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord
1

violations. By riir, there have been 4 in the Barotse
Province, 5 in the North-Western Province, 11 in Eastern
Province, 4 in the Central Province, and 1 in the Southern
Province, making a total of 25.

would not be used as a base for hostile activities against
Portuguese territory. Both sides agreed that it was in rhe
interest of the two countries to promote peace and work
towards mutual co-operation within permissible limits.

9. As early as 5 December 1966, my predecessor, in a
communication to the Council [S/7612], informed it of an
incursion on 21 November 1966 by armed units of the
Portuguese military forces, based in the.colonial territory of
Angola, which crossed the border into the Republic of
Zambia, attacking our peace-loving people in the villages of
Musala and Chingi with shells, hand grenades and other
small arms, destroying property and seriously injuring one
of our people. Since that was not the first incident-as our
previous letter of 26 July 1966 [S/7430/ indicated-he
pointed out in that communication: “These aggressive acts
of the Portuguese colonialists in Angola are increasing along
our common border and are a continuous source of turmoil
and instability; they are no doubt threatening the peace and
security not only of Zambia, but of Africa as a whole.”

13. That hope has never been realized; for Portugal has
not only continued to apply military force to subjugate the
peoples of Angola and Mozambiclue, creating tremendous
instability in the area, but has also in the course of this
colonial war overstepped its boundary and continued 1x1
attack the peace-loving people of Zambia.

10. I need not remind the Council that the Portuguese
authorities, in their letter of 12 December 1966 (S/7632]
issued on 13 Deceniber, challenged the Zambian accusation.
Instead of stopping the reported aggression, the Portuguese
authorities threatened that they would apply an economic
lever-the strangulation of Zambia.
11. Again on 8 November 1968, I myself, in a letter to the
President of the Council [S/8895], drew the attention of
the Council to another flagrant act ‘of military aggression
committed by the Portuguese armed forces against my
country. I pointed out that on 6 November 1968 Portuguese armed forces violated Zambian territory and took up
a position at the village of Kameta in the Katete district of
the Eastern Province of Zambia near the Mozambique
border. I pointed out in my letter that the incident was
“only one in a series of similar unprovoked aggressive acts
by Portuguese armed forces against Zambia”. Furthermore,
in my letter of 4 February 1969 (S/8993], I again drew the
attention of the Council to a skirmish which took place
near Chingi in Balovale District ih the North-Western
Province of Zambia, when a patrol of armed Portuguese
soldiers crossed into Zambia from Angola and clashed with
our soldiers.

14. I do not propose to burden the Council with a
description of all these shameful acts of aggression conk
mitted by the Portuguese armed forces against my country.
I will, however, take a few of these cases,for two specific
reasons.The first is that, as evidenced in their letter
[S/7632/, the Administration in Lisbon, in spite of all the
availablefacts, has denied the involvement of its armed
forces in someof the incidents we have reported to them;
the second is that we should like particularly to make
availableall the information at our disposalto indicate tu
Portugal’s friends, especially the members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), that such armsas
they make availableto Portugal through NATO are used
not for the defenceof Portugal n- the membercountriesol’
NATO, but for the oppressioncf the peoplesof Angola and
Mozambiqueand, more seriously, againstthe peace-loving
peopleof Zambia.
15. To do this, I will unfortunately have to delveinto a lot
of statisticaldata. I regret that at a moment like this in the
history of man, when the world is being plied with
statisticaldata from the spacecraft Apollo 11, I haveto add
my own data to that endlesslist. We intend to make this
data available at the end of my statement so that
representativeswill have time to analyseit and draw their
own conclusions.In this regard, I alsomust apologizefor
having to bring into this chamber, a chamber of peace.
fragmentsof bombswhich the aggressive
Portugueseforces
have usedin the massacreof my innocent countrymen and
women, as well as children. I shall also endeavour ta
provide you with mapsindicating the area wheremost of
the conflicts have taken place. While our minds are still
fresh, I propose to begin by providing data which OUT
armed forces have collected at the various scenesof
Portugueseaggression.

12. But up until now, my Government has remained
unshaken in its policy of wanting to settle this serious
problem through bilateral negotiations. The Council may
wish to know, for example, that between 7 and 14 June
1968 a high level Portuguese delegation visited Zambia to
see for itself what damage had been done by their soldiers
to some of our villages in the Kabalo district, bordering on
Angola. It is an open secret that on that occasion the
Portuguese delegation accepted full responsibility for what
had happened, and indicated it would recommend to the
Administration in Lisbon that it pay a fair tind reasonable
compensation for the damage. They also promised that
their Government would take approp;iate measures t;
ensure that there would be no repetition of the attacks on
or viblations of Zambian territory. The Zambian side, on its
part, reassured the Portuguese delegation that the Government of the Republic of Zambia would continue to take
appropriate measures to ensure that Zambian territory

16. Following the Portuguesebombing of Zambianvillages
in the Kabalo district in April 1968, a thorough examina.
tion of aerialbomb fragmentsand fusescollected from the
villagesof Kashituka,and Kangombe wascarried out. The
bomb fragmentsconsistently indicated their having come
from a high-explosivebomb of at least 50 poundsin weight.
The fuse fragments were from nose fuseswhich operate
upon direct impact with the ground. These are usuaIly
screwedinto a booster,which, in turn, screwsinto the nose
of the bomb. This type of bomb is usually fitted belowthe
wingsof light aircraft of the Harvard type. They arefitted
in banks of four under each wing, and each aircraft can
carry up to eight bombs.The bomb is manufacturedin two
halves,and can be fitted with a mixture of a high-explosive
and smokecomposition-white phosphorus: high explosive
and one-quarter-inchsteel balls for anti-personneleffect, or
2

inches in diameter, 2 to 2 l/2 poundsin weight, and fired
electrically from tubes fitted beneath the wings of an
aircraft.

high explosive to shatter the bomb body only. The bomb is
fitted with a nose impact fuse which operates on impact
with the ground and explodes the bomb. The bombs are of
universal type and can be manufactured by any NATO
country. It is thought that the bombs dropped on these
occasions by Portuguese armed forces were of Portuguese
manufacture.

20. In June 1969, a number of grenadesand antipersonnelmineswere discoveredin the border areasouth of
Chadiza, in the EasternProvince of Zambia. The grenades
are of the polyvalent type, and one of them consistsof
three parts:

17. At 0730 hours, local time, on 1 October 1968, two
aircraft of the Harvard type, bearing Portuguese markings,
were seen flying wide apart some eight miles inside Zambia
near the Mozambican border, One aircraft was flying at an
estimated height of 600 feet. A Zambian army patrol
opened fire on the latter aircraft with three machine-guns
and six rifles. The aircraft was thought to have been hit, as
smoke was seen coming from the rear as it turned away
towards Mozambique. Local inhabitants later informed the
Zambian authorities that the aircraft’s engines had stopped
thereafter and that it had begun losing altitude as it crossed
tile Zambian border into Portuguese territory. One and a
half hours later, two more aircraft were seen flying five
miles inside Zambian territory. One of the aircraft was
simiiar to the Beaver type aircraft and had a red painted tail
and red wing tips.

(a) An instantaneousfuse incorporating a spring-loaded
striker with a short lever, a firing cap and a powerful
detonator. A safety split pin holds the striker off the striker
cap. The striker lever is painted red.

fb) A cylindrical drab olive plastic body, 4 inches long
and 1 7/8 inchesin diameter.This is filled with TNT. The
fuseis screwedinto the top of this body.
/c) A spirally wbund Fragmentationsleeve.This sleeveis
removable,and the grenadecan be usedwith or without the
sleevein place. To avoid lossof fragmentation and ensure
greater injuries to personnel,it is unlikely that the grenade
will be usedwithout the fragmentation sleeve.

18. Fifty minutes later, a single aircraft was seen circling
around about two miles from the village of Chimpopi and
attacking an abandoned farm known as Phiri’s Farm at
approximately 1015 hours, local time. The same aircraft
swept over the village of Chimpopi, situated Iwo miles from
the Zambian-Mozambican border, and attacked it with
rockets. It is estimated that eight rockets were fired on that
occasion. A contingent of the Zambian army proceeded to
the villageto investigatethe attack and found at the scenea
package containing two misfired 37 mm air-to-ground
rockets anda number of fragmentsof 37 mm rockets.

This grenade appearsto have been specifically manufactured for use as a booby trap. It can be attached to trees
with a wire or length of strong cord fixed to the safety pin.
This trip wire can then be stretched across tracks or
through low undergrowth and attached at the other end.
Disturbance of the trip wire pulls out the safety pin, and
the grenadeexplodesinstantaneously.It hasa dangerarea
of approximately 30 feet. The grenadecan alsobe usedin
parcel bombs. The markingson the baseof the grenades
are: “ARM A/P FRAG M/963 l-02/67”. It is not known at
present who manufacturesthis grenadeor its country of
origin, but no doubt it shouldnot be beyond the ability of
the Council to find this out.

19. The*following technical data were clearly visible on
the rockets and on someof the fragments which were
recovered by the Zambianarmy authorities:

21. The mine, anti-personnel,consistsof the following:

On the fuses:
(1) SNEB 22-28 BT 62
(2) SNEB 22-28 BT 63

(a) A domed plastic fuse, which screwsinto the mine
body and in which is housed: (1) a plastic striker coated
with a ‘match’-headcomposition, and (2) a smallamount of
flame-producingcomposition.

On the rocket heads:
37 SNEB
TELE TYPE EXPLOSIVE
BT 4-63

(b) A squat cylindrical plastic body measuring 1 l/4
inchesin depth and 2 l/4 inchesin diameter. This is filled
with an outer ring of TNT and an inner ring of gun powder.

On the rocket motors:
(1) Prop type 44 BT 4-63
(2) TT 7” lo-65 SM
37 SNEB
TYPE 447
BT 8-63

(c) A metal detector ring which fiils over the top of the
mine immediately beneaththe fuse.
(d) A smallbut powerful detonator housedin a celluloid
cylinder. This is insertedinto the mine body before the fuse
is screwedin.

The rocket headswere painted a drab olive colour, with
yellow stencilling,andthe rocket motorswere paintedlight
grey, with black stencilling. Thesecolours and markings,
according to our army experts, indicatethat the projectiles
were manufacturedin France:

Markings on the baseof the mine, which is of drab olive
coloured plastic, are “SAE 8/66”, stencilled in about
one-eighth of an inch in yellow letters. With regardto these
figures, “SAE” relatesto the manufacturer, we believe,and
“8/66” should indicate the month and year of manufacture. The mine can be operated by either a kick or a
pressure of 20 pounds or less. When laid without the

rocket heads were filled with high explosive of the
TNT type. They were about 16 inchesin length and 1 I/2
The

3

33. On 22 March 1968, the Portuguese Air Force invaded
the village of Mulonda, in the Kabalo district of the
Barotse Province of Zambia, and bombed it from the air.
Sevenpeople were killed, 18 wounded, among them women
and children and several houses and much property were
destroyed. Forty-two houses in the village of Kshiluka were
razed to the ground following Portuguese aerial bombardment on 29 April 1968.

detector’ ring, the mine cannot be detected without the
mine detector. The mine is powerful enough to blow off a
man’s foot or seriously damage the front suspension of a
vehicle. In spite of the markings on the base of the mines,
we have not been able as yet to determine who manufactures them or their country of origin, but, again, if we in
this Council put our heads together, in a spirit of
co-operation, it should be possiole for us to decipher these
markings correctly.

34. On 3 June, the aggressor entered the village of
Shangombo, in the Senanga district of the Barotse Province
of Zambia, and took away seven Zambian nationals as loot.
They have never been returned.

22. Having delved into all these technicalities, I should
now like to inform the Council of the damage done to my
people and country by the Portuguese aggressors.In order
not to tax the patience of members of the Council any
further, I intend merely to mention some of the incidents,
as I have before, and if any member of the Council is
interested in more detail I should be only too glad to
expatiate.

35. In the attacks against Zambia, the Portuguese invaders
have not confined themselves merely to attacking villages,
as was shown on 9 June 1968. On that occasion, having
murdered in cold blood a guard who was in charge of one
of our vital bridges, the Luangwa bridge, they proceeded to
blow up the bridge, thus cutting away the entire Eastern
Province from the rest of the Republic of Zambia.

23. On 19 February 1966, Portuguese soldiers based in
Mozambique crossed into Zambia and stole 21 head of
cattle belonging to a Mr. Phiri of Mwanjawanthu village, in
the Petauke district of the Eastern Province of Zambia. As
if that were not enough, these maurauders also kidnapped
Mr. Phiri himself. He has never been seensince.

36. On 10 June, .the village of Katumba, in the Katete
district of the Eastern Province, was invaded by the
Portuguese. A man and his wife were abducted and released
two weeks later, after undergoing a series of tortures and
questioning.

24. On 12 April, Mr. Goza Mwanza of the Petauke district
was kidnapped by Portuguese soldiers, tortured in Mozambique for three months and then released.

37. On 20 July, two people were shot dead in the village
of Chinkoma, in the Petauke district of the Eastern
Province of Zambia. On 28 July 1968, the thieves struck
again, this time in the village of Katumba, in the Katetc
district, where they stole 37 head of cattle. Obviously the
behaviour of our friends’ colonial soldiers reminds us of the
thieving soldiers who lived off the land of the victims of
their aggression‘during the Thirty Years’ War.

25. On 15 July, the village of Chipatela in the Balovale
district, in the North-Western Province of Zambia, was
attacked, and 11 houses and several grain bins were
destroyed.
26. On 23 September, Portuguese forces based in Angola
attacked the village of Nakushowa injuring 12 people.

38. Even more shameful was the Portuguese bombing of
the Kanongesha Catholic Mission, in the Mwinilunga dis.
trict, in the North-Western Province of Zambia, on 30
August. One man was killed in the village of Kaengo, in the
Katete district, on 17 August. That incident was followed
by one on 30 September, at the village of Songwe, where
the Portuguese Air Force dropped 18 bombs, completely
destroying 3 houses and killing and maiming several domes.
tic animals.

27. On 20 December, a Mr. Shindano of the Kabalo
district wasshot dead by Portuguese troops.
28. On 23 December, Portuguese soldiers invaded the
village of Musala, near the Kapanda Mission in the
Mwinilunga district, and in the invasion a man waskilled.
29. On 30 December, armed Portuguese soldiers from
Lumbala in Angola crossed into Zambia and kidnapped
three men. Two of these were shot on the way to Lumbala
as they tried to escape.The fate of the third man is yet to
be known,

39. In the invasion in Chimpopi on 1 October, six people
were seriously wounded, and the fragments that were
discovered on the scenehave been described already.

30. On 11 August 1967, the village of Mwanjawanthu, in
the Eastern Province of Zambia, wasagain attacked. Three
Zambian nationals were kidnapped, tortured for a month
and then released.

40. On 6 October, Mr. Kalikeka Njovu of the Petauke
district of the Eastern Province of Zambia was abducted
and has never come back to his family.

31. On 3 1 October, Portuguese soldiers from Mozambique
kidnapped a Malawian visitor to Chadiza in the Eastern
Province of Zambia. He has never been seensince.

41. On 2 November, Mr. Petolo Mahmo wasgoing about
his work in his garden, well within Zambia, near the border
with Mozambique, when Portuguese soldiers shot at him
and he wasseriously wounded.

32. On 25 December, the invaders from Mozambique
attacked the village of Nyanje in the Petauke district,
kidnapping 16 Zambians and stealing their property. Their
fate is still unknown.

42. Portuguese forces from Mozambique invaded the
village of Kamela in the Katete district on 6 November.
They kidnapped one person and proved their depravity by
raping an innocent woman. On 6 November, as I have
4

pointed out before, Portuguese soldiers crossedinto Zambia
and took up positions at the village of Kamela in the Katete
district of the Eastern Province of Zambia, and for a short
while engaged our armed forces. A Portuguese commander
was killed and four others were seriously wounded. One
Zambian soldier wasalso wounded.

bombing, were inclined to abandon their homes and hide in
the forests. On Wednesday, 2 July, and Thursday, 4 July,
the Portuguese Air Force struck again at the same village,
dropping 24 bombs in all. As the inhabitants took to the
bush at each approach of the invaders, no casualties were
reported; only property was damaged. Zambian forces
opened fire in self-defence on both occasions.

43. On 24 January 1969, a patrol of armed Portuguese
soldiers crossed into Zambia from Kalipende, a Portuguese
army garrison in Angola. In a clash that followed with our
armed forces, three of the invaders were killed.

48. The representative of Portugal may wish to hear the
following words of Mr. Freitas, one of the Portuguese
soldiers currently under detention in Zambia as quoted in
the independent Tinzes of Zambia on 4 July 1969, on the
occasion of the quashing of the two-year sentence imposed
upon him :

4.4. On 16 June, about 2 o’clock in the afternoon local
time, a Portuguese military patrol under the command of
Lieutenant Jose Maria Santos Silva crossed into Zambia,
and two of the soldiers--Jose Maria Santos Silva himself and
Lance-Corporal Jose Antonio Forgaz Monte e Freitas-were
apprehended by Zambian authorities. The Zambian military
patrolmen took the aggressorsinto custody and they are
now under detention, in accordance with our emergency
regulations, pending a reasonable attitude from the Portuguese side. The Portuguese administration in Lisbon should
learn from our attitude that, while they kidnap and kill our
innocent civilians, we do not, even when the opportunity
offers itself, take similar barbaric measures against the
captive aggressors. A sentence that was handed down by
one of our courts against these invaders was, in fact,
quashed by a higher court for technical reasons. Thus, the
men are now under mere detention.

“I can’t believe what is happening. I can’t be free. This
is wonderful to think that a Zambian judge can do this
for us. Zambian justice is certainly impressive. Now I just
want to finish my term in the army and go back to
Lisbon. We have been well treated here. We have no
complaints. We certainly hold nothing against Zambia.”
Of course, as a man in detention, Freitas was not aware at
that moment that his Government’s armed forces were
continuing their cowardly and shameful aggression against
the village of Lote.
49. I have stated earlier that in spite of the seriousness of
the situation my Government still believed that bilateral
negotiations with the Portuguese were the best course of
action. My Government therefore proceeded to raise this
matter with the Portuguese authorities, which explains why
no action was taken in the Security Council for almost two
weeks after the incident occurred. Unfortunately, the
Portuguese attitude has been one of arrogance and total
lack of co-operation. When we raised the serious issue of
their soldiers planting mines in our territory, they turned.
round and said the mines were not planted in our territory
but in Mozambique. As members will see from the maps
which I shall make available, there can be no question asto
where the aggressor planted these deadIy weapons. There
can be no question but that Portuguese armed military
forces have violated Zambia’s territorial integrity,

45. Under cover of darkness during the night of Wednesday, 25 June, a Portuguese launch wasseen cruising on the
Kwango River, heading for the village of Lyanibe in the
Shangambo area of the Senanga district of the Barotse
Province. Upon reaching the village, 8 armed Portuguese
soldiers, in company with 1.5 others who masqueraded as
civilians,
attacked this village. They kidnapped
Mr. Jeremiah Lushindu, and stole some of his property,
including three sewing machines and some money, To date
nothing has been heard about the whereabouts of Jeremiah
Lushindu .
46. On the morning of Monday, 30 June, between 0900
and 1000 hours local time, two planes flew over the village
of Lote from the direction of Mozambique. Their pilots
surveyed the heavily populated area of Kabilima, Songwe,
Climpopi and Lote villages. Each of these villages has a
population of over 200 persons and are quite far from the
border, Lote village itself being well over three miles away
from the border with Mozambique, When the planes were
sufficiently low over Lote, 12 bombs were dropped on the
village, two women were killed; Muonengi Phiri and
Mutilire Phiri were their names, Their bodies were very
badly mutilated by bomb fragments. Mutilire’s head was
severed from the rest of her body and thrown 200 yards
away. Mr. Banda was seriously injured. He now lies in
St. James Hospital, Katete, with a broken leg. Several
houses were destroyed and grain bins gutted. Much property was also destroyed. Muonengi is survived by her only
child, aged seven. Mutilire was only twenty-two years old.

50. The grave bombing of the village of Lote on three
successive days, which I have referred to before, has been
dismissed merely on the grounds that-and I quote the
official Portuguese reply-“the bombed locality is in Portuguese territory”. Apart from the implications of that
dismissal, it is in itself a shocking admission. I should like,
however, to point out that an examination of the area in
question-and this the Portuguese side must admit-will
clearly indicate that the Portuguese policy to remove
forcibly all the inhabitants on the Mozambican side, at least
seven miles away from the border, has left their side clear
of any villages. Anyone found in the border area by the
bloodthirsty Portuguese soldiers is shot on sight. It is
incredible therefore that, while knowing that they have no
villages in the border region on their side, they should
shamelessly claim that the village they were bombing was
Mozambican.

47. Immediately after this incident a contingent of the
Zambian army wasrushed to the area. It helped remove the
fear of the inhabitants of the area, who, as a result of the

51. While in the past we had known the Portuguese to
make hollow promises of peace and good-neighbourliness,
5

are the champions of Christianity and Western civiiization
in southern Africa. What a shame. I wonder what they vii1
say after hearing what their so-called champions are doi.ng
there. Will they continue to support militarily and ecanom.
ically a nation with as bad a record as the Portuguese? 110
they derive any pleasure from all these murders, kidnap
pings, robberies and rapes? Is this what Western civilization
stands for?

the occasion has not arisen for them to question on which
side of the border the attacked villages were located. We
would regard the matter as of very grave concern if by that
reply the Portuguese were to suggestthat Lote is on the
Portuguese side of the border. But since this is not the only
caseof deliberate Portuguese aggressionagainst Zambia, we
can only interpret this attitude as being a prelude to open
aggression and a departure from the policy of bilateral
talks.

56, We in Zambia would like to build a colour-blind
society where all men can have equal opportunity. 1Ne
would like to devote our energies to peaceful economic
development. We would like to live with our neighbours in
peace and mutual co-operation. Unfortunately, the colonial
policy of Portugal prevents us from reaching these goals.
While we want to be faithful to the Charter of the United
Nations, the Portuguese have not only trampled on it but,
jn doing so, they have made us victims of their inhuman
colonial policies.

li 52. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the United Nations Charter
clearly states:
“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”
In the light of this shameful chain of acts of aggression,the
Council may pause to consider whether Portugal, a Member
of the United Nations, is observing that internationally
accepted principle.

57. We would like to warn them, however, that in
accordance with Chapter VII, Article 5 1, of the Charter, we
reserve our inherent right of self-defence. If it is their
intention to close the door to negotiations, if it is their
intention to continue committing these acts of aggression,
we shall not fail to make an appropriate response to their
aggression, The fact that we have turned the other cheek :EO
far should not be exploited any further. If what Portugal
understands is barrel diplomacy, we shall have no choice, if
attacked again, but to reply in the same language. We havea
duty to defend our innocent peace-loving citizens, and o’ur
people are ready to defend their motherland. The supporters of Portugal in this mad policy will be well advised lo
prevail on it not to carry war into Zambia any more.

53. In various pronouncements and in several exchanges,
my Government has reiterated its conviction concerning the
policy of good-neighbourliness. Concerned over the deterioration of the situation in southern Attica, we have on
occasion advised the Administration in Lisbon that it is
foolish and ludicrous to blame their tragic failures in
Angola and Mozambique on neighbours. We have told them
that as long as the peoples of these colonies are not free
they will continue to be encumbered with those problems.
Why cannot Portugal learn from the excellent example of
Brazil? It is that kind of relationship of co-operation in
equality which is going to yield good. results instead of
murder, arson and oppression. But, of course, our counsel
has fallen on deaf ears. While we have sought to adviseour
neighbours for the good of all, they have responded with
cannon fire against us.

58. At this stage it may be necessary for me to indicate
what we seek from the Council. We believe that any
country worthy of membership in the United Nations
should condemn, in the strongest terms, this continuous
unprovoked and premeditated aggression committed by
Portugal against our innocent, unarmed men, women arrd
children. The Council should call on Portugal to stop sll
these cowardly murders, the destruction of property,
shameful acts of rape, thievery, the planting of mines, and
the violation of our territorial integrity, These acts must
stop once and for all. As for what Portugal has already
done, we shall demand that it hand back our nationals
kidnapped by its barbaric soldiers in Angola and Mozarn.
bique. We demand that Portugal make amends for the
destruction of our homes and property. We do not wiult
our people to live in fear. The pain of this international
pillory, although we do not cherish it, and the pain (of
having to recompense us for lost lives, should teach
Portugal to live in peace with its neighbours. Weare tired aI’
people from other continents exporting their problenls
to us.

54. It is shameful that a county which led the world
during the age of discovery, not so many centuries ago,
should now be famous for providing rapists, callous
murdeieis and robbers to Africa. One even wonders
whether the teachings of the Catholic Church are making
any impression on the Portuguese mind of today.
55. At this stage I should like to turn to our friends in the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Will they sit back and
let their allies sink so Iow? Indeed, will they continue to
provide arms to Portugal so that it can use them to turn our
innocent men, women and children into cannon fodder?
When vire come to this Council to tell Western countries
that a real threat exists in southern Africa, instructions are
rushed to our friends here not to support our call for
collective effective preventive measures.Our arguments that
their investments are protected better in a peaceful,
democratic and independent southern Africa appear not to
be heeded. When we ask them whether they at least care
about the fate of their nationals in Africa north of the
Zambezi, they bury their heads in the sand. Instead, our
Western friends would rather believe the sordid propaganda
that the Portuguese, the South Africans and the Rhodesians

59. Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the members of
the Council for bearing with me for so long.
60. The PRESIDENT (translated
from
French):
The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Portugal, ala
whom I now call.
61. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): Mr. President,1 thank yclu
and, through you, the other members of the Council fiJr
6

inviting me to participate in this debate on behalf of the
Government of Portugal. I have listened with careful
attention to the statement just made by the representative
of Zambia. He began by saying ‘that the hope had been
expressed that the month of July would be devoted to
bilateral rather than international diplomacy, If anything
has been done to destroy that hope, the responsibility is
obviously that of the Zambian Government. It is not
Portugal which has called for a meeting of the Security
Council, It is not Portugal ~hkh
has abandoned the way of
bilateral negotiations. AS I shall have occasion to say later
in this statement, the responsibility for coming to the
Security Council, avoiding bilateral negotiations, is again
that of the Zambian Government.

is, to say the least, difficult to understand,but it is even
more difficult when it is rememberedthat since then
bilateral talks have taken placebetween the two Governmentsand as a result all -the pastincidents,whether they
actually took placeor not, havebeenconsideredassettled.
Therefore, it waswith no smallamount of surprisethat I
listenedto the list invoked here by the representativeof
Zambia.
66. In its letter to the Security Council the Zambian
Government believesthat it has found “proof of the
bellicose intentions of the [Portuguese] Government”
[S/9331]. What the Zambian Governmenthas found is a
mare?+nestcreated by its own unwarrantedattitude towardsPortugal.It is astoundingthat the ZambianGovernment should make such a sweepingallegation against
Portugal, when all the facts point to the great lengthsto
which Portugal has gone in trying to maintain good
relations with Zambia, in spite of the clearly unfriendly
attitude which the Government of Lusaka has adopted
towardsPortugal. The Governmentof Lusakais obviously
trying to invert the truth in an effort to justify its own
hostile intentions, seekingto camouflageits own lawless
initiatives as self-defence.It is common knowledge that
until 1966 there had been no incidents on the frontier
betweenZambiaand the contiguousPortugueseterritories.
Since Northern RhodesiabecameZambia,Portugal hasat
all times tried to maintain friendly and co-operative
relationswith the newRepublic.

62. The Security Council has been convened at the request
of the Government of the Republic of Zambia in order to
discuss allegations of a specific nature made by that
Government against Portugal. The request and the allegations are contained in document S/9331.
63. My delegation cannot help saying that this attitude of
the Zambian Government is very strange indeed. It is very
strange not only in view of the utter lack of substance in
the allegations made against Portugal but also because the
Zambian Government has thought fit to rush to the
Security Council, bypassing the method of bilateral talks
which have been adopted by agreement between the two
Governments and which the Zambian Government itself has
avowed to be very useful during all this time. What has
made the Zambian Government leave those talks at loose
ends this time and come rushing to the Security Council?
My delegation cannot but wonder, as I am sure all of you,
Mr, President and members of the Council, will also
wonder. It may be that a clue is given by the reports which
have appeared in the press regarding the case of two
Portuguese military persons unlawfully and faithlessly
detained in Zambia. According to press reports, a crisis has
arisen between the executive and the judiciary in Zambia
over the case under reference and serious riots have broken
out in that country. ‘I shall have more to say on this case
subsequently.Meanwhile, I should like to emphasizethat
my Pelegationis at a lossto understandthe strangeconduct
of the Zambian Government in calling upon the Council
while bilateral talks werestill.going on.

67. AS I said,until 1966 there had beenno incidents,The
Zambian attitude towards Portugal was correct and the
Portugueseattitude towardsZambiawascorrect. Certainly
there wasno intention on the part of Portugal to provoke
Zambia,just as there is today no intention on the part of
the PortugueseGovernmentto provoke Zambia,in spiteof
all that hashappenedsince1966.

64, In trying to justify its request for this meetingof the
Security Council, the Zambian Government referred to its
previous communicationsto the Council and to unspecified
“recent Portugueseviolations” of its territory. Concretely,
the Zambian Governmentmentionsa singleincidentalleged
to have taken placeon 30 June 1969 at Lote villagein the
Eastern Province of Zambia. Since this supposedincident
has been talked about for the last two weeks, the
Portugueseauthoritieshave had sufficient time to checkon
it. I am in a position to inform the Council that the
Zambiai allegationis devoid of foundation. My delegation
rejectsit categorically.
65. In the statementhe hasjust made,the representative
of Zambia gavealong list of incidentsallegedto havetaken
place since 1966. As I listened to him, I wonderedwhether
he was trying to create an impressionin the Council. To
come now with a list of incidents which took placein I966
7

68. Right now I wish to emphasizethat at no time has
Portugal shown any unfriendly, much lesshostile, intentions towardsZambia.On the contrary, by words andacts
Portugalhasshownits sinceredesireto live on goodterms
with Zambia.But the samecannot be saidof the Zambian
Governmentin relationto Portugal.It is significantthat the
representativeof Zambia presenteda list of incidentssaid
to havetaken placesince1966.What happenedin 1966? It
is not Portugal that changedits attitude towardsZambia.It
is Zambia that changed its attitude towards Portugal,
becausein 1966 the ZambianGovernmentdecidedto open
its territory to hostile activities against Angola and
Mozambique. The Zambian Government authorized the
establishmentof training and sup@ybasesin its territory
for armedattacks on the adjoining Portugueseterritories.
This is no secret and the Zambian Government hasitself
openly admitted it more than once. Indeed, in his peroration today, the representativeof Zambia implicitly admitted Zambia’shostility towardsPortugal.
69. It was therefore the Zambian Governmentthat embarked, at a certain stage,on a policy of gratuitoushostility
to PortugaI. Its policy of permitting violence against
Portugal gave rise to attacks carried out from Zambian
territory against Portugueseterritories. It is difficult to
figure by what stretch of the imaginationthat can be

who might wish to have a look at it, but I shall not waste
the time of the Councilby goinginto technical details.I do
not wish to impressthe Council in that way, but I too have
with me a list of detailsof violations.

construed as self-defence on the part of Zambia. In fact, the
offence comes from the Zambian side, and a situation has
arisen in which the Portuguese frontier areas in Angola and
Mozambique are constantly being violated by armed elements proceeding from Zambia. The Zambian Government
cannot disclaim responsibility for this situation. It has the
obligation not to permit its territory to be used as a
springboard for hostile actions against foreign territories.

75. I wish also to draw the attention of the Councilto
another incident that took place recently, to which the
representativeof Zambia also alluded. Since armedraiders
frequently crossfrom Zambia into the Portugueseterritories, a certain areainsidePortugueseterritory wasminedby
70. The representative of Zambia quoted Article 2, paraour security forces. The representativeof Zambiasaidthat
graph 4, of the Charter.I wishhe had quotedit to hisown
he hasa map, Well, I too have a map which I amprepared
Government.
to showto membersof the Council. On 21 June, 27 armed
71. The PortugueseGovernment,facedwith this situation, men of the Zambian forces crossed into Portuguese
territory and tried to remove the mines. When the
has,on the one hand, tried to reasonwith Zambiaand,on
the other hand,issuedstrict instructionsto its own security Portugueseforces advancedwith a view to arrestingthe
intruders, they opened fire, which the Portugueseforces
forces to respectthe territorial integrity andsovereigntyof
the Republic of Zambia.And the PortugueseGovernment returned. The Zambianforcesthen fled back into their own
seesto it that its instructionsare obeyed by its security territory, The incident was reported by the Timesof
forces. But the PortugueseGovernmentcannot, obviously, Zambia. But it was denied by a Zambian Government
allow its security forcesin the frontier areato be harassed spokesman,who naturally would have found it compromisingto admit an incident in which the Zambianforces
and fired upon by hostile elementsstationed acrossthe
border without those security forces reacting in self- had obviously violated Portugueseterritory. However,on
defence.
the very next day after this denial, a Zambian Air Force
plane violated Portugueseair spaceby flying low over the
72. The representativeof Zambiahasalsoquoted Article
areafor 15 minutes.Again, I shallnot wastethe time of the
51 of the Charter. If Article 51 is’at all applicable,it is to
Councilby giving the detailsof the description of the plane,
this situation in which the Portuguesesecurity forces, in
andso on.
their patrol duties along the frontier areas,are being
harassedand fired upon by elementsenjoying the protec- 76.’ I could mention many more violations of Portuguese
tion of the ZambianGovernment.
territory by Zambian forces. The PortugueseGovernment
has tried to deal with all such frontier problemsat the
73. If the Portuguesesecurity forces did, not react, it
bilateral level and the Zambian Government, on its side,
would amount to relinquishingcontrol of a strip of
agreedto the adoption of that method for dealingwit11
Portugueseterritory along the frontier which would thus
frontier problems. I repeat, the Zambian Government
come under the control of the attackersfrom the other
agreedto the adoption of bilateral talks for dealingwith all
territory. Portugalcannotallow sucha situationto develop. frontier problems.III fact, we have documentary evidence
In fact, no country can allow sucha situation to develop to s11ow
that the Zambian Government not only agreedto
along its frontiers. It is up to the ZambianGovernmentto
that method but also found it to be very useful. This can
take measures
to stop the firing acrossthe border from its
only meanthat the ZambianGovernment was satisfiedwith
territory into Portugueseterritory. This is the elementary the honesty and reasonableness
of the PortugueseGovernduty of any‘Government.No amountof political quibbling ment and its desireto negotiatein good faith. Whoor what
can lessenthe responsibilityof a Governmentthat fails in
has queeredthe pitch now? Certainly, nothing that the
this duty as the Zambian Governmentis so failing. The
PortugueseGovernmenthasdoneor failed to do.
Security Council could do worse than call upon the
Zambian Government to fulfil its international obligation 77. The Zambian representative mentioned vaguely an
on this point. In fact, my delegationexpectsthe Councilto
incident which is said to have taken place in the pastfew
call upon the Governmentof Zambiato abideby the norms days.He did not give details;he has promisedto do so.But
of international goodconduct in this respect.
one conclusioncan already be drawn: that it wasnot that
alleged incident which made the Zambian Government
74. I repeat that the incidents are createdby the hostile cometo the Security Council, bypassingthe talks that were
elementswhich the Governmentof Zambia authorizesto
beingheld on all the previous recent incidents, particularly
carry out unlawful violent activities againstthe Portuguese the incident allegedto have taken place on 30 June1969.
security forces engagedin their fully legitimate task of
patrolling the frontier areas.Sometimeseven the Zambian 78. I must inform the Council that, as soon as the
armedforces, includingthe Zambianair force, areinvolved.
Zambian allegation concerning the incident saidto have
Now that the Zambian Government has come to the
taken place on 30 June becameknown to the Portuguese
Security Council to accusePortugal, I wish to draw the
Government,the PortugueseGovernment directed its Amattention of the Council to the frequent violations of
bassadorin London to contact the ZambianHighCortuni~.
Portuguese air spaceby the Zambian Air Force. The
sioner in that city, in accordance with the procedure
, representativeof Zambiahasgiven a long list of details.I,
adoptedby the two Governments for bilateral talks, asI
too, have with me details regarding the violations of
have already mentioned.The PortugueseGovernmentgave
Portuguese territory by the Zambian Air Force, I am
its version of the incident, but the Zambian Government
preparedto show this list to any memberof the Council did not reply. It came to the Security Council, allcglng
8

Portuguese bellicosity and making a number of other
allegations which, to my Government, come as a surprise.
My delegation asks whether this is a case of Portuguese
bellicosity or of Zambian faithlessness.

want that understanding, and indeed seems to fear the very
goodwill shown by the Portuguese Government in spite of
constant Zambian provocation, may be seen in the present
attitude of the Zambian Government in brmging baseless
charges against Portugal before the Security Council,
bypassing the talks that were being held-1 repeat: bypassing, not breaking them off-without
saying a word to
the Portuguese Government .

79. The Zambian delegation says that Zambia broke off
the talks because of Portuguese arrogance. I really fail to
know what is meant by “Portuguese arrogance”. Portugal
approached the Zambian authorities, and the Zambian
authorities did not even reply; they came to the Security
Council. And yet they have the effrontery to allege
Portuguese arrogance.

86. My delegation believes that it has made the Portuguese
position quite clear. The specific charges brought by
Zambia are utterly devoid of foundation. Portugal has at all
times shown its willingness to smooth things out with
Zambia in a spirit of friendship and co-operation. Portugal
has given proof of this willingness not only by word but by
action. And Portugal remains willing to continue with the
bilateral talks, and formally proposes to the Zambian
delegation that the Luso-Zambian mixed commission be
asked to investigate also the allegation now brought before
the Council. The Portuguese delegation to the LusoZambian talks has already suggested that the frontier line
be clearly demarcated so that it can be easily recognized,
even from planes. I repeat this-it is a very important
point-because in some cases it appears that the Zambian
authorities are not quite clear about the boundary line. It
would help a good deal if the Luso-Zambian mixed
commission were to proceed to a demarcation of the
frontier line.

80. I must inform the Council that for over a year now the
Portuguese and the Zambian Governments have maintained
contacts and held bilateral talks, here in New York, in
London, and in Zambia itself; high-level delegations of the
two Governments have met on a number of occasions. The
most recent of these meetings took place in Zambia about
two months ago. A Luso-Zambian mixed commission exists
to investigate, on the spot, all allegations made by either
side.

81. As a result of the investigations made by the mixed
Luso-Zambian commission, it was found that in the past
many of the incidents alleged by the Zambian Government
had been provoked from the Zambian side. When, in a case
or two, it was found that the fault lay on the Portuguese
side, the Portuguese Government immediately expressed
regret and paid the amount of compensation demanded by \, 87. The Portuguese Government for its part has declared
Zambia. This has been acknowledged today by the reprethat it is willing to participate in the expenditure that may
sentative of Zambia before the Security Council.
be incurred in this connexion. For reasons best known to it,
this suggestion has not been followed by the Zambian
82. I ask: Is this an attitude of arrogance? Is this an
Government. Are we to conclude that the Zambian
attitude of bellicosity on the part of the Portuguese
Government wants to keep the frontier line undemarcated
Government?
Or is it proof that Portugal negotiates in
so as to be able to continue to allegePortuguese violations?
good faith, in all honesty, prepared even to admit where its
own fault lies, if there is any fault.
88. The Portuguese Government has shown its good faith
and its sincere desire to avoid border incidents by making
83. But there is more, As you all know, the Benguela
this constructive suggestion. It is a sad disillusionment for
Railway also serves the interests of the Republic of Zambia.
the Portuguese Government to find that the Zambian
Nevertheless, the Benguela Railway has been sabotaged by
Government does not show equal good faith in dealing with
elements infiltrating from Zambia, There have been, bePortugal. If proof were needed, we have it in the incident to
tween January and April of this year, no fewer than 110
which T have already alluded and to which I now wish to
acts of sabotage, some of them serious ones, Nevertheless,
refer in detail. I refer to the incident of the two Portuguese
the Portuguese Government, knowing how vital that railmilitary men who are being held in Zambia. The represenway is for Zambian trade, has until now kept the line open
tative of Zambia mentioned this incident but gave a version
for the transport of goods to and from Zambia, as it has
which, I must say, does not fully correspond to the truth,
kept open the line which Zambia uses for its access to the
because he has left out important details.
sea through Mozambique. Is this an attitude of bellicosity
towards
Zambia? After this, to attribute to Portugal
89. On 16 June 1969, at 1400 hours local time, a
bellicose intentions in relation to Zambia is to invert the
Portuguese military patrol comprising three elements and
truth and to display plain bad faith.
including a sublieutenanlt, went to Caripande, near the
frontier between Angola and Zambia. The Portuguese
84. In these circumstances, the one who should be the
military men were invited-and I emphasize the point that
accuser is Portugal, Portugal, which is the victim of the
they were invited-to draw near the frontier by the
attacks which the Government of Zambia has authorized to
Zambian authorities, The Portuguese military men were
take place from its territory. If the Lusaka Government
asked to leave their arms behind and approach for an
finds that it cannot put a stop to such illicit activities
exchange of views. The Portuguese sublieutenant and a
against foreign territories initiated from Zambian territory,
lance-corporal accordingly gave their arms to a third
then the Lusaka Government has to assume full responsicompanion and approached, At that stage a Zambian
bility for the consequences.
military vehicle appeared on the scene and arrested the
Portuguese military men, taking them to Chavuma. Sub85. Nevertheless, Portugal has patiently tried to come to
sequent contacts which took place at the frontier between
an understanding with Zambia. Proof that Zambia does not
9

their talks, which have pl.nved their fruitfulness,. to the
satisfaction of both the Governments concerned. The
Luso-Zambian mixed commission may still be an in&u-’
ment of understanding and co-operation between Zambia
and Portugal. This instrument should not be lightly set
aside. Such a course would, besides, have the merit of being
in conformity with Article 33 of th? Charter.

the Portuguese and Zambian authorities indicated that the
latter demanded the payment of a fine as a condition for
the return of the Portuguese military men. The Portuguese
authorities agreed to pay the fine-under protest, of
course-in order to obtain the release of the prisoners.
Nevertheless, the Portuguese military men continued to be
held in Zambia. They were tried and sentenced by a lower
court, but the High Court of Zambia, in a procedural review
of the case, pronounced the two Portuguese military men
innocent and ordered them to be released. The representative of Zambia said that the High Court had ordered the
release for technical reasons. I understand from newspaper
reports that the Zambian High Court has been accused of
giving a political verdict. Be that as it may, the High Court
of Zambia ordered the release of the two men; but then the
Zambian Executive refused to carry out the verdict of its
own High Court and criticized the judge who had given the
verdict. The two Portuguese were ordered to be rearrested
and are still being held in Zambia. According to press
reports, the Chief Justice of Zambia, defending his colleague who had given the verdict, had this to say: “I myself
cannot regard the actions of a man who divested himself of
his arms and who steps within the borders of Zambia on the
invitation of an immigration officer as constituting a threat
to the security of the State.” That is the opinion of the
Chief Justice of Zambia, but the verdict of justice-of the
High Court itself-obviously
does not weigh with the
Zambian Government. The latest reports are that the crisis
between the Executive and the Judiciary in Zambia has
triggered off riots, in the course of which, among other
things, a foreign diplomat was manhandled. This is the state
of affairs which probably explains why Zambia has thought
it fit to come to the Security Council with a fictitious
complaint against Portugal.

93. For di those reasons my delegation expects the
Security Council to reject the Zambian complaint.
94. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated fi’o?~ French):
Before turning to the item on our agenda, I should like, on
behalf of the Algerian delegation, to express to the
delegation of the United States of America our congratulations on the flight of Apollo 11 to the moon. This scientific
feat is, first and foremost, to the credit of man; it also
shows that when man devotes all his energies to an
enterprise worthy of his genius, he usually obtains the
desired results.
95. Now, more than ever, is the time to raise the burning
question of whether the progress we are witnessing in the
material sphere is really being accompanied by progress in
morality-particularly
political morality-or
whether in the
latter field we have remained in prehistoric times.
96. More and more we see a new interpretation of
international law tending to be based on force, as well as a
systematic recourse to methods based on deliberate disdain
for the law of nations and States in the settlement of
international affairs. For examplk, a new category has been
created in the law of war, a category which is by now
becoming increasingly systematized, and is called the right
of pursuit.

90. However, to revert to the case of the two Portuguese
military persons, my delegation is sure that the case will be
regarded as shocking by all those who have a sense of
propriety and justice, To invite two foreigners and then to
detain them amounts to perfidious conduct. To detain
them even in the teeth of the clear findings of the country’s
own Judiciary amounts to a flagrant disregard of all values
on which any ordered society rests. My delegation formally
asks the Security Council to call upon the Government of
Zambia to release forthwith and unconditionally the two
Portuguese military men in question and place them back
on the Portuguese frontier in Angola.

97. This accelerated deterioration of political morality, of
which the situation in the Middle East provides a striking
example, is also illustrated by the question before us today,
the development of which the representative of Zambia has
just described to us.
98. The unfortunate tendency of our Organization to
place more emphasis on the main events of current political
affairs, rather than on the struggle for liberation being
waged for nearly ten years by the people of Angola and
Mozambique in order to put an end to Portuguese colonial
domination, makes us forget somewhat the daily nature of
the bombings to which the neighbouring territory of
Zambia is subjected by the colonial forces.

91. I have here with me certain correspondence exchanged
between the authorities of the Governments of Portugal
and Zambia at the highest level. A perusal of this
correspondence would help clear many of the fundamental
points relevant to this debate.

99. However, was it not our Organization which, in the
framework of resolution 1514 (XV) of the General Assembly, established a truth already well known in Africa
-that is, that as long as a colonial situation continues,
international peace and security will be in danger?

92. For our part we have given Zambia all assurances of
our continued desire and our continued purpose of cooperation and good neighbourliness. Differences of political
opinion do not justify the kind of conduct that Zambia
permits itself in relation to Portugal; but Portugal likes to
think that Zambia will still come to realize the advantages
of mutual co-operation in furtherance of the well-being of
the respective populations. This is the note on which my
delegation wishes to conclude its reply to the unfounded
Zambian allegations. The two parties can very well continue

100. IS it not alarming that a State which formerly shone
bright in the pages of world history, and which obviously
retains some nostalgia for that splendour, does not hesitate
for a single moment today to bomb innocent villages in
order-so it claims, as have many others-to
destroy
resistance bases?
10

E

101. Is it not alarming that 60,000 Portuguese soldiers.
aided by 44,000 auxiliar? troops rkcruited locally, armed td
the teeth thanks to their alliances with the Western world
and NATO, are stubbornly persisting in fighting a people,
or I might even say peoples, who are unarmed?

108. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia):I apologizefor taking the
floor again. I do not know whether I shouldexercisemy
right of reply because,to judge from what the fascist
representativeof the Lisbonrdgimehashadto’$ay, he does
not deserveeven the mere courtesy of a reply. But I
thought that I shouldmakeone or two pointsclearfor the
purposeof the reCord.

102. We know the logic of these situations, and how the
colonial forces generally try to expand the zones of
conflict. Unable to bring to its knees a people which
intends to live, Portugal is now trying to expand the area
and the nature of the conflict-to
expand the area of the
conflict by a ‘ffuite en avant” policy which consists of
bombing the alleged guerrilla bases in a neighbouring
country, Zambia; and to enlarge the nature of that conflict,
since only a few days ago Mr. Caetano launched the idea of
a vast alliance uniting Brazil, Portugal and the latter’s
overseas possessions for purposes you can well imagine.

109. He wantedto know why we havebypassedwhat he
calledthe Zambian-Portuguese
joint commission.
He makes
this referenceasthough to imply that thereis a permanent
Zambian-Portuguese
commissionto deal with border incidentsof this nature.I do not know how closehe hasbeen
to this particular problem of border incidents,but for his
information I wish to inform him that there is no
permanent Zambian-Portuguese
joint commissionto look
into border incidents. We have had committeesmeeting
from time to time on anad hoc basis.

103. It was to be expected that the representative of
Portugal should try, as he has just done, to demonstrate
that the bombings in question were confined to areas
within the frontiers of Territories under Portuguesejurisdiction. We know what to think of sucharguments,and we
shall not get very far by sayingthat those responsiblefor
thesecriminal surpriseattacks are usually indifferent asto
whether they are’carriedout on one or the other sideof a
frontier, sincecolonistsof all sorts generally have astheir
common enemy only the populations of races different
from their own.

110. Secondly,he wantedto know why we did not make
use of that channelthis time. The answeris that we did
makeuseof that channelin the past;andno soonerhadwe
signedan agreementthan the Portugueseattacked another
village. It is not possiblefor us to subjectour innocent
citizensto suchbarbarousand uncivilizedattacksfrom the
Portuguese.

104. If the Governmentof Portugal today feelsauthorized
to persistin its misguidedpolicy, it is obvious that it is
being encouragedto do so by some of its friends in
southern Africa, and that its battle is also theirs. In fact,
geographicallyZambia is at present the only independent
country in this region, and also the only country which
refusesto submit to the rtgime which advocatesapartheid.
It has now becomea major obstaclein the rearguardaction
undertaken by the Salisbury-Pretoria-Lisbonalliance, and
the hideousfuture which this trio hasin store for southern
Africa callsfor the subjectionof Zambia, if it wereever to
be realizedin practice.
105. It is now clear that any victory achievedby these
enemiesof freedom sofar hasbeenthe result of the apathy
of international public opinion, which has constituted a
direct encouragementto continuation of such actions.The
Organization of African Unity, which has endorsedthe
decisions of the United Nations, particularly General
Assemblyresolution 1514 (XV), now expects our Organization to put an end to a passivitywhich is dangerousboth
to the future of Africa and to world peace,
106. Therefore, it is the duty of the Council to condemn
vigorously both the repeatedaggressions
againstan inde.pendent State-Zambia-and the entire colonialist policy
being practised by Portugal. Furthermore, the Algerian
delegation considersthat it is time decisionswere taken
which would enableZambia to defend the integrity of its
territory and its political independence,which are the sole
guaranteesof its survival.
107. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I give
the floor to the representativeof Zambia in order that he
may exercisehisright of reply.
11

111. I wish to readfrom one of the documentsto which
the fascistrepresentativeof Lisbonhasreferred.During one
of the meetingswhich washeld betweenthe Zambianand
Portuguesedelegationsfor the purpose of settling an
incident which had occurred,a joint declarationwasmade.
It readin part:
“The Portuguesedelegation formally accepted the
incidents asunfortunate and promisedto recommendto
its Government,in face of this concreteevidenceand in
accordancewith the agreementreachedin New York,
that it apologizeand pay to the ZambianGovernmenta
fair andreasonable
compensationfor the damage.”
112. If undertakingsof that nature haveoccurredin the
past, why are the Portuguesecontinuing to bomb our
innocent civilians? The representativeof Portugalhasalso
complained about the activities of the Angolan and
MozambicannationalsinsideMozambiqueor insideAngola.
It is the duty of eachandevery Governmentto control the
activities of its own citizens. The Governmentof Zambia
cannot accept responsibility for the activities of the
Angolan people in Angola and the activities of the
Mozambican peoplein Mozambique,becausethat is the
responsibilityof the Lisbonr&me.
113. He alsomadereferenceto what he callsa crisiswhich
has arisen in Zambia as a result of the decisionof the
executive branch of governmentto demandan explanation
from the High Court for having quashedthe sentences
of
the two Portuguesesoldierswho had violated Zambian
territory and who had consequentlybeenapprehendedby
the Zambian authorities. Unlike the casein Portugal,in
Angola, or in Mozambique,thereis freedomin Zambia.Our
nationalshave the right, enshrinedin the Constitution, to
demonstrateagainstanything they do not like, andI would
be glad if the representativeof the Lisbon @me could

rences along the frontier. The responsibility for all those
occurrences rests squarely with the Zambian Government,
which allows armed persons stationed in its territory to
attack the Portuguese security forces on the Portuguese
side. Nevertheless, I repeat that the Portuguese forces have
strict instructions, which are being obeyed, not to cross
into Zambian territory. And if even innocent Portuguese
who are invited to Zambian territory can be treated in the
way the two Portuguese military men have been treated,
everyone here will understand how cautious the Portuguese
security forces have to be about avoiding crossing into
Zambian territory. But nothing takes away the right of the
Portuguese security forces to defend themselves, from
Portuguese territory.

state in this Council whether the peoples of Angola and
Mozambique can do the same thing concerning the Lisbon
r&ime, in their respective territories.
114. The arrogance that he has displayed before the
Council th& afternoon, which is obviously intended to
mislead the Council, is characteristic of the contempt with
which his country has treated the previous decisions of not
only the Security Council but also the General Assembly.
He is in a very unenviable position here. People would not
envy me if I were in his position, because it is not an easy
thing to defend such shameful acts. The representative of
Portugal needs sympathy much more than anything else.
115, I shall take the opportunity at a later stage to reply
in full to the baseless allegations which he has made against
my Government.

120. The Zambian representative read out a passage from
a document, a passage which referred to the payment of
fair and reasonable compensation. He need not have taken
the trouble to read out that passage; I referred to it myself
in my statement, and I referred to it as proof of the good
faith and honesty of the Portuguese Government in its
dealings with the Zambian Government.

1,16. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I give
the floor 10 the representative of Portugal in order that he
may exercise his right of reply.
117. Mr. MIRANDA
(Portugal): The representative of
Zambia has taken the initiative to refer to me in discourteous language. To insult a person who is on the other side
of a debate is the final argument used by someone who
does not have right on his side. The norms of social
behaviour which I have learned do not permit me to
descend to the same level. I shall, however, reply very
briefly to the points which the Zambian representative
made in his second intervention, if only to keep the record
straight, lest there be confusion in the minds of the
members of the Security Council.

121. The Zambian representative also said that I had
complained about the activities of people in Angola and in
Mozambique. Certainly not. I complained about the activities of the armed men to whom Zambia gives asylum and
protection to attack the Portuguese Territories of Angola
and Mozambique. That is something very different from
what the Zambian representative said.
122. The Zambian representative referred to the right of
the Zambian people to demonstrate. My delegation is not
concerned with this matter at all. If I mentioned it, it was
simply to point out that the Zambian Government has not
carried out a verdict of its own judiciary.

118. The representative of Zambia said that there is no
such thing as a permanent commission; a permanent
Luso-Zambian mixed commission. In itself this point would
be of little importance, but I must say that the Zambian
Government itself signified to us its desire that the ad hoc
committee-to use the terminology of the Zambian representative-should consist always of the same persons, so
that the conclusions arrived at could be kept within a
certain group of persons.

123. Finally, the Zambian representative offered his
sympathy to me. I thank him very much, but I do not need
it.
124. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
no other speakers on my list, and if no other representative
wishes to take the floor at the present stage of the
discussion, I shall adjourn the meeting. As a result of
consultations with the members of the Council, it has been
agreed that the next meeting will take place on Tuesday, 22
July, at 3 p.m.

119. Secondly, the Zambian representative tried to give an
explanation for why the talks were bypassed-again I use
the word “bypassed” very deliberately-by
the Zambian
Government. He said that no sooner were the talks held
than the Portuguese attacked another Zambian village. I
have already made clear the responsibility for the occur-

The meeting rose at .5:3O p.m.

12

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Nations,
Soles
Section,

throughout
New
York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
des
d+oritoirer
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los pvblicaciones

Litho

in United

Nations,

LES PUBLICATIONS

Nations
Unies
sent
entier.
Infotmez-vous
des venter,
New York

PUBLICACIONES
de Ias Nociones

DES NATIONS

en vente
dons
les libroiries
et les agsncer
aupr&r
de votre librairic
ou adrerrez-vous
&:
ou Gem+.

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidas

ertirn

en venta

en todas
portes
del mundo.
Conrulte
Ventor,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

o IU librero

o dirijore

New York

(or

Price: $U.S. 0.50

UNIES

equivalent

UNIDAS
en librerior

in other

y cosos

a: Nocioncr

currencies)

Unidos,

distribuidoros
Sccci6n

de

82115-November

1972-%OSO
