UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

CONTENTS
Page

.. ... ... .. .... ... .. ... .. .. .... ... .. ..

1

.. ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ... .... .. .. .. ... ... .... .. ..

1

‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12066) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . t.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

:Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l918)

-Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. 1918’

NOTE
..
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference ,to a United
Nations document.

’
I
.~

?.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . ,) are normally.published
in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

: ;_

1918th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD

in which they ask to be invited, under rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote. Accordingly
if I hear no objection I propose, in accordance with the
practice of the Council and with the relevant provisions
of the Charter, to invite those representatives
to
participate in the debate without the right to vote.

(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Medani (Sudan)
and Mr. Sallam (Yemen) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/l918)

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The first speaker is the representative
of Kuwait.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12066)
The meeting

4. Mr. BISHARA
(Kuwait):
Mr. President,
we
believe that it is very fortunate that the Council is
discussing the question of occupation
under the
Presidency of a descendant of the French Revolution,
which contributed
to the re-emergence of the most
cherished ideals of equality and justice. I shall not
elaborate on that; suffice it to mention the name of
General de Lafayette.
The delegation
of Kuwait
wishes you the best in your stewardship of the Council’s deliberations this month.

was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption

10 May 1976, at 3 p.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab Territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President
of the Security
Council (S/12066)

5. The question under discussion is not necessarily
the revolt of the Palestinian people against foreign rule.
It is not the examination
of Israeli practices in the
occupied territories. It is first and foremost the issue
of occupation by Israel of Arab territories. Almost a
decade has elapsed since Israel invaded Arab territories in the West Bank, Gaza, Sinai and the Golan
Heights. Scores of resolutions have been adopted
condemning this occupation and calling upon Israel
to withdraw from Arab territories. Certain steps have
been taken outside the purview of the United Nations to
ensure that withdrawal. Yet, after this long span of time
and despite the continuous calls for withdrawal, the
Council finds itself virtually at square one.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier [1916th
and 1917th meetings], I shall now invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Saudi Arabia, as well as the representative
of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), to participate in the debate without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Herzog (Israel)
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took places at the Security Council table and Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) and Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Repubhc)
took the places reserved, for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

6. To say that Israel is defying the international
will
is an understatement.
To refer to the violation by
Israel of international
law, of the Charter, of the principles and tenets of international
documents is indeed
a repetitive and almost shabby argument. It is clear
from the statements of the Israeli offtcials inside
Israel and outside it-and
they are very prolific on

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In addition, I should like to inform the members of
the Council that I have just received letters from the
representatives of Kuwait, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen
1

this point-that
Israel has no intention of pulling out of
Arab territories. Israel’s obsession with the notion of
defensible borders with the concomitant establishment
of Jewish settlements on Arab lands, and certainly
the absurd revival of historical attachment
to the
property of others, make the entertainment
by Israel
of the principle of withdrawal impossible. Israel, by
the nature of its structure and the designs of its leaders,
is a difficult member of the international
community.
By its actions in the occupied territories it poses an
intractable problem to the United Nations. By its
defiance of the Charter and scores of United Nations
resolutions it has become an international
outcast.
There is no need for me to quote Israeli officials
abundantly on that point. Suffice it to refer to the
soothing-or,
rather, unsoothing-instructions
of the
Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Rabin, to the Jewish
settlers in the West Bank to grow therein olive
trees, which take no less than seven years to bear fruit.

that the Government
of Israel indirectly or directly
encouraged the militant Jews in their march in the
West Bank while it prevented a march by the Arabs
to counteract the demonstration
of the militant Jews.
And one should not forget the fact that the march of
the Jews was initiated by foreigners for the sake of
expansion while the suppressed Arab march was a
legitimate
response to a provocation
by aliens. In
other words, Jews marched in a foreign land while
Arabs intended to march in their own country. Moreover, the Jewish march was in violation of international
law, while the suppressed Arab march was for selfdefence, a principle supported by the Charter and
international law.
9. It is obvious that the difference between the Jewish
militants and the Israeli Government has not been on
the principle of the establishment of Jewish settlements
on Arab land but merely on the timing of the establishment. Both support the establishment
of Jewish
settlements, but they differ on the style of implementation, on the location of the settlements and on whether
these settlements need the prior consent of the Govemment or not. In other words, they differ on technicalities, but they do not differ on the principle. Both
are for the building of Jewish settlements in defiance
of Article 49 of the fourth Geneva Convention.’
The
difference between the two is on the application of
local Israeli laws, but they are hand in glove in
violating international law and defying United Nations
resolutions. There is no conflict, then, between the
militant Jews and the Government of Israel in their
intent to mutilate international
law. The ‘argument
inside the Israeli Cabinet and Israeli society centres
round the authority of the Government,
but it does
not relate in any respect to international
law, which
both violate and contend is non-applicable. There is no
difference between the moderates and the militants in
respect of the violation of international
law. The
difference lies only in the degree of the violation and
the intensity of defiance.

7. What is the present situation, then? It is more than
obvious that Israel does not intend to withdraw from
Arab territories.
Will the international
community
resign itself to that glaring and obnoxious fact? What
will be the fate of many small countries that have
placed their faith in the United Nations? Will the
dictates of power, and force prevail over what justice
enjoins? Are we still in the era of the predominance of
force? Such rhetorical questions are mooted in every
comer, in every gathering-and
justifiably so, in the
light of Israel’s behaviour in the occupied lands. For
how long will the Security Council tolerate ,such an
anomalous situation? For how long will the Arabs
display patience? For how long will the UnitedlNations
accept the scorn with which its resolutions are treated?
That is the crux of this debate. It is not a change of
heart by the Arabs towards Israel. It is not the Sunday
sermons the Security Council is subjected to about the
achievements
of Israel in the occupied territories.
It is not the bizarre dissertations on the Egyptian
rule over Gaza or the Jordanian measures in the West
Bank prior to 1967.

10. These Israeli measures raise three fundamental
questions. First, there are the rights of the Palestinians
in the West Bank as human beings subjected to foreign
occupation.
Are they not entitled to preserve the
integrity of their land? Are they not part of the people
of Palestine, half of which was consigned to the
squalid conditions of the refugee camps? Are they
not entitled to protection from international
organizations? Secondly, what are the chances of peace in the
area, in the light of Israeli practices? Does anyone
see a light at the end of this bleak tunnel? Will this
policy of rubbing salt in the wounds pursued by Israel
<be helpful in the achievement of peace? Thirdly, is
there any more concern or any respect for intemational agreements? Are these documents meaningless
paper which the poweiful can tear up, or violate, or
destroy any time it suits them to do so? If the answer
is yes, what will happen to this world, to this troubled
planet, to small countries which have nothing but their
spirits and slings with which to defend themselves?

8. The Israeli representative comes here to pontificate on Israel’s record in the occupied territories. We
all know that there is a chasm, an ocean, a gulf
between pontification and facts. Let me highlight sotie
of Israel’s practices since the last debate almost seven
weeks ago. Israel deported to Lebanon two Palestinian
candidates in the municipal election, in violation of
international
law. Israel imposed a blackout on the
activities of the Palestinians before the elections and
prevented the media from reporting thereon. Israel
has continued its campaign of expropriating
Arab
lands and has persisted in establishing Jewish settlements in Arab territories. The municipal election was
undoubtedly
a demonstration
of indignation
against
the Israeli occupation and, at the same time, a rejection
by the Palestinians of Israeli policy. It has confirmed
beyond any shadow of doubt the allegiance of the
Palestinians to the Palestine Liberation Organization,
their sole representative.
It should not be forgotten
2

selves of the Nazi onslaught. It is your duty to display
moral support for their struggle against the forces of
evil and occupation, for their struggle is in line with
the United Nations resolutions and, indeed, in harmony
with the Charter.

11. To ensure respect for international agreements is
a fundamental aim of the Charter, as the third paragraph of its Preamble indicates. If the Security Council
fails to take any action, then the edifice of intemational law, the Charter and international
agreements
will be undermined and relegated to limbo. Members of
the Council have a dual responsibility.
The Charter
confers upon them the responsibility to maintain peace
and order and to preserve the sanctity of international
agreements. They are parties to the fourth Geneva
Convention and have pledged their support not only
to observe it but to ensure its implementation
by others.
Any failure to take action in strict implementation
of the Convention will be interpreted as abdication of
the responsibility conferred upon the members of the
Council by the Charter. Hence, in our view, there is
no room for accommodating
the violation of the Convention by the Israeli Government.

15. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I invite the representative of Yemen to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
16. Mr. SALLAM
(Yemen): Mr. President, at the
outset may I congratulate you on behalf of the delegation of the Yemen Arab Republic on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May, the name of which was derived from
the goddess Maia, whose son Hermes was especially
worshipped as the god of fertility and whose birth took
place on the fourth hour of the fourth day of the month.
I therefore hope that this debate will bear fruitful
results under your guidance and leadership.

12. Some of those who spoke before me referred to
the abuse of the veto power and its role in encouraging
Israel in its pursuit of the policy of building Jewish
settlements in Arab territories. We believe this is true.
If Israel’s policy had been opposed by none other than
the United States Government,
unequivocally
and
vehemently, Israel could not have dared to continue
this policy of defiance. This is a truth with which we
daily live.

17. It also gives me great pleasure to see Mr. Malik
resuming his normal functions in the Council. I personally felt the absence of his eloquence, dynamism
and outstanding wit.
18. History books and biblical traditions state that
the Philistines settled in Palestine in the twelfth century
B.C., long before the arrival of the Israelites. They
mention that the two peoples lived together, suffered
together and fought hand in hand against the austerities
of the invaders until both peoples were merged
together through experience and sharing to make up
the people of Palestine, the guardians of the holy
shrines of Judaism, Christianity and Islam. The two
peoples lived in peace and tranquillity
through the
centuries, until Zionism, a strange political ideology,
disrupted the peace and harmony which had existed
in the area for centuries immemorial.

13. The Council’s concern, therefore, is to see that
peace prevails in the area. This is the matter that
deserves a collective quest, and this is the Council’s
sole preoccupation.
But peace has its own prerequisites. Peace cannot be attained with the establishment of Jewish colonies in Arab lands. Peace cannot
be reached when Israeli officials compete with each
other in advocating the rights of Jews to live in Arab
territories. Peace will not be at hand as long as Israel
persists in its defiance of the international community.
The chasm, the gulf, the ocean and the gap will remain
unbridgeable as long as Israel does not recognize the
right of the Palestinians to self-determination.
The
suspicion, distrust and hate will continue unabated as
long as Israel is unwilling to withdraw from the Arab
territories. And peace will remain as elusive as ever.

19. The land of peace is experiencing today one of
the most pernicious terrorist campaign in the history
of mankind. Boys and girls are pulled by their hair
and dragged through the streets. Innocent
men,
women and children lose their lives every day. Students
are beaten, arrested and put in gaols without trial. All
these terrorist practices aim at consolidating
Zionist
settlements, desecrating religious and cultural shrines,
confiscating lands, expropriating vast areas, changing
their historical
and demographic
characteristics,
exploiting Arab labour, distorting Arab educational
programmes and permitting
murder, repression and
brutal terrorism against Arab citizens.

14. It is not hyperbole to suggest that the Middle
East is lurching
towards more bloodshed.
The
Palestinians
have exhibited
proverbial
patience in
enduring the onslaughts of occupation and in placing
their faith in international efforts to restore their rights.
No wonder that they have collectively
revolted
against the brutal manipulation
of the invaders. Time,
as we know, will not erode their dauntless spirit of
resistance against Israeli occupation, and much more
ferocious measures on the part of the Palestinians
against the Israelis are in store. No one expects any
people in the tentacles of occupation to offer caviar or
champagne
to their invaders. In this sense the
Palestinians are not different from any other nation.
They borrowed a leaf from the French book, Mr. President. Your countrymen,
to a man, rose to rid them-

20. The new uprising of the Palestinian people is a
reflection of the accumulated grievances of a population that has been under Zionist occupation for almost
a decade. The Palestinian people have waited so long
for the peace-loving peoples, the international
community and this august Council to free them from the
bondage of slavery. But since all have been unable
to oblige Israel to comply with United Nations resolu3

tions, it is their prerogative to revolt against their
oppressors until they attain their rights to selfdetermination,
sovereignty and independence.

25. Despite the disapproval of the United States
Government, the Zionists went on to expropriate more
and more land. On 18 April 1968, a new order was
published to confiscate the site of the nocturnal
journey of the prophet Mohammed,
known as AlBuraq, the Magharbah,
the Moroccan quarter, the
Bab Al-Silsilah quarter and the Al-Husor market. All
those quarters were 100 per cent Arab property. The
total area expropriated on that date alone was about
28 acres, which included 700 buildings, 437 shops, and
1,048 apartments that sheltered 5,000 Arabs. A girls’
school with 300 pupils was closed down and
transferred to accommodate the Jewish religious Court
of Appeals.

21. The acquisition of land in Palestine has been one
of the central aims of the Zionist movement ever
since its foundation at the end of the last century.
It was to “rescue the land in the land of Israel”. The
establishment
of Israel eliminated
many of the
obstacles which stood in the way of the Zionist
attempts to acquire Arab lands. Land acquisition
proceeded more rapidly after the cessation of hostilities
at the :end of 1948 and after the signing of the armistice
agreements between Israel and the neighbouring Arab
States.
‘9 ) J
22. ,,pn 28 February 1949,700 refugees were expelled
from-the village of Kafr Yosif, where they had taken
refuge during the hostilities. Most of them were put
in trucks and driven to the front lines where they were
forced to cross the border. On 5 June 1949, the Israeli
army and police surrounded three Arab villages in
Galilee-Hisan,
Qatiya and Jauneh-and
expelled
their inhabitants to the Safad area. On 24 January
1950, an Israeli army unit arrived in the village of
Ghabisiya and told the inhabitants that they had to
leave their homes by 3 p.m. on 26 January, otherwise
they would be expelled across the frontier. At the
beginning of February 1951, the inhabitants of 13 Arab
villages in Wadi Ara were expelled over the Israeli
border. In September 1953, the inhabitants of Umm
Al-Farag were expelled from their village, which was
blown up immediately
afterwards. In October 1956,
which lived in the north
the Baqqar
tribe,
of the country, was forced to cross the frontier into
Syria. Expulsion
and the confiscation
of land
continued.

26. All those Israeli measures of expropriation
and
annexation resulted in an out flow of more than
5,000 Arabs from the City of Jerusalem alone, and
thus added to the number of unemployed
and the
number of Palestinian refugees.
27. The tragedy of the Palestinians continued in spite
of the General Assembly and Security Council resolutions-particularly
resolution 252 (1968), which I quote
here as a reminder. In its paragraph 2, the Council
“Considers that all legislative and administrative
measures and action taken by Israel, including
expropriation of land and properties thereon, which
tend to change the legal status of Jerusalem are
invalid and cannot change that status”.
In paragraph 3 the Council
“Urgently
culls upon Israel to rescind all such
measures already taken and to desist forthwith
from taking any further action which tends to change
the status of Jerusalem”.

23. I need not burden this Council with so many
details, but I shall not fail to point out’ that Israel
continued its land expropriation after the 1967 war with
even greater rapacity.

28. However, in complete defiance of successive
United Nations resolutions,
a number of official
expropriation
measures have been taken. I need not
mention the new list of land expropriations and Zionist
settlements in Jerusalem, the whole West Bank, the
Gaza Strip, the Sinai peninsula and the Golan Heights,
since these have been enumerated by the representatives who have spoken before me.

24. On 12 January 1968, the Israeli Government
expropriated 838 acres of land outside the Old City
of Jerusalem to ensure Jewish settlements in the
annexed part of the city. An official announcer
said that 1,400 housing units were to be built in the
coming six months. Four hundred of these were
presumably for Arabs whose houses had been levelled
inside the Old City. But most of those Arab residents
had been forced to leave for the East Bank to find
shelter there in tents. The Israeli expropriation of land,
like its annexation,
then met with disapproval,
including
that of the United States Government.
Only three days after the expropriation,
the State,
Department
explicitly
announced that it refused to
recognize the Israeli measure to “expropriate
more
Arab territory”.
It criticized
Israel’s “unilateral
actions affecting the status of Jerusalem”
and continued, “we believe that the status of Jerusalem must
necessarily be considered in the context of a settlement
of all problems arising out of the recent conflict”.

29. The Israeli representative, in his statement, which
lacked accuracy and cogency, mentioned that the
Council was again “listening to the same old cracked
record grinding out the inevitable theme of hate”
[1917rh meeting, pm-u. 641: I wish to reply to him that
the Arabs have never hated Jews. I was personally
invited by the Yemeni Jewish community in New York
during the Passover holiday. I enjoyed with them our
traditional Yemeni hospitality.
They served Yemeni
dishes, we spoke Arabic, listened to Yemeni music
and enjoyed very cordial and amicable talks. I am
certain that the Arabs have more in common with the
Arab Jews than Mr. Herzog and his fellow Zionists
have with them. It is not the same old cracked record
4

_.‘..~’

of hate as Mr. Herzog pointed out. It is Israel which
has alienated the world community.
30. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have repeatedly condemned Israel for its violations of
the Charter and of the Hague and Geneva Conventions.
The International
Conference on Human Rights has.
cited Israel’s violations of human rights in the occupied
The Human
Rights Commission
has
territories.
charged Israel with war crimes. Amnesty International
reported that its own investigation
disclosed the
existence of practices “abhorrent
to the conscience
of mankind”.
UNESCO
has condemned
Israel’s
archaeological
desecration of Jerusalem. The World
Health
Organization
has condemned
Israel and
threatened to suspend its voting rights because of its
refusal to abide by the fourth Geneva Convention,r
a refusal which has also brought public criticism from
the International
Red Cross. The Israeli League for
Human and Civil Rights has repeatedly charged that
Israel has ill-treated its own Arab citizens and the
inhabitants
of the occupied territories
in flagrant
violation of the Geneva Conventions.
In short, no
Government
represented at the United Nations has
been so universally condemned or has shown greater
contempt for world opinion.
,
31. The representative of Israel likewise stated that
his country would continue on its path towards peace.
He also pointed out that Israel was prepared to
negotiate only on the basis of a recognition of Israel’s
sovereign rights. We are well aware of the fact that
Palestine was partitioned by the General Assembly
in 1947 into two independent States, Arab and Jewish,
with a special international
regime for the city of
Jerusalem. Israel has since then gone through different
phases of metamorphosis:
it has consumed the whole
area of Palestine; it has extended its tentacles to bring
under its occupation the Sinai peninsula and the Golan
Heights.
32. The Israeli representative wanted the Arabs to
recognize Israel, but he did not specify which Israel
the Arabs should recognize. Israel has never defined its
boundaries and never shown any good will with regard
to the recognition
of the rights of the indigenous
people of Palestine to self-determination,
sovereignty
and independence.
33. It is therefore imperative that the Security Council
face its responsibility
under the Charter and request
the United States and the Soviet Union to reconvene
the Geneva Peace Conference as soon as possible,
with the participation
of all parties concerned,
including
the representatives
of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.
34. If there is good will and a genuine desire for
peace, there are always several ways and means of
getting out of an impasse. Therefore, the Government
of the Yemen Arab Republic believes that the formula
of Security Council meetings could be applied to the

L

Geneva Peace Conference,
which could likewise
convene under the auspices of the United Nations in
the presence of all parties concerned.
35. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretationfiom
Russian): Sir, since I am speaking
in the Security Council for the first time on this
matter, I should like first to extend a hearty welcome
to you, an eminent diplomat and politician of France,
and to wish you success in discharging the responsible
functions which fall to you as President of the Security
Council. Your abilities and experience will undoubt-,
edly help us to solve the complicated problems before
2
the Council this May.
36. It gives me great satisfaction to point out the
growing and strengthening relations based on mutual.
understanding, trust and friendship between the Soviet
Union and France. As far as the Soviet Union is
concerned, as the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko,
stated recently at a
luncheon given in his honour by the President of
France, Mr. Giscard d’Estaing, “We intend to continue to devote particular attention to the development
of relations with France.” The delegation of the Soviet
Union, in this connexion, finds it a source of great
satisfaction to be able to refer to the Soviet-French
communique on the official visit of the Soviet Minister
of Foreign Affairs to France. In that communique
both parties once again stated that they were devoted
to the policy of the relaxation of international tension.
Indeed, the USSR and France were at the very source
of this policy, and1 once again both countries have
confirmed their resolve to continue on this course,
which is in accordance with the interests of all peoples.
37. In this connexion, I should like to point out that
the Soviet Union assumes, and has always assumed,
that the positive changes which have occurred in the
international
arena, linked as they are with the vital
relaxation in international
tension so important to all
States and peoples, will help to promote a general
atmosphere which will make for the achievement of a
sound and just peace throughout the world. However,
it should be pointed out that those who are against the
relaxation of, international
tension and the peaceful
settlement of disputes adduce the absurd thesis that
detente is, as they state, simply a one-way street and
merely serves the interest of the Soviet Union and
other socialist countries. In this connexion, one may
well ask what the world situation would be today
without the major positive changes which have recently
occurred and which fall within the concept of detente
or the concept of the relaxation
of international
tension. What an acute stage could be reached by any
international conflict, especially by the conflict in the
Middle East, were it not for this detente inintemational affairs.
38. Those who are against detente have not put
forward, nor can they put forward, any reasonable
alternative.
Essentially,
what they are doing is

encouraging the revival of the discredited policy of
acting from a position of force, which has frequently
brought the world to the brink of catastrophe. The
pursuit of that policy for a quarter of a century cost
mankind very dear. It is the duty of all peoples and
Governments not to commit the world once again to
being pushed back to the times of the cold war.
Our common duty is to ensure that the world should
once and for all forget the ominous times of the cold
war and resolutely embark on a course of relaxation
of international
tension, in order to save mankind
from the threat of a thermonuclear
war.

principle adopted by the United Nations and the
Security Council in this matter. It is a position of
principle because it derives from the fundamental
decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly on the Middle East, and it is sober and
realistic since only the representatives of the PLO, the
sole legitimate,
universally recognized and genqine
representatives and spokesmen of the aspirations and
interests of the Arab Palestinian people, can speak
on behalf of the Arab people of Palestine, who is the
main victims of the aggression of Israel and has suffered
most from it.

39. I should like to assure you, Mr. President,
the Soviet delegation is prepared to co-operate
you in all matters dealt with by the Council.

44. From the very thorough and convincing statements which have been made here in the Council by
the representatives
of Arab countries, it is quite
obvious that the aggressors and occupiers, supported
and financed by their patrons, have developed a broad
campaign of terrorism against the Palestinian people
dwelling in the occupied Arab territories. The forces
of occupation are making desperate attempts to break
the will of the Palestinian people in its struggle for
freedom and national independence, including its right
to self-determination
and the right to create its own
State, and are resorting to shootings, arrests, beatings
and the persecution of thousands and thousands of
peaceful Arab inhabitants. A heinous example of this
policy of genocide pursued by the Israeli authqrities
against the Palestinian people was the brutal shooting
and beatings committed
by the occupation forces
against workers taking part in the May Day demonstrations in the largest city in the West Bank of the
Jordan, Nablus. These terrorist actions on the part
of the occupying forces have further complicated the
already tense situation in the Middle East which has
been caused by the fact that the conflict has remained
unresolved for such a long time as a result of the
obstructionist position taken by Israel.

that
with

40. Since I have not yet had an opportunity to do so
in the Council, I should like to welcome our new
colleagues, the representatives of the United States
and Japan, Ambassador Scranton and Ambassador
Abe, and to wish them success in their careers that,
while new for them, are extremely important. I hope
that my words of welcome will be communicated
to
Mr. Scranton.
41. I should like to take this opportunity,
since this
is the first time I have spoken in the Council after a
long absence due to well-known circumstances,
to
thank heartily the members of the Council, my colleagues, the representatives
of the Membei States,
the members of the Secretariat and also the United
States citizens and citizens of other countries, including
my long-standing
friends and acquaintances,
the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines, Mr. Romulo, and Mr. Baroody, who is well known to all of
us, for their very warm and friendly words of sympathy,
for their telegrams and letters, for the numerous
bouquets, which were sent to me and to my wife when
we were being treated in hospital and thereafter, and
for their good wishes for our speedy recovery. I should
like also to express my deep gratitude to the administration, the doctors and the entire medical stti of the
Community
Hospital in Glen Cove for their concern
and their attention and for the high-calibre medical
assistance which was given to us while we were beibg
treated in that hospital after our automobile accident.

45. For many years now its armed forces’ have been
occupying vast territories of the Arab States. In these
territories, a policy of racial discrimination
and oppression is being practised against the Arab population.
The indigenous inhabitants of the occupied territories
are forcibly expelled from their homeland and their
homes are being destroyed and razed to the ground
in order to clear the way for the creation of settlements
for citizens of an alien State who have by force seized
these age-old Arab lands. Those who oppose this
cruel occupation policy are subjected to arrest, eviction and other repressions. Step by step these territories that have’ been seized are being incorporated
into Israel. All this has created in the Middle East a
situation of prolonged and explosive crisis.

42. Turning now to the matter being discussed by the
Council, I should like to point out that the Council is
once again, for the second time in the last one and a
half months, considering a serious situation which
has arisen in the Arab territories occupied by Israel.
43. The delegation of the Soviet Union is very pleased
to note that in this discussion an active .part is being
played by the delegation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the sole legitimate representative of the
Arab people of Palestine. Its participation
in the discussion from the beginning to the end on an equal
footing with the delegations of other parties directly
concerned is a reflection of the sober position of

46. The duty of the Security Council is to condemn
resolutely the violent terrorist actions committed by
the occupation forces in the occupied Arab territories and to require that Israel put an end to such
actions. This is the minimum the Council should do
in the present situation. The members of the Council
must at the same time be realistically
aware of the
6

fact that such interim action on the Dart of the Council, although it may be useful in itself, does not solve
the basic problem, which is rooted in the fact that the
ruling circles in Israel are obstinately refusing to leave
the Arab territories they have seized. They are also
impeding the implementation
by the Arab people of
Palestine of its right to create its own State. While
the Palestinian Arab people, numbering 3 million, has
a right to this equal to that of any other people in the
Middle East and any other people in the world, it continues to have the status of people in exile and of
refugees, despite the fact that its right to create its
own State in the territory of Palestine has now been
officially acknowledged and has been confirmed by the
world community, represented by the United Nations.
The PLO has been broadly recognized as the legitimate
representative of that people and enjoys the support
of the masses of the people in the territories occupied
by Israel.

50. In the statement
emphasized:

I

of the Soviet Government

it is

“A situation in which the Middle East conflict
remains unresolved carries in it the seeds of a new
military explosion. This situation means that the
aggressor continues with impunity to reap the fruits
of its criminal policy while the legitimate interests
and rights of the victims of aggression are being
flouted. It is clear that there can be neither stability
nor tranquillity
in the Middle East on such a basis.
Failure to settle the conflict has already led four
times to military clashes between Israel and the
Arab States within comparatively
short intervals of
time. It would be naive to proceed on the assumption that this could not happen a fifth time. Meanwhile the possible consequences of a new war in the
Middle East, -including the consequences for the
international
situation as a whole, are obvious to
all.”

47. Great attention was devoted to the problem of
settling the Middle East conflict at the recent Twentyfifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, to which I had the honour of being a delegate.
This problem was given a very important place in the
final report of the Party’s Central Committee at the
Twenty-fifth Congress, which was made by Comrade
Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee. The report outlined the Soviet Union’s constructive position of principle on the question of a
Middle East settlement. This question, together with a
number of other international problems, also occupied
a very significant place in the programme adopted by
the Congress for the further struggle for peace and
international
co-operation, for freedom and the independence of peoples. That programme aims to “Concentrate the efforts of peace-loving
States on
eliminating
the remaining seats of war, first and foremost on implementing
a just and durable settlement
in the Middle East. In connexion with such a settlement the States concerned should examine the question
of helping to end the arms race in the Middle East”.

Further on the same statement

says:

“The real aims of those who would like to put off
a solution to the problem of a Middle East settlement indefinitely should be clear to any objectively
minded observer. The preservation of the existing’
situation in the Middle East fully accords with their
long-term plans of establishing their control over the
Middle East region and its enormous oil resources
and important strategic positions. It is for this very
reason that those who are pursuing aims that have
nothing in common with the genuine interests of
the peoples of the Middle East are anxious to weaken
the Arab States to the maximum possible extent to
block their way to progressive social development,
to set them against one another and to force them to
act in disunity in their actions.
“Who does not know that until recently the arsenal
of imperialist policy in the Middle East included one
main weapon-Israel’s
Zionist ruling circles that are
pursuing a policy of territorial
expansion at the
expense of the Arabs. Now, however, the aggressors and their patrons hope to rely in their policy
also on some Arab States. But it can confidently
be affirmed that in the final count the peoples of the
Arab East will frustrate this plan that is hostile to
the cause for which the Arabs are struggling, the
cause of their independence and freedom.‘*

48. In its subsequent statement on the Middle East,
on 28 April this year [S/1206.?, annex], the Soviet
Government
once again drew the attention of the
entire world, first and foremost that of the parties
directly concerned, to the serious nature of the situation in the Middle East. The statement gave an analysis
and an evaluation of the dangerous situation which has
arisen in that area and clearly indicated who was
responsible for it.

51. The position of the Soviet Union on the Middle
East is principled and consistent. It is based on the fact
that the peoples of that region should be complete
masters of their fate. They should have an opportunity
to live in conditions of independence,
freedom and
peace. It is precisely for that reason that the Soviet _
Union is resolutely in favour of a radical’ political
settlement for the Middle East conflict and considers
that this is feasible. The discussion of the item on the
situation in the Middle East in recent years and the
relevant decisions of the Security Council and General

49. It is now quite obvious to everyone that last
year’s separate transactions, which left out of consideration the key issues in the Middle East settlement and which provided for the creation by a foreign
Power of long-term and costly installations in the centre
of the Sinai peninsula, not only failed to defuse the
situation in the Middle East but further complicated it.
This is shown by the bloody events in Lebanon and the
equally tragic situation prevailing in the occupied Arab
territories.
7

_.

Assembly on this matter have revealed the basis on
which such a settlement can and should be achieved.
This basis consists of three elements which are
organically interrelated: first, the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from all Arab territories occupied as a result of
Israel’s aggression in 1967; secondly, meeting the
legitimate
national demands of the Arab people of
Palestine, including its inalienable right to create its
own State; and thirdly, international guarantees for the
security and inviolability
of the borders of all States
in the Middle East and their right to independent
existence and development.

ment of ,the States concerned. Loyal to the ideal of
solidarity with peoples struggling for .their liberty and
social progress, the Soviet Union has unflaggingly
supported and will continue to support firmly the just
position of the Arab States and peoples. Peace and
tranquillity in the Middle East are the sincere aim of the
policies of the Soviet Union in that area.
56. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers
that the Security Council can and should make its own
weighty contribution
to the achievement of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
--

52. These are the fundamental
and interrelated
elements pertaining to a settlement in the Middle
East. They cannot be separated from each other. They
take due account of the legitimate rights of all parties
directly concerned, and they constitute a just and
realistic basis for a settlement. If both parties to the
conflict agree on this basis to commence talks, then
the path to a Middle East settlement will be open.
The agreement of Israel on the first two points
would greatly help in the implementation
of the third,
with which Israel should also be directly and vitally
concerned.

57. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation feels that it
must express its views on‘the two following matters,
which have been touched upon during the present
debate.
I :’
58. .First; the representative
of Israel,. in the concluding portion of his statement, emphasized that his
country aspired to peace and was prepared to conduct
negotiations on a peace settlement in the Middle East.
We are deeply convinced that if he had added that his
country was prepared to depart from Arab lands and
to return to their legitimate owners the territories that
were seized, and also to recognize the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people, the whole
question of a peaceful settlement in the Middle East
could be removed from the present deadlock and
speedily solved.

53. There is also proper international
machinery
which would be of help in the elaboration
of the
modalities of this agreement, and that is the Geneva
Peace Conference on the Middle East. It is quite
obvious to everyone that if the States concerned so
desired, the Conference could lead to agreement on all
matters pertaining to a settlement. The Soviet Union is
in favour of resuming the work of the Geneva Conference with the participation
of all parties directly
concerned, including the PLO as the representative of
the Arab people of Palestine.

59. The Soviet Union for its part believes; as I have
already stated, that a Middle East settlement should be
based on three organically integrated principles, which
I take the liberty of repeating once again: withdrawal
of Israeli forces from all Arab territories occupied by
Israel as a result of its aggression in 1967, recognition
and implementation
of the inalienable national rights
of the Arab people of Palestine, and international
guarantees for the security and inviolability
of the
Borders of all countries in the Middle East and the
right of those countries to an independent existence
and development.
Regarding guarantees, the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the’communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Comrade Brezhnev, made
the following statement at the twenty-fifth
Party
Congress:

54. In its statement of 28 April, the Soviet Govemment proposed that the work of the Conference be
organized in two stages. At the initial stage all the
organizational
questions could bd resolved, including
the procedure according to which concrete aspects
of the settlement should be examined and the possibility of setting up appropriate working groups and
bodies and so on. This stage would obviously not last
a long time. Immediately
thereafter the Conference
could proceed to tackle its main task, that is, finding
a solution to the essential problems of a settlement.
Of course, during the work of both those stages of the
Conference, the representatives
of the PLO should
participate on an equal basis.

“We are prepared to participate in international
guarantees of the security and inviolability
of the
frontiers of all Middle East countries either within
the framework of the United Nations or on some
other basis. Incidentally,
it is our opinion that
Britain and France, too, could participate in such
guarantees along with the Soviet Union and the
United States. This would only help matters.”

55. In expressing its ideas regarding the need to take
action to reach a settlement of the Middle East conflict,
the Soviet Government at the same time officially and
convincingly stated that the Soviet Union is not seeking
any advantages or gains for itself in the Middle East.
Neither in the Middle East nor in any other part of
the world is it seeking either military bases or any
right to exploit the natural resources of the region
or any opportunity to influence the internal develop-

60. Secondly, the question of terrorism has been
touched upon in this debate, and an attempt has been
made to shift the blame to the Arab side. But the facts
of the present situation show very convincingly
that the Zionist party not only preaches but in fact
8

practises terrorism.
Zionism
has made terrorism
part of its armament.
We all know, for example,
about the extremist Zionist organizations that exist in
the host country, organizations
that we are fully
entitled to call Fascist Zionist mafia. Their main aim
is to carry out acts of terrorism against foreign
diplomats accredited to the United Nations. There
are also forces behind those mafia who are financing
and encouraging their terrorist activities. Each of their
misdeeds is broadly advertised and is used as propaganda by all the mass information media in the host
country. Is not shooting at the’buildings of the Soviet
Mission to the United Nations four times to be
regarded as terrorism on the part of Zionist extremists?
However, none of the criminals who perpetrated these
misdeeds has been punished. Recently, on the night of
2 to 3 April, the Soviet Mission was fined on with
a high-calibre weapon. In the building at that time were
the representative of the Soviet Union and his wife,
who had only recently suffered a very severe automobile accident. Shooting at a building in which a
foreign ambassador lives can- only be regarded as a
direct attempt on the life of an ambassador by terrorists.

mafia which calls itself the Jewish Defense League
a terrorist threat? That telegram contains threats to
continue planting bombs and to proceed to kidnap or
kill Soviet diplomats. It gives the precise address of
this criminal organization, which has openly declared
its villainous intention to carry out attempts against the
lives of foreign diplomats: 1133 Broadway, New York.
We have informed the United States Mission about
this, and we hope it will reply and take the proper
steps.
64. Finally, can we not regard as a threat of terrorism
the article published by the head of this mafia, this
“holy man” Rabbi Kahane? I shall now read from.that
article:
“After all, what would be the consequences of a
fatal attack on Soviet Ambassador Yakov Malik?
The thought is a chilling one, especially when. all
sides know that one Jewish extremist simply cannot
be stopped if he does not fear the consequences.“*
This is where the root of the evil can be found. The
terrorists do not fear the consequences in this country.
They act with impunity. The authorities allow them to
do anything.

61. As many well know, an eminent statesman and
politician
of ancient Rome, Cicero-our
colleague
Ambassador Vinci can confirm this-resolutely
condemned any attempts against foreign ambassadors. He
wrote:

65. At the end of this article by the head of this
group of Zionist terrorists, again the address is given:
Room 310, 1133 Broadway, New York. Consequently,
the address of these’ ill intentioned persons who have
openly threatened to kill and kidnap foreign diplomats
is well known to the American authorities. However,
no steps have been taken against these criminal
elements. At the same time, it is quite clear to everyone
that by their terrorist actions and threats the Zionist
extremists are degrading America and its wonderful
people.

“It is a fearful crime to make an attempt on the life
of an ambassador and to incite one’s slaves to kill
a guest. How much impudence and infamy is in such
a design!”
62. At the same time, the Zionists not only encourage
these misdeeds but carry them out themselves. They
organize hostile demonstrations before the premises of
the missions of United Nations Member States, and the
persons in those demonstrations
utter demands not to
give any peace to diplomats. When they demonstrate
before our Mission they brandish placards calling
for the shedding of Russian blood in the streets of
New York, and so on. Quite recently, on 2 May, there
was a hostile demonstration
whose main purpose was
to intervene in the internal affairs of other States.
It was a demonstration
of hostility against the United
Nations because the Organization
had condemned
Zionism as a form of racism and racial discrimination.
There participated
in that demonstration
very important officials: senators, congressmen, the Governor
of the State, the Mayor of New York and others.
That demonstration,
too, was characterized by such
criminal slogans as I have described. In the first place,
this acts as a culture for Zionist terrorism, and in the
second place, it is evidence of the fact that the federal
and local authorities in the host country not only
tolerate but condone and thereby encourage the
criminal activities of the terrorist Zionist groups of this
fascist hue.

66. All this gives us every reason to state offtcially
in the Security Council that Zionism has made terrorism
the main weapon in its arsenal. Only one conclusion
can be drawn from this: that Zionism has turned into
a terrorist
organization.
It has chosen murder,
kidnapping, bombing and shooting at the buildings of
diplomatic missions as to the United Nations its main
weapon, with the direct condonation, almost bordering
on encouragement, of the offtcial authorities of the host
country. The United Nations is entitled to demand that
the administration
of the host country take all necessary steps to restrain these evil-doers and to ensure
that all necessary conditions prevail in New York for
the United Nations Headquarters to continue to be
located there and to guarantee the security of the
missions of Member States and their staffs.
67. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I thank Ambassador Malik, the representative of the
Soviet Union, for his kind words with regard to the
presidency. I was particularly
moved by his words

63. Is not the telegram received by the representative of the Soviet Union on 3 May from the Zionist

* Quoted

9

in English

by the speaker.

because, like him, I rejoice at the positive results of
the visit to France of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Soviet Union, results that are important to both
our countries but also for the consolidation of detente
and for peace throughout the world. That is what
inspires the policy of France as well as that of the
Soviet Union.

aggression and hegemonism, setting a brilliant example
for the people of the third world. It can be seen that
the Palestinian and other Arab peoples are experiencing
a new awakening, opening up new vistas for the
struggle in the Middle East against aggression and
hegemonism.
Their just struggle is an important
component of the struggles of the people of the entire
third world. The Chinese Government
and people
will, as always, firmly ‘support the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples in their just struggle against Israeli
Zionist aggression and against super-Power interference, control and subversion, and we are deeply
convinced that final victory certainly belongs to the
Arab and Palestinian peoples who persevere in unity
and struggle.

68. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (translationfrom
Chinese):
Of late, the Israeli Zionists have intensified their
wanton persecution and brutal repression of the Arab
population in the occupied territories. They are forcibly
seizing land belonging to the Arab people, ruthlessly
killing innocent Palestinian and other Arab people
there for the purpose of changing the structure of the
occupied territories by various means in an attempt
to perpetuate their occupation of the Arab territories.
This has been fully exposed by the host of irrefutable
facts enumerated by the representatives of Egypt, other
Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization: It is only natural that the perverted acts and
atrocities committed
by the Israeli Zionists have
aroused the strong indignation and firm resistance of
the entire Palestinian and other Arab peoples. The
Chinese delegation expresses great indignation
and
sternly condemns, the series of fresh crimes committed by the Israeli
Zionists,
and we deeply
sympathize with and support the valiant struggles of
the people in the occupied territories who fear no
sacrifices. We hold that the Security Council should
adopt a resolution strongly condemning
the! Israeli
Zionists’ atrocities and voicing firm support,for the
just struggle of the Arab people in the occupied
territories.

71. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of his right
of reply. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
72. Mr. ALLAF
(Syrian Arab Republic):
Instead
of addressing himself to the serious subject under
consideration, the representative of the Zionist regime
in his statement at the last meeting resorted, as usual,
to dilatory remarks and irrelevant matters in an attempt
to avoid the real issue, which is the tragic situation
and the suffering of the Arab population in the territories under Israel’s illegal occupation. ‘As a matter
of fact, the representative of Israel allotted one third
of his statement to Lebanon and the second third to
purely inter-Arab relations, and only managed in what
remained of his statement to repeat for the hundredth
time the falsifications, lies and distorted facts on which
the Israeli representative is an authority, twisting the
truth out of shape beyond any recognition.

69. It is our consistent view that the question of the
Israeli occupied territories is an integral part of the
whole Middle East question, and in the final analysis
the dire sufferings of the Arab and Palestinian people
in the occupied territories are caused by the rivalry
between the super-Powers for hegemony in this
region. Therefore, it is evident that a fundamental
solution of the question of the occupied territories
lies in the elimination
of super-Power interference,
the restoration of the national rights of the Palestinian
people and the complete withdrawal of Israel from all
the occupied Arab territories. All this can be realized
only by relying on the close unity of the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples themselves in waging persistent struggles against the common enemy with the
support of the people of the whole world.

73. For my part, I shall not be dragged into discussing
alien subjects or irrelevant matters. I shall rather
confine myself to setting right some of the numerous
inaccuracies and distortions uttered by the Zionist
representative.
74. The representative of Israel showed his pride in
the record of his regime in the West Bank. He was
proud that under Israeli occupation there had been
“a real growth in the gross national product in both
territories*’ -meaning
the West Bank and Gaza-“of
an average of 18 per cent per annum” [1917th meeting,
para. 991. What a magnificent way towards progress
and development!
But was that not always the pretext
of colonialists and alien invaders who tried to justify
their domination
of other peoples and territories by
claiming for themselves the role of “civilizers”
.and
self-appointed prophets for progress and prosperity?
Yet, despite the fact that the freedom and sovereignty
of peoples can never be the price of their development and prosperity, let me remind the representative
of the Zionist regime that, before playing the role of
messenger for development and progress, his regime
would be better advised to try to remedy its own
economic failure and bankruptcy.

70. The current situation in the Middle East is
excellent!
Beset with troubles both at home and
abroad, Israeli Zionism has been landed in unprecedented isolation. The true colours of the superPowers have been further exposed in their aggression
and their contention
for hegemony in this region,
and they are being discredited. The just struggles of
the Palestinian and other Arab peoples are deepening.
Recently the EgyptianGovernment
and people have
achieved another major victory in their struggle against
10

And it is amazing that in that quotation the Israeli
representative considers Israel and the world to be
on one side and the Arab countries on the other. He is
saying the question is not whether the world will come
to terms with Arab nationalism,
but the question is
whether Arab nationalism will come to terms not with
the world but with another Middle Eastern nation.
The answer is that this is not another Middle Eastern
nation; it does not try to be another Middle Eastern
nation. It is an alien, expansionist settler regime which
is trying to implant itself by force in the heart of the
Arab territory against the will of the people of the
territory and of the States in the region.

75. Let me draw his aftention to what the Governor
of the Bank of Israel declared less than two weeks
ago before the Financial Commiteee of the Knesset,
as reported in Yediot Ahwonot on 26 April, concerning
Israel’s total econornis dependence on the United
States. After referring to the masked unemployment
in Israel, which is reflected in the decrease in labour
productivity
and the systematic devaluation
of the
Israeli pound, he declared that the amount of Israel’s
external debt at the end of 1976 will reach $9 billion,
with an annual average debt servicing charge of
$450 million per year. So, before raising the standard
of living of the Palestinian people at the cost of their
independence, freedom and human dignity, how about
curing Israel’s own dependence and non-viability?

80. Thus, in the opinion of the Israeli representative,
the Arab nation should surrender the Arab territories
in Palestine just because it has four and a half million
square miles, and the Arab nation should surrender
the rights of 3 million Palestinians just because it
comprises, as he said, a hundred million people. Again,
what silly and stupid logic! If the question is one of
territorial
size or of population
figures, how about
directing the greedy Zionist designs towards the United
States, for example, which is incomparably
larger in
population
and in the size of its territory than all
20 Arab States put together?

76. Another falsehood constantly repeated by the
Zionist representative is the Arabs’ alleged refusal of
peace. The Israeli representative
should be the last
person to mention “sincerity”
so far as peaceful
efforts are concerned. Everyone is aware of the
shameful record of Israel in defying United Nations
resolutions, in violating the Charter of the United
Nations and principles of international
law and in
blocking every single international
effort for peace.
One has only to recall Ambassador Jarring’s efforts,
the Rogers plan, the African leaders’ mediation,
the
Geneva Conference,
the Secretary-General’s
initiatives and many other steps in order to realize how
sincere Israel is in its alleged desire for peace.

81. The Israeli representative
has also repreatedly
said that Israel has declared its readiness to end the
state of war and that no answer has been forthcoming
from the Arab countries. But the mere existence of
Israeli soldiers on Arab territory is an act of war;
military occupation is an aggression and an act of war.
So how dare Israel say that it sincerely wants to end
the state of war, when it refuses to withdraw from
any part of the Arab territory?

77. The Zionist representative
always dares to
mention Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) as if Israel had ever accepted or implemented
those two resolutions. The Geneva Conference was
supposed to be meeting on the basis of those two
resolutions in order to try to reach a comprehensive
settlement. Who is blocking the convening of that
Conference? Is it not those who want to solve the
Palestinian question in the absence of the people of
Palestine?

82. I do not want to take the Council’s precious
time in answering the rest of the falsifications in the
Israeli representative’s
statement. I should like only
to say that we have been accustomed to hearing, time
and again, the same arguments and the same lies from
that representative. If Israel really is sincere in wanting
peace, it has to recognize that peace cannot be
established in the region unless every inch of the
occupied Arab territory is liberated and unless every
single Palestinian is able to exercise his inalienable
national rights.

78. ’ The Zionist representative unashamedly claims
that the core of the problem “is not a question of
territory and is not a question of Palestinians”
[ibid.,
para. 1051. What, then, is the core of the problem
if it is not the territory Israel occupies and the people
it has been oppressing for three decades?
79. The representative of Israel does not even try any
more to mask the expansionist nature of his regime.
He says flatly that

83. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of the United States of
America, who has asked to speak in exercise of his
right of reply.

the Arab nation has realized its sovereignty in
20 States comprising 100 million people in 4.5 million
square miles, with vast resources. The issue therefore is not whether the world will come to terms
with Arab nationalism. The question is at what point
Arab nationalism,
with its prodigious
glut of
advantage, wealth and opportunity,
will come to
terms with the modest but equal rights of another
Middle Eastern nation to pursue its life in security
and peace.” [Ibid, para. 106.1
“

. . .

84. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): My
brief words are not really in the nature of a right of
reply, but are rather a comment with respect to some
of the statements that the Soviet representative has
made.
85. I am sure that we are all very glad that Ambassador Malik has returned to this chamber in full vigour,
11

and he has been gracious enough to express his
appreciation for the care and treatment that he and his
wife have received after an unfortunate accident,
when we all suffered the pain of knowing that he was
in the hospital.

you read it also. So where is the hyperbole in all
this? Where is the exaggeration? These are facts.
90. How many attacks have there been against
diplomatic staff in the Soviet Mission in recent years?
Not a single one of the attackers has been punished,
despite the fact that they were seized and turned over
to the police. You refer to your legislation,
which
requires that foreign diplomats come to court and say,
“That is the person who attacked me” and “That is
the person who insulted me and beat me up”. But
diplomats are not obliged to enter a court in the host
country, and we shall not go to your courts. We gave
over these miscreants to the police. These are the
people, we said, who had attacked us and beaten us
up. And the police took them from our hands into
their hands, but the court demanded evidence. What
evidence is needed? What sort of legislation is this?
Legislation which shields and thus encourages criminal
acts.

86. But I regret to say that it seems to me that this
afternoon his vigour has carried him to some hyperbole.
Some of the statements in the latter part of his remarks
are baseless, and surely he knows they are. The Soviet
representative must surely know from both the private
and the public communications
that have passed
between our two Governments
what the situation
is with respect to recent disgraceful and outrageous
actions against the Soviet Mission and its personnel.
87. Now, the results are not being obtained as quickly
as the Soviet representative would like, or indeed, may
I say, as quickly as my own Government would like.
But we do not plan to change our system of law and
orderly justice and procedure, even if that justice and
procedure is sometimes rather slow. But to charge
United States officials with complicity in and encouragement of activities which we all deplore, and which
the Soviet representative has described as terroristic,
is, I submit, a statement unworthy of the representative of a major Power.

91. The numerous demonstrations held in the streets
of New York, with the participation of public officials,
the Mayor of the city, the State Governor, congressmen and senators; the shouting of criminal slogans,
with demands and threats to kidnap and to kill foreign
diplomats, to bomb our Mission, and so on and so
forth: is not this encouragement
and creation of a
favourable climate for the Zionist extremists to feel
they can act with impunity?

88. The PRESIDENT
(interpretafion from French):
I now call upon the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.

92. Here is the telegram from the League I have
mentioned and the article by Rabbi Kahane. I can give
them to you so that you may see that these are facts
and not hyperbole or inventions.

89. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation from Russian): I cannot agree with the
assertion of the United States representative that there
was any hyperbole in my statement. No, my statement
contained facts, and only facts. The fact that the
premises of the Soviet Mission have been fired at
four times is not hyperbole; it is not something we
have invented: it is genuine fact. The numerous demonstrations which have been held opposite the Soviet
Mission, with their criminal slogans that Russian blood
should be shed in New York streets and that Soviet
diplomats should be killed, are not hyperbole; they are
facts and are well known to you. It seems that no
mission has sent you as many notes as ours has. And
then there is the telegram from the Zionist organization, which can only be described as a Fascist mafia,
with threats not only to explode bombs but also to
proceed to kidnap and kill Soviet diplomats.
This
telegram is not hyperbole. I sent a copy to the United
States Mission, to Ambassador Scranton. And, finally,
the article by the leader of that mafia, that “holy
man”, Rabbi Kahane, containing a threat to attack
Ambassador Malik is not hyperbole or exaggeration;
it is a fact. The text of that article, which emphasizes
the place and refers to attacks against Malik, were
also transmitted to Ambassador Scranton. Apparently

93. You also referred to democracy and to democratic
legislation, but what is democracy when criminals are
allowed to attack people, to kill them or kidnap them?
This is not democracy, this is gangsterism. Therefore
we are entitled to protest against it and to require
through the United Nations that your Government take
steps to create normal working conditions for both the
United Nations and the missions attached to it, because
these attacks and threats by the Zionist extremists
cause suffering not only to the Mission of the Soviet
Union but also to the missions of many other countries as well. I think there must be a few dozen of
them-many
have been complaining
about such
attacks on the part of .various extremist groups in
New York. Therefore we are entitled to demand that
official steps be taken with regard to these criminal
elements.
The meeting

rose at 5.25 p.m.
Note

1 United Nations, Treaty

12

Series,

vol. 75, p. 287.

, .
.

..’

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICAITONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libtairies et tes agencesd6positaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gem&.
KAK

H3xamx

3xAax
BarueH
HasxR,

HOJIYPHTh

Opraxxsaqxx

H3nAFfHSI

OPI’AHH

OtYbenxxexxbIx

SAUHH

OIYbEAHHEHHhIX

~oxcxo

HAUHR

x xxxxcxblx
xarax arexIc=Bax ao xeex paftoxax xxpa. HaBonHTe
cnpaxxx 06 x3Aaxuxx
B
XXW)I(XOY Yarasxxe
EUXX IIHUIXT~
no anpecy : OpraXXJaqHR
Ob’benexexxbrx
Cexuxx
no nponaxce
xsnaxxfi.
HMO-H•
PK HJIX Xkxeaa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

HauxR

xynxTb

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciona de las Nations Unidas e&n en %ntx en lib&as y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seti6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-60801~September

~984-2.200
