S/PV.7453

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7453rd meeting

Friday, 29 May 2015, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Linkevičius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Hamid
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Hamidi
Mr. Finlayson
Mr. Magaji
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Martínez Vázquez
Mr. Sedwill
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Foreign terrorist fighters
Letter dated 8 May 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/324)
Letter dated 13 May 2015 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2015/338)
Letter dated 19 May 2015 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2015/358)

15-15629 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1515629*

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Foreign terrorist fighters
Letter dated 8 May 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Lithuania
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/324)
Letter dated 13 May 2015 from the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2015/338)
Letter dated 19 May 2015 from the Chair of
the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2015/358)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Jürgen Stock, Secretary General of INTERPOL, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/324, which contains the text of a letter
dated 8 May 2015 from the Permanent Representative
of Lithuania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.
I also wish to draw the Council’s attention to
document S/2015/338, which contains the text of a
letter dated 13 May 2015 from the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, addressed
to the President of the Security Council; as well as

2/30

29/05/2015

to document S/2015/358, which contains the text of a
letter dated 19 May 2015 from the Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, addressed to the President of
the Security Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank those present for
their participation in spite of their very busy schedules.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Jürgen Stock,
Secretary General of INTERPOL, and to thank him
for his participation. I also recognize the leadership
and contributions of the Chairs of the Securty Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), and resolution 1373 (2001),
the Ambassadors of and Lithuania and New Zealand,
respectively.
Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters that have joined the
ranks of Daesh and other terrorist groups continues to
grow. There has been an estimated 70 per cent increase
in foreign terrorist fighters worldwide between the
middle of 2014 and March 2015. This trend means more
foreign terrorist fighters on the front lines, a bigger pool
of expertise available to terrorists and a menace to their
countries of origin once they return. The Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004) estimates that over
25,000 foreign terrorist fighters from over 100 Member
States have travelled to Syria and Iraq, as well as
Afghanistan, Yemen and Libya.
No country can tackle this challenge alone. Member
States must enhance their cooperation and exchange
information, develop effective border controls and
strengthen their criminal justice systems, in accordance
with the rule of law and human rights standards. Full
compliance with international law is central to success.
That includes, in particular, international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law. When counter-terrorism efforts
ignore the rule of law and violate fundamental rights,
they not only betray the values they seek to uphold,
but can also end up further fuelling violent extremism.
To ensure consistency with human rights principles,
measures to implement resolution 2178 (2014) must
be clear and precise, as required by the principle of
legality.

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Exceptional and lawful restrictions imposed on
rights must be specific, necessary and proportionate.
The United Nations stands ready to assist Member
States in implementing those standards. Ultimately,
we have to address the conditions conducive to young
men and women being lured by violent extremism.
Radicalization is the essential precursor to individuals
becoming foreign terrorist fighters.
Building effective, accountable and inclusive
governance and institutions is an important element of
preventive efforts. Youth today are the group most prone
to radicalization, violent extremism and recruitment
as foreign terrorist fighters. Most foreign terrorist
fighters are young males between 15 and 35 years of
age motivated by extremist ideologies. However, we
should also address the conditions and factors leading
women and girls to join the ranks of Daesh and other
terrorist groups.
I welcome this growing emphasis on addressing
the underlying drivers of violent extremism at the
global, regional, national and local levels to prevent
radicalization. I intend to present a plan of action to
prevent violent extremism to the General Assembly
at its seventieth session later this year. I also welcome
other Council initiatives, including the upcoming
special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters,
which will be held in Madrid on 27 and 28 July.
In support of the implementation of resolution
2178 (2014), I have instructed the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in the Department of
Political Affairs to establish an inter-agency working
group on foreign terrorist fighters to coordinate the
work of all relevant United Nations entities.
The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre’s
project on enhancing the understanding of the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters in Syria,
which I announced at the Security Council high-level
meeting held in September 2014 (see S/PV.7272), is
aimed at understanding the underlying drivers of the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters with a view
to assisting Member States in crafting a better policy
response. I welcome the recent interest that many
affected countries have expressed in that project.
I remain concerned that recent events, particularly
in Iraq and Syria, which have seen the advance of Daesh
and other groups with the growing support of foreign
terrorist fighters, demonstrate that this is an increasing

S/PV.7453

threat to international peace and security that requires
even more concerted action by the international
community.
The United Nations will continue to work actively
with Member States to forge more comprehensive and
creative approaches to address this multidimensional
threat, emphasizing the importance that we should
attach to ensuring that they are fully anchored in the
rule of law and human rights.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Gerard van
Bohemen, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Since
Ambassador Gary Quinlan of Australia briefed
the Council in November 2014 (see S/PV.7316), the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities has continued to
devote special focus to the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters, as mandated by paragraph 21 of resolution
2178 (2014). The threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters is serious and affects all States and societies.
The response to this threat to international peace and
security must be comprehensive and coordinated and
employ a range of tools. The Al-Qaida regime’s targeted
sanctions are an important part of the toolbox.
The Security Council has established a framework
through its resolution 2178 (2014) to address foreign
terrorist fighters and their networks. That exists
alongside Council resolutions on the threat to
international peace and security posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known as Daesh,
and the Al-Nusra Front. Resolution 2178 (2014) sets
out a number of obligations and measures for Member
States. Two of those obligations in particular intersect
with the work of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.
First, Member States are called upon to prevent the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters across their
borders. Secondly, Member States shall prevent the
recruiting, facilitating or equipping of individuals who
travel to a State other than their States of residence or
nationality to carry out or prepare for terrorist acts or
training and the financing of such activities.
The measures imposed upon individuals and
entities designated by the Al-Qaida Sanctions

15-156293/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Committee are threefold: an assets freeze, a travel ban
and an arms embargo. In addition, any individual or
entity that provides financial or material support to
those designated, including arms or recruits, is eligible
to be added to the Al-Qaida sanctions list.
The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has approved
several designations this year aimed at the foreign
terrorist fighters threat. In January 2015, the Committee
designated Tarkhan Tayumurazovich Batirashvili and
noted that he led approximately 1,000 foreign terrorist
fighters for ISIL. In March 2015, the Committee
designated the Hilal Ahmar Society Indonesia and
three of its leaders based upon their recruiting, funding
and facilitating travel of foreign terrorist fighters to
the Syrian Arab Republic. In April, Ali ben Taher
ben Faleh Ouni Harzi, a member of Ansar al Shari’a
in Tunisia, was designated partly due to his efforts to
recruit foreign terrorist fighters. Further ISIL-related
designations are expected in the near future. As with
all designations, INTERPOL-Security Council Special
Notices have been issued. Cooperation between the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and INTERPOL is
key to improving the implementation of the sanctions
measures. That is particularly true for foreign terrorist
fighters, given the need for timely information sharing
about cross-border movement.
On 26 May 2015, the report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004),
which supports the work of the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, on foreign terrorist fighters (S/2015/358)
was published pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014). The
headline conclusion from that report is there are now
more than 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters from over
100 countries. Many have travelled to fight for terrorist
entities associated with Al-Qaida, especially ISIL, and
the main movement has been into Syria and Iraq. The
report addresses three main areas concerning foreign
terrorist fighters: first, the analysis of the threat,
including the scale, predictions for growth and ancillary
risks; secondly, the trends, including demographics,
recruitment and financing; and thirdly, the challenges,
including information-sharing and border control. As
directed in resolution 2178 (2014), the Monitoring Team
made a number of detailed recommendations on the
basis of which the Committee has now taken decisions,
and will be following up and facilitating including with
the Security Council and Member States. This will be
reflected in a position paper from the Committee.

4/30

29/05/2015

The Monitoring Team concluded that there are
three essential elements in the international response
to foreign terrorist fighters. First, Member States
should share actionable information on potential and
known foreign terrorist fighters, such as advanced
passenger information and material from national
watch lists. Secondly, at the national level Member
States should build capacity to disrupt foreign terrorist
fighter networks. This capacity can be enhanced
through legislative frameworks and national strategies
that allow Governments to act quickly and nimbly.
Thirdly, the Monitoring Team considers countering
violent extremism at every stage of an individual’s
involvement to be at the heart of any successful policy
response. Member States need to develop strategies to
counter violent extremism that aim to prevent, assess
and reintegrate foreign terrorist fighters into society.
In resolution 2178 (2014), the Security Council
called on Member States to propose foreign terrorist
fighters, and those who facilitate or finance their
activities, for designation on the Al-Qaida sanctions
list. Some progress has been made since September
last year, but there is more work to be done. I take
this opportunity to recall that any Member State may
propose an individual or entity for inclusion on the list.
The Monitoring Team can advise any Member State
considering proposing designations, and the Team
takes part in regular outreach and training. I encourage
Member States considering designation proposals to
make early contact with the Team and the Chair of the
Committee.
To encourage proposals for listings, on 24 April
my predecessor as Chair of the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Jim McLay, organized an
open briefing for all Member States on the Committee’s
work. This briefing provided an informal opportunity
for interested Member States to interact with the
Committee and its work through the Chair and the
Monitoring Team coordinator. A variety of issues were
discussed, including the procedure for adding names
to the Al-Qaida sanctions list. I intend to continue to
hold such open briefings periodically throughout my
chairmanship.
We need intelligently targeted and well-implemented
sanctions as part of our toolbox to counter the threat
posed by foreign terrorist fighters and the harm they
cause to Member States, their societies and peoples.
The President: I thank Ambassador van Bohemen
for his briefing.
15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I now give the floor to Ambassador Raimonda
Murmokaitė, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): On behalf of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, allow me to give a brief
overview of developments in the work of the Committee
and its Executive Directorate, as requested in paragraph
26 of resolution 2178 (2014).
The Committee, with the support of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
has identified 67 States most affected by the threat of
foreign terrorist fighters. They represent a wide range
of countries in terms of size and capacity, drawn from
all regions of the world. They include all four categories
of States: origin, transit, destination and neighbouring.
Using tools developed by the Committee to facilitate
its dialogue with States on the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), as well as
new tools dedicated to analysing measures specific
to resolution 2178 (2014), CTED, in support of the
Committee, has analysed an initial batch of 21 States,
looking at how they implement those resolutions, the
gaps that they might individually or collectively need to
address, and the good practices that they already deploy.
The relevant report was submitted to the Council on
13 May.
These evidence-based and risk-based conclusions
will be further used to develop detailed, concrete
recommendations for the facilitation of technical
assistance in the coming months. More reports, to be
delivered in July and September, will expand the scope
of enquiry to all 67 affected States. Future reports will
discuss ways to address recruitment, the challenges
posed by terrorists’ use of Internet and communications
technologies, the disruption of terrorist financing and
support networks, and the special challenges associated
with returning foreign terrorist fighters, including the
monitoring of returnees, bringing returning foreign
terrorist fighters to justice, the use and effectiveness
of rehabilitation programmes, and how to manage their
eventual reintegration into society.
In the coming months, therefore, these reports will
provide a detailed road map of concrete measures to
assist in the building of capacity to resist the threat of
foreign terrorist fighters. These reports will continue to
draw on threat analysis provided in the course of CTED’s
dialogue with its partners, including the Monitoring

S/PV.7453

Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, INTERPOL, the
Council of Europe, the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), the International Civil Aviation Organization,
the International Organization for Migration, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
World Customs Organization.
According to the first report, the comprehensive
criminalization of various offences related to foreign
terrorist fighters, as required by resolution 2178
(2014), remains a high priority. Only 5 of the 21 States
reviewed had introduced legislation to criminalize
preparatory or accessory acts conducted in a State with
the aim of committing terrorist acts outside that State’s
territory. Furthermore, many of the 21 States had not
yet introduced criminal laws to allow the prosecution
of individuals who travel or attempt to travel to a State
other than their States of residence or nationality for
the purpose of the perpetration, planning or preparation
of or participation in terrorist acts, or the provision or
receipt of terrorist training.
Resolution 2178 (2014) also calls on all States
to require airlines operating in their territories to
provide advance passenger information as a means of
detecting the travel of certain foreign terrorist fighters.
Only 5 of the 21 States we surveyed in the report
required advance passenger information or passenger
name records. In fact, a dedicated report on advance
passenger information that was submitted to the
Council on 26 May shows that only 51 States globally
currently utilize advance passenger information
systems at varying levels of effectiveness. CTED and
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force are
requested to jointly develop initiatives with relevant
international organizations, aimed at assisting with
the implementation of advance passenger information
systems, with a particular focus on States affected by
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
On measures to disrupt financing networks and to
bring to justice those who finance and support facilitation
networks, most of the 21 States can apply to foreign
terrorist fighters the mechanisms that they already have
in place to disrupt and prevent the provision of financial
support to terrorists. There remain concerns about
States’ capacity to freeze terrorist assets in accordance
with resolution 1373 (2001). CTED is currently working
closely with FATF to develop concrete tools to address
these issues, including a set of red-flag indicators that

15-156295/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

29/05/2015

can be used operationally by financial institutions and
others to spot suspicious activity that may be linked to
support for foreign terrorist fighters.

terrorism in accordance with international law, in
particular international human rights law, international
refugee law and international humanitarian law.

Other priorities identified in the report of 21 affected
States include the centralized and coordinated
exchange of law enforcement information at the
national level; the breaking-down of silo thinking
among law enforcement agencies; and the urgent need
for an operational 24/7 alert system that would enable
users to share information immediately with front-line
officers, including immigration officials and customs
authorities.

The Committee and CTED will also continue
to arrange open briefings on regional and thematic
counter-terrorism issues for the wider United Nations
membership, with a view to further enhancing
transparency and strengthening cooperation in the
fight against terrorism.

There is also good news, however. We are finding
good practices already implemented by many of the
affected States. Nearly all have taken steps to prohibit
by law incitement to commit a terrorist act under
their criminal laws, as called for in resolution 1624
(2005). These measures can contribute significantly to
stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, who are
often spurred to action by calls to terrorist violence made
by others, whether in person or through the Internet or
social media. The Committee is also providing guidance
designed to assist in capacity-building on specific
issues. On 18 February, the Committee submitted to
the Council a report that analyses, in practical terms,
the prosecutorial challenges States face in bringing
Foreign terrorist fighters to justice.
Meanwhile, the Committee has undertaken activities
to reinforce its direct support to States threatened by
terrorism. In my role as Chair of the Committee, I
conducted, from 2 to 6 February, a high-level political
mission to Mali and the Niger, together with CTED’s
Executive Director. The Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel and the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union for CounterTerrorism Cooperation also participated. This served
to convey a single message that the international
community is united in its determination to assist
countries in their counter-terrorism efforts.
Over the coming months, the Committee will
continue to fulfil the mandates conferred by the Council,
including through the preparation of a special meeting
on stemming the flow of Foreign terrorist fighters, to
be held in Madrid in July; continued Committee visits
to States, particularly those affected by foreign terrorist
fighters; and further interaction with civil society, the
private sector and academic institutions, particularly
in facilitating the use of new technologies in building
the capacity of high-risk, low-capacity States to prevent
6/30

The President: I thank Ambassador Murmokaitė
for her statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Stock.
Mr. Stock: It is a privilege to address the Security
Council once again. Let me thank the Lithuanian
presidency for having INTERPOL present as various
senior security officials gather before this body for
the first time in history. At the core of this meeting
is a single goal: breaking the cycle from radicalization
to return — a cycle we saw tragically completed in
the streets of Brussels. A single individual, carrying
lethal skills refined through a year spent in Syria, was
able to leave the conflict and travel freely throughout
South-East Asia and to finally re-enter Europe to strike
against innocents. At the time, no identifiers existed
in INTERPOL databases about the suspect. Indeed,
the incident illustrated how opportunities to disrupt
terrorist mobility must be systematically forged and
promptly seized.
Such was the case last year, when a suspect was
apprehended on his way to Syria, thanks to Belgium’s
decision to issue an international alert through
INTERPOL and thanks to the actions taken by Lebanese
officials on the ground, based on that intelligence. In
another instance, a routine fingerprint check against
INTERPOL databases made it possible to identify an
undocumented migrant off the coast of Greece as a
subject wanted for terrorist activity in Chechnya.
Those are just two examples of the many
interdictions achieved by our member countries. No
matter where they occurred, they all embodied the
same two elements of success: first, the secure sharing
of information on foreign fighters across national and
regional borders, through INTERPOL; second, prompt
access to that information at the front lines, by the right
officer, at the right moment. Those two dimensions also
define INTERPOL’s support to its member States in the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014).

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorism-related operational information has
unique features. Understandably, restriction of its
circulation is the default position of any sovereign
national authority. Therefore, we have actively engaged
member States to forge the trust needed for data to flow
internationally. I have had the honour to personally
open a dialogue on that issue with ministers across
our membership, such as in summits held in Riga,
Washington, D.C., and St. Pölten, Austria. In parallel,
our counter-terrorism experts regularly hold restricted
operational meetings. There, national agencies can
determine how to best combine the potential of
INTERPOL’s tools with their country’s legal, tactical
and human rights requirements.
Today, I am glad to confirm that remarkable
progress has been achieved. At the time of the
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), fewer than 900
foreign terrorist fighters had been identified through
INTERPOL channels. Today, identifiers of more than
4,000 are available in our databases. No doubt, the call
issued by the Security Council represented a watershed.
Countries are increasingly realizing that not sharing
ultimately represents a risk, while doing so through
INTERPOL offers them an invaluable opportunity.
Whenever information enters INTERPOL’s systems,
the source country retains full control over it. Every
single member country shall remain in our databases
and can take a free and sovereign decision as to how
long the data shall remain in the INTERPOL databases
and how its visibility should be managed. Member
States can therefore use INTERPOL channels even to
communicate bilaterally.
The same freedom applies to the type of information
countries choose to exchange. That can include basic
identifiers such as names, aliases, dates of birth and
photos; fingerprints and DNA profiles retrieved from
crime scenes; and information on valid or revoked
travel documents potentially at the disposal of suspects.
INTERPOL diffusions, which let States handpick foreign counterparts accessing their information,
remain the primary channel for sharing information
on foreign terrorist fighters. Their great flexibility has
been proven in the field. In one case, two countries
had issued diffusions to flag the same foreign terrorist
fighter, each of them choosing different geographical
restrictions for access to their records. The information
was thus linked to the same individual within the
database, yet INTERPOL applied a tailored approach
to the visibility of every single piece of data, depending

S/PV.7453

on the source and its instructions. That model explains
why countries increasingly trust INTERPOL with their
data.
In addition, we are working to turn that information
into added value for member States. Our analysts are
working side by side with seconded national experts,
thanks to the generous support of Belgium, France,
Kuwait, Spain, Switzerland and the United States. All
data received is cross-checked to establish links, which
are communicated to relevant agencies as allowed by
data owners. Routes and transit hubs, as well as tactics,
techniques and procedures used by terrorists, are the
object of dedicated analytical products. As a result, we
are monitoring the threat as it evolves.
We assess that the pressure to restrict foreign
terrorist fighters’ mobility is already producing
changes in tactics. In the medium term, we project
so-called broken travel to become a more frequent
feature and facilitation networks to become more
prominent relative to self-organization. That underlines
the importance of implementation of targeted United
Nations sanctions on individuals and entities involved
in such activities, including through the issuance of
INTERPOL Special Notices. Other patterns include
a growing share of recruits with criminal records,
especially from Europe, and the active role played
domestically by some suspects who had been prevented
from travelling abroad. Furthermore, a growing number
of groups — from northern and sub-Saharan Africa
to South-East Asia — are shifting their allegiance to
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Greater risks
exist for cross-pollination among conflict zones beyond
Syria and Iraq and for access to resources for more
sophisticated attacks abroad.
That landscape leads to a single conclusion, and
my first recommendation today. We must share even
more information and share it even better. Intelligence
is crossing borders, but at a much slower pace than
foreign terrorist fighters. Groups active in Syria and
Iraq can rely on recruits from 190 countries. That is
well above the number of States currently populating
INTERPOL’s foreign terrorist fighters database, which
explains why a gap still exists between the number of
foreign terrorist fighters we have identified and those
estimated to have reached that conflict zone.
Let me also highlight two other imperatives: first,
ensuring that information flows domestically between
national intelligence agencies and law enforcement; and
secondly, sharing data across regional borders. Several

15-156297/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

encouraging initiatives are fostering information
collection regionally. I believe the next, natural step is
for INTERPOL to bring them together as a single, global
platform. That will avoid duplication of efforts and new
missed opportunities. Withholding information within
any region simply puts the rest of the world at risk.
The same applies to any intelligence made available by
member States, but unable to reach the front lines.
As highlighted by the Hague-Marrakech Memorandum
on Good Practices for a More Effective Response to
the Foreign Terrorist Fighter Phenomenon of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, making INTERPOL tools
directly accessible at international borders is a valuable
step in screening travelers and turning knowledge
into action in the field. We are therefore pursuing the
extension of INTERPOL’s I-24/7 network to border
posts as an utmost priority in our support to member
States.
Compared with the same period in 2014, in 2015
80 million additional searches were performed globally
against our screening tools, such as INTERPOL’s
nominal database; the travel documents associated with
the INTERPOL notices system; and the stolen and lost
travel documents database. Over the past year, more
than 20 countries have shown encouraging increases in
the use of these systems. However, to date systematic
checks at borders are a reality only in select member
States. Underlying this is first and foremost national
capacity. In many cases, domestic authorities show a
willingness to establish protocols and inter-agency
cooperation to extend access. Yet infrastructural gaps
still provide challenges, particularly in high-priority
locations.
This leads to INTERPOL’s second recommendation
to this forum. The call for capacity-building made
in resolution 2178 (2014) finds a natural target in
strengthening international borders. Today we have
the opportunity to set a clear-cut, ambitious objective
aimed at filling this urgent gap. Leaving the most
exposed member States alone in their response would
mean undermining both their immediate security and
our chances of success in the long term.
INTERPOL asserts that, with the Council’s
leadership and support and by mobilizing member
States’ resources, within a reasonable time frame all
major border posts surrounding this conflict zone
will be able to achieve systematic screening capacity.
INTERPOL stands ready to act to turn that vision into
reality, together with our partners.
8/30

29/05/2015

Among them, of course, are the United Nations
counter-terrorism entities. We remain committed
to working closely with the United Nations and its
Member States to fully implement the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We will continue our close cooperation with
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
particularly as the Chair of the working group on the
protection of critical infrastructure and co-Chair of
the working group on border management and law
enforcement relating to counter-terrorism.
The same applies to our support to the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, including
the provision of INTERPOL experts to assessment
missions and to our ongoing efforts with the 1267
Monitoring Team to strengthen the implementation of
sanctions against individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida.
Finally, we are working to expand our support
by becoming a global, neutral platform to exchange
experience, challenges and solutions across countries
and sectors, acting as a bridge to private industry in
countering terrorist use of the Internet; as a hub for lawenforcement discussion on issues such as radicalization
and de-radicalization; and as a forum linking police and
the military, including peacekeepers, in understanding
shared threats such as the spreading of improvised
explosive devices.
In closing, let me express how privileged I feel at
the trust that the Security Council has bestowed on
INTERPOL. I would like to place once again the full
array of our expertise, tools and services at the complete
disposal of the international community.
As Member States find themselves once again
united in protecting peace, they will find INTERPOL at
their side, helping them turn their borders into vehicles
for justice and barriers to terror.
The President: The Council has before it the text of
a statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today’s meeting. I thank Council members
for their valuable contributions to this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/11.
It is so decided.
15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.
Let me start by paying tribute to all of our
peacekeepers. Today is the International Day of
United Nations Peacekeepers, and last year alone 126
peacekeepers were killed; that is a very large number.
Let us remember them all and pay tribute to them.
I thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their contributions. I am pleased that this briefing on
foreign terrorist fighters has drawn so many high-level
officials in charge of counter-terrorism actions. This
clearly demonstrates the importance and urgency of the
matter we are discussing today.
Today’s briefing is taking place eight months after
the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) at the Security
Council summit meeting chaired by President Obama
(see S/PV.7272) and six months after the high-level
Australian debate (see S/PV.7316). This allows us to take
stock of the progress made in implementing resolution
2178 (2014) and address existing gaps in tackling the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
Countering foreign terrorist fighters is only a
part of broader counter-terrorism efforts, but it is a
significant one, for a number of reasons.
It is an increasingly global threat. As noted earlier,
there are now more than 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters
originating from over 100 countries. Most of them end
up in Syria or in Iraq, where they carry out crimes of
exceptional barbarity and brutality. Their eventual
return to their countries of origin would pose enormous
new problems and challenges to local law and order
as well as to counter-terrorist bodies. It is a complex,
mutating, and shifting threat. The age, gender and
social background of foreign terrorist fighters; where
they come from and why; how they travel to conflict
zones; how they get recruited; and how they organize,
train, arm and finance themselves varies from case to
case. No typical profiles or patterns can be drawn, and
standard solutions to the problem are hard to apply.
It is a threat that puts existing counter-terrorism
measures to an unprecedented test. While certain
frameworks exist to tackle the phenomenon, significant
implementation gaps persist, including lack of capacity,
resources and even awareness of the problem at hand.
Our responses to this threat need to be constantly
adjusted and modified if not to outpace, then at least to
match the level of adaptability and dynamics of foreign
terrorist fighters themselves. The phenomenon must be

S/PV.7453

tackled in a systematic and coherent way, involving the
countries of origin, transit and destination, as well as
neighbouring States, all of which have a specific role
to play.
Let me refer briefly to some of the priority actions
that need to be taken with all due urgency. These include
the review and update of national criminal laws in the
light of resolution 2178 (2014); strengthening border
protection and border security; improving national
judicial and prosecutorial capacities; increasing
traveller information collection, analysis and sharing;
greater regional and international cooperation; and
the more robust use of tools and services provided by
Interpol, the International Civil Aviation Organization,
the Financial Action Task Force and other relevant
bodies. The World Customs Organization and the
World Tourism Organization, too, have important roles
to play, the latter in particular, as terrorist recruits
are devising new ways of avoiding being detected and
tracked down by using tourism to disguise their travel
to conflict zones, including ever more complex broken
itineraries.
At the national level, too, more effective inter-agency
cooperation and coordination among all relevant
authorities — ministries of foreign affairs, home affairs
and justice and law-and-order institutions, transport and
communications bodies, financial crime investigation
service, intelligence, counterterrorism, and prosecutor
general’s offices — are truly essential.
On the other hand, a more coherent and comprehensive
response by the United Nations system in support of
national and regional efforts is needed, including closer
and more coherent coordination among the various
United Nations bodies tasked with counter-terrorism
mandates, inter alia, to reinforce one another’s efforts
and build on one another’s strengths.
No country can consider itself immune to the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters. Waiting until it strikes
would be the worst possible choice. We all must take
very seriously our obligations under resolution 2178
(2014) as well as other relevant counter-terrorism
resolutions and international instruments.
The Lithuanian criminal code, for instance,
establishes as criminal offences various foreign
terrorist fighter-related activities. Those who commit
acts forbidden by international agreements, including
terrorist acts, can be held responsible under Lithuanian
law irrespective of their citizenship, their place of

15-156299/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

residence, the place of the commission of the crime,
or whether the act is punishable under the laws of the
locality where it was committed.
Lithuania relies on some well-established measures
to prevent the travel of terrorists across its borders
as well as to disrupt facilitation of their travel. They
include effective border control, which is also part of
the Schengen system, and the routine use of various
INTERPOL databases. Lithuania also employs a
variety of measures to prevent money-laundering and
terrorist financing, in compliance with Financial Action
Task Force and European Union (EU) standards. We
also stress the importance of providing a determined
response at EU level and within the Schengen space.
Let me also stress that in the fight against terrorism,
it is crucial to address not only the consequences but
also the underlying factors of radicalization. Our
efforts to prevent foreign terrorist fighters will only
have a limited effect if the phenomenon itself continues
to grow. In that regard, we need a comprehensive
cross-sectoral approach guaranteeing the involvement
of all policies relevant to counter radicalization and
violent extremism, including through upholding human
rights for all, promoting inclusiveness and tolerance
and adequate education, social, development and
regional policies. Creating effective counter-narratives,
including on social media, is also very important.
Respect for fundamental rights is crucial in the fight
against terrorism. Our common work must be based on
a proper balance between security and fundamental
rights. As we seek to curb and contain that dangerous
phenomenon, we must do so in full respect of human
rights, fundamental freedoms, pluralism, rule of law
and democratic governance.
Finally, let me express my thanks to the United
States delegation for the initiative of today’s presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/11, and to Council members for
their active engagement in negotiating the text which
lays down clear guidelines about what needs to be
done by all of us to combat the foreign-terrorist-fighter
phenomenon.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Johnson (United States of America): It is an
honour to address this distinguished group of leaders.

10/30

29/05/2015

This is an unprecedented event — a meeting of the
Security Council convening key interior ministries. I
express my appreciation to Lithuania for its leadership
is convening this event, as the President of the Council,
and its efforts as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism. It is an important and timely gathering to
review our progress against foreign terrorist fighters.
Our Ministries are responsible for domestic action
to address the foreign terrorist fighter issue and we
know the importance of working together across our
Governments and across borders.
It has been eight months since the adoption of
Council resolution 2178 (2014). The resolution creates
a new legal and policy framework for international
action against an emerging threat to the security of
our homelands. In making the case for resolution 2178
(2014), my country’s President Obama, said,
“we must come together as nations and an
international community to confront the real
and growing threat of foreign terrorist fighters”
(S/PV.7272, p. 3).
Our task, today, is to assess how we are coming together
and building the capacity to confront this phenomenon
and to make sure that when we reach the one-year mark
we have achieved substantial progress on the actions
called for in resolution 2178 (2014).
Recent events in Libya, Denmark, Tunisia, Yemen,
France, Belgium and elsewhere reveal the way in which
this global terrorist threat has evolved. Terrorists of
today have considerable resources and use sophisticated
communications technologies. They are increasingly
mobile, adaptable and brutal. Terrorist organizations
include foreign terrorist fighters travelling to participate
in other people’s conflicts. The threat increasingly
includes people carrying out attacks where they live,
after returning home.
Much more work needs to be done. We must
fulfil the provisions of resolution 2178 (2014) in five
general respects. First, we must criminalize the travel
and attempted travel of foreign terrorist fighters and
certain forms of support; secondly, adopt effective
border controls and issue secure travel documents,
as well as the corollary need to exchange operational
information concerning terrorists; thirdly, expand
criminal investigations and prosecutions; fourthly,
counter violent extremism; fifthly, encourage a
greater role on the part of the United Nations and its

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

counter-terrorism bodies such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
In recent years, however, we have witnessed
an unprecedented flow of foreign terrorist fighters
to conflict zones, including Afghanistan, the Horn
of Africa, Yemen, Libya, Syria and Iraq. That new
challenge requires a new response and our response must
include stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and their facilitators and identifying and helping those
that are disillusioned before they succumb to violent
extremism ideologies.
More than 22,000 foreign terrorist fighters from
over 100 nations have travelled to Syria since the
beginning of the conflict there, including at least 4,000
from the West. Over 180 Americans have travelled, or
attempted to travel to Syria. Governments all over the
world are mobilizing to deal with this new threat and
the United States is eager to work closely with all of our
partners in doing so.
President Obama has directed all elements of the
American Government to focus on the problem. We
are therefore focused on improving border and aviation
security, bolstering legal and prosecutorial capacity,
improving information-sharing and addressing
the underlying conditions conducive to terrorism,
thereby preventing the problem by countering violent
extremism.
It is encouraging to see that many countries have
taken steps to respond to threats from foreign terrorist
fighters. The threat is truly global and involves
crossing borders. At the United States Department of
Homeland Security, we are expanding the security of
our visa-waiver programme to bolster the screening of
citizens from even our closest partners and friends and
supporting the expansion of pre-clearance processes that
screen travelers en route to the United States. That will
protect travelers of all nations on flights to the United
States. Other countries have taken their own national
measures. Our safety and security is inextricably tied
up with theirs. Therefore, my Government regularly
consults with other partners concerning foreign
terrorist fighters in an ongoing effort to prioritize the
threat, assess vulnerabilities and adapt measures to
prevent and interdict.
We are also encouraging greater law enforcement
cooperation through INTERPOL’s notice advisory
system and foreign terrorist fighter database. As the

S/PV.7453

world’s largest international police organization,
INTERPOL has a vital role to play in foreign terrorist
fighter interdiction. Through INTERPOL, United
States authorities are sharing information in real time.
During the past year, the United States has shared a
dramatically increased number of terrorist identities via
mechanisms offered by INTERPOL. Two United States
personnel will soon be assigned to the INTERPOL
foreign terrorist fighter fusion cell in Lyon, France,
as part of a programme funded by the United States
Department of State. I urge all of our partners to
consider actively exchanging information with the
foreign terrorist fighter fusion cell and to provide
financial or in-kind contributions to the cell.
The United States Government has also established
over 80 bilateral arrangements with 45 partner countries
to share information on known and suspected foreign
terrorist fighters for use by law enforcement, border
authorities and security services. It includes important
information on those we believe to be radicalized to
violence by terrorist groups operating in Syria and Iraq.
We also continue to share information on a
case-by-case basis with partners with whom we have
had longstanding relationships. Our Federal Bureau of
Investigation continues to aggressively pursue counterterrorism investigations in the United States. United
States Departments of Treasury and State are working
closely with foreign partners to disrupt access by
foreign terrorist fighters and their support networks to
the United States and international financial systems to
finance travel. United States designations trigger asset
freezing against those providing supports to terrorist
networks. The international community must continue
to develop and update countermeasures to deprive our
enemies of resources.
We are eager to assist our international partners
in their own efforts. Alongside our State Department,
justice personnel are providing technical assistance and
expertise to our partners in reviewing their investigative
tools and their law enforcement and prosecution
legislation for compliance with resolution 2178 (2014).
More than 30 countries have updated their laws since the
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014). Others are reviewing
them. More needs to done to strengthen legal systems
where needed, particularly in order to criminalize the
intent to travel as foreign terrorist fighters to commit
terrorist acts, as well as to counter acts such as training
and facilitating terrorism activities. And we must do
that as expeditiously as possible.

15-1562911/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorists are always looking for ways to
circumvent border security and security at airports.
At the Department of Homeland Security we are
continuously evaluating, modifying and enhancing
our security measures in order to stop them,
working in cooperation with our foreign partners.
Last summer, example, the department required
enhanced screening at certain overseas airports with
direct flights to the United States of America. The
United Kingdom and other countries followed suit in
order to further enhance the security of global aviation.
It is essential for countries to cooperate more in that
area.
As outlined in resolution 2178 (2014), the collection
and analysis of travel data is an important instrument
for border control and aviation security. It provides
the basis for countries to work together to counter
the movement of foreign terrorist fighters, or their
supporters and financiers. Yet according to the CTED
report, only 51 States employ this vital tool. I encourage
additional countries to use travel information like
advanced passenger information and passenger name
record data to identify both known and previously
unknown foreign terrorist fighters. We recognize that
the use of such information may be new to some of our
partners, and some may looking for ways to facilitate
the adoption of those interdiction mechanisms.
My department is committed to helping our
partners better use traveller screening information.
Within the next twelve months, the Department of
Homeland Security, through our customs and border
protection component, will be developing a new
passenger data screening and analysis system. That
global travel assessment system will be made available
at no cost to the international community, for both
commercial and Government organizations, to use
maintain, customize and enhance as needed. In order
to maximize the adoption and accessibility of that
system, it will be developed on free and open-source
platform technology and optimized to operate on lowcost community hardware or cloud infrastructure.
Once the initial software is released to the international
open-source software community, Member States will
be able to make software enhancements and contribute
software code to the project.
More broadly, all Member States need to work
more closely to take steps that will increase security,
particularly with respect to border controls. The
development of the global travel assessment system is

12/30

29/05/2015

one such step, but we encourage other Governments
and the United Nations to take action. For instance, it
is important that the United Nations system and donors
move expeditiously to provide capacity building and
technical assistance to the most affected States in order
to fill critical gaps in countering the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters. Close work between CTED and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office
can contribute to this effort. July’s high-level special
meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, to be
hosted by Spain, as well as CTED’s technical sessions
leading up to it, provide another opportunity. Ministries
of the Interior and security services need to lead efforts
to address this evolving and unprecedented threat.
I encourage all of us to continue to invest in
addressing the conditions that lead to violent extremism.
The Department of Homeland Security is building
partnerships with State and local law enforcement
agencies, community leaders and private institutions
that are in a position to deter those who may turn to
violence. As part of that effort, I have personally met
with community leaders in Boston, Chicago, Columbus,
Los Angeles, Minneapolis and here in New York. Last
February, my Government hosted at the White House a
summit on countering violent extremism. Many of the
countries represented here today attended.
Groups like Daesh use the Internet to radicalize
people to violence, but the Internet does not belong
to them. The Internet is a tool that we can use to help
parents, friends and religious leaders to save people
from turning to terrorism and violence. We need to
engage and challenge extremist ideas online and in our
communities in order to counter the ability of terrorists
to recruit foreign terrorist fighters. It is imperative
that we, as ministers of the interior, regularly and
systematically track our efforts to fulfil our obligations
under resolution 2178 (2014). I urge those present
today to participate in the United Nations CounterTerrorism Committee’s special meeting in Spain in
late July. That event will bring together experts — on
border management, countering recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters, prevention, criminalization and
prosecution — from all around the world. Challenging
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters remains a
daunting task. Progress has been made, but we still
have much to learn from each other. I remain optimistic
and encouraged by the cooperation of United Nations
States Members to detect and defeat today’s enemies of
peace, security and decency.

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), we
have increasingly shared our vision for countering this
threat, and the tools to do so. The time to take action is
now. I look forward to hearing from those around the
table about their efforts in this shared task.
Mr. Hamidi (Malaysia): I first wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for so ably
steering the proceedings and work of the Security
Council over the course of the past month. I am pleased
to be here with you, Sir, and with the other colleagues
around the table. I believe we had an important and
useful discussion earlier this morning, graciously
hosted by Secretary Johnson and Ambassador Power of
the United States of America. We welcome Lithuania’s
initiative in convening this meeting of the Council, which
for the first time ever includes ministers responsible for
internal and homeland security, aimed at, among other
objectives, assessing the implementation of resolution
2178 (2014), regarding the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters. I also wish to thank His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, the Chairs of the Council’s
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) and resolution 1373 (2001),
and the Secretary General of 1NTERPOL for their
comprehensive and insightful briefings.
Last September, the Council took an historic
and decisive step with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014). In our view, that resolution
helped pave the way for the international community
to respond to and address the growing threat posed
by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters at the
national, regional and international levels. Malaysia
reiterates its strong and unequivocal condemnation
of all acts of terrorism whenever and by whomsoever
committed — regardless of the motivation. We remain
committed to implementing all the relevant Council
resolutions aimed at combating terrorism. We welcome
the opportunity afforded to us today to take stock of
efforts to that end.
In that regard, I am pleased to announce that,
since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), Malaysia
has taken a number of concrete measures aimed at
addressing the threat of terrorism within and outside
Malaysia and in ensuring the safety and security of
our people. Among others measures, the Malaysian
Parliament earlier this year voted to enact a new law
aimed at preventing terrorism, entitled the Prevention
of Terrorism Act, which is currently awaiting royal
assent before being passed into law. In essence, the

S/PV.7453

Act aims to prevent the commission of or support for
terrorist acts involving listed terrorist organizations in
a foreign country. I would stress that in drafting the Act,
the Government took into account the need to respect
Malaysia’s obligations under the relevant human rights
instruments it is party to.
One key feature of the Act that I wish to share with
the Council concerns its provision on rehabilitation
and deradicalization. The assumption underlying this
provision is rooted in the belief that the fight against
terrorists cannot be won through force or punitive
measures alone. The inclusion of a rehabilitation
and deradicalization component in the Prevention of
Terrorism Act was based on the success of a similar
model provided in the now-repealed Internal Security
Act in Malaysia.
In essence, the model comprises multiple
components geared towards changing the world
view and mind-sets of radicalized or extremist
individuals through approaches such as small group or
individual counselling. This component also involves
a humanitarian aspect where assistance is provided
when such individuals are ready to reintegrate into
society. We believe that such measures are important to
preventing relapse or the return to militant or terrorist
activities.
Alongside the Prevention of Terrorism Act, the
Government is in the early stages of promulgating
legislation that would have extraterritorial application,
among other features, and allow for measures to be taken
against persons found to be committing or supporting
terrorist acts involving listed terrorist organizations
in a foreign country. This legislation is provisionally
entitled “The Special Measures against Terrorism in
Foreign Countries Bill 2015”.
With regard to successes in preventing the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters, I am pleased to share
with the Council that, since February 2013 to date, a
total of 107 persons, including 87 men, 20 women and
16 foreign nationals with suspected connections to or
involvement with Daesh, have been arrested. We are
actively monitoring the activities of 63 Malaysians who
are known to have travelled to Syria and Iraq to engage
in fighting in those countries. Out of this number,
11 are confirmed to have been killed.
With regard to improving information and
intelligence sharing, particularly through the advanced
passenger information system, I wish to inform the

15-1562913/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Council that Malaysia is in the process of acquiring
an advanced passenger screening system, which is
expected to be fully operational by November 2015. It
will go a long way towards providing early warning on
the possible arrival of high-risk travellers, including
potential foreign terrorist fighters.
With regard to border control measures, Malaysia
is currently developing a comprehensive national
immigration control system for effective filtering or
screening on entry and exit of travellers through air,
sea or land checkpoints. With regard to efforts at the
regional level, I am pleased to inform the Council
that Malaysia, in its capacity as Chairman of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and incoming Chair of the tenth ASEAN Ministerial
Meeting on Transnational Crime, will be hosting a
ASEAN Special Ministerial Meeting on Radicalism
and Violent Extremism in Kuala Lumpur on 2 October.
We believe that the proposed meeting will provide an
important platform for ASEAN countries to share their
experiences in countering the rise of radicalism and
violent extremism in the region and also to exchange
views on concrete measures that could be taken to
prevent the spread.
In conclusion, Malaysia is convinced that the
international community needs to address the incentives
and motivations that lead people to leave their homes
and loved ones to fight in far-flung regions of the world,
including, inter alia, prolonged and grievous injustice,
unequal access to resources and opportunities, gross
violations of human rights, foreign occupation and
systematic discrimination. At the domestic level, our
study of the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon has
shed some light on such fighters’ motivations and the
huge gap in terms of the international community’s
response.
Malaysia is convinced that unless we deal effectively
with the root causes of terrorism, we will not be able
to curtail the soft power of the terrorists, particularly
their efforts to enlist and entice new recruits, much
of which happens through social media. That said, we
are conscious that even if the so-called root causes of
terrorism could be addressed, the scourge of violent
extremism will not be resolved overnight. However,
we believe that doing so would go a long way towards
removing the motive factor so cleverly manipulated
by the terrorists in gaining sympathy for their dubious
cause and ends.

14/30

29/05/2015

We must all remain fully seized of and committed
to combatting the twin scourges of terrorism and
violent extremism for the simple reason that their
primary target is our youth. These young people, who
hold infinite promise and potential for a brighter future,
are in danger of being led down a path of death and
destruction. This, God willing, must not be allowed to
happen.
Mr. Finlayson (New Zealand): New Zealand
commends the continuing Security Council leadership
on addressing the threat of foreign terrorist fighters.
It is a complex and multifaceted challenge, and the
Council’s role in providing strategic direction and
coordination, marshalling United Nations resources and
outlining concrete measures is essential. In particular,
the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) was a milestone
in our collective efforts to combat foreign terrorist
fighters. We welcome today’s presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/11 as a means of further focusing Member
States’ efforts to implement this important resolution.
New Zealand agrees wholeheartedly with the report
on foreign terrorist fighters prepared by the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, when it states
that
“[t]he most effective policy against foreign
terrorist fighters is to prevent their radicalization,
recruitment and travel” (S/2015/358, para. 46).
The most successful responses will contain measures
that address all three of these challenges. And yet, it is
important to recognize that there can be no one-size-fitsall response. States will need to use a diverse range of
approaches to ensure the appropriate balance is struck,
depending on their context, including whether they are
source, transit or destination countries.
In New Zealand, as a source country with a small,
but evident foreign terrorist fighter issue, we have
strengthened our national framework in response to
resolution 2178 (2014). We ensure that our law penalizes
recruitment and that our enforcement agencies have the
power, either on their own or in cooperation with other
States, to prevent would-be foreign terrorist fighters
from travelling. However, the focus of our efforts is on
preventing radicalization in the first place.
We agree that, in preventing radicalization,
education and countering extremist messages are
essential. We note the significant role of the Internet in
radicalization and the need for education in cybersafety

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to protect young and vulnerable individuals. But more
than that, New Zealand’s experience is that the most
effective outcomes derive from working closely with
and alongside our communities.
For New Zealand, tackling the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon is much more than a security issue.
Our national approach to countering violent extremism
is built on supporting individuals and communities,
continuing to have a positive stake in our society and
rejecting ideologies that promote violence. The key
is to be inclusive, not exclusive — to integrate, not
marginalize. We have worked to develop leadership
programmes, provide counselling support and develop
safety nets for those at risk — in short, to address the
specific drivers of radicalization for individuals and
communities.
We accept, however, that countering violent
extremism cannot be the whole story. We have to tackle
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters, including those in
transit or about to travel, through more robust means. We
need access to better real-time information, especially
at our borders, as is made clear in the reports of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(S/2015/338, annex) and the Al-Qaida Monitoring
Team (S/2015/358, annex). That can be achieved only
through States’ efforts to improve intra- and inter-State
cooperation, and by utilizing the tools and platforms
provided by INTERPOL and other organizations
working on the issue of foreign terrorist fighters. For
States with small populations, foreign fighters may also
have a disproportionate impact on their society, but so
too will modest and well-managed technical assistance.
In the Asia-Pacific region, my country is working hard
to share its best practices relevant to the foreign-fighter
threat. We have assisted many States, particularly on
the issues of border control, money-laundering and
community engagement and policing.
We welcome the United Nations counter-terrorism
committees’ continuing work on risk assessment and
capacity-building and support the vision outlined in
today’s presidential statement on how those bodies
can better coordinate their work. The Council should
also bear in mind the very real and understandable
constraints that small developing countries face in
implementing foreign terrorist fighter frameworks.
Capacity-building is essential, but in some cases there
may be inherent limits on what is appropriate and
reasonable to expect of very small States.

S/PV.7453

In conclusion, resolution 2178 (2014) is the start of a
long, collective journey working steadily, cooperatively
and successfully against this threat. Today’s briefing
is a timely opportunity to take stock of the work done
so far and to re-focus and re-energize our efforts to
implement resolution 2178 (2014).
Mr. Hamid (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate Lithuania on its presidency of the
Council this month and to thank you, Mr. President,
for the initiative taken to hold today’s meeting on the
follow-up to the implementation of resolution 2178
(2014) on foreign terrorist fighters. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and
the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism, as well as the
Secretary General of INTERPOL, for their statements.
The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters in areas
of conflict, particularly Iraq and Syria, has worsened
during the past few years. We are deeply concerned by
the threat’s expansion to various neighbours of Chad,
especially Libya. In that regard, the report (S/2015/358,
annex) of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) is
edifying. The adoption in September of resolution 2178
(2014) on the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
embodies the international community’s commitment
and determination to conduct a merciless campaign
against the problem.
In that regard, Chad continues to affirm, at both
the national and regional levels, its determination
to prevent and combat the scourge of terrorism in all
its forms. At the national level, we have taken steps
designed to secure our borders and strengthen controls
within the country, while emphasizing prevention by
raising awareness of the dangers that violent extremism
and terrorism present. Despite Chad’s enormous size
and modest means, we have strengthened our controls
on the movement of people and goods in various
key areas in our territory. Our border controls and
systematic collection of all information relating to
religious extremism have spared our country the effects
of violent extremism and enabled us to suppress the few
incidents that have occurred.

15-1562915/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Similarly, we have taken steps to break up various
associations that have shown extremist tendencies
and to suspend the dealings of religious groups of that
nature. Community and religious leaders are taking part
in awareness-raising campaigns promoting a culture
of peace, peaceful co-existence and inter-religious
dialogue. We have decreed 21 November to be a
day of peace celebrated annually by every religion
and confession. We are currently drafting other
administrative and legislative measures related to the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014) in order to
further strengthen ways of preventing and combating
terrorism in general and the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters in particular.
In 2006, we established the Chadian-Sudanese joint
forces, which have shown themselves to be effective
in monitoring and controlling Chad’s more than 1,300
kilometre-long eastern border with the Sudan. We have
also taken measures designed to strengthen our defence
and security forces’ presence on the Libyan border,
where the terrorist threat, including that posed by
foreign fighters, is growing. The fact is that the fall of
the Muammar Al-Qadhafi regime, in 2011, has created
a situation of unprecedented chaos and institutional
instability in Libya. The southern part of the country,
which borders on Chad, is a genuine no-man’s-land, in
the grip of every brand of terrorist and criminal group,
enabling the conduct of all kinds of illegal activities,
including trafficking in arms, drugs and human beings,
and representing a serious threat to peace in the
subregion.
Beyond its national borders, Chad continues to
intervene militarily in several theatres, particularly
in Mali and some neighbouring countries, in order
to prevent various terrorist groups associated with
Al-Qaida or the Islamic State from establishing
themselves and creating sanctuaries in the Sahel. In
January 2013, Chad intervened in Mali with more than
2,000 men in an effort to halt the worrying advance of
several terrorist groups towards the southern part of the
country. That intervention facilitated the neutralization
of notorious terrorists on the sanctions list maintained
by the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011), and enabled the arrest of a large
number of terrorists, including foreign fighters.
Since January, Chad has been taking military action
against the Boko Haram terrorist group, especially in
the north-east of Nigeria. Chad’s intervention alongside
forces from Cameroon, the Niger and Nigeria made

16/30

29/05/2015

it possible to retake 11 localities under Boko Haram
control, including Fotocol, Gamboru, Dikwa, Malam
Fatori and Damasak. It also helped to significantly
undermine the disruptive capabilities of those terrorist
groups, which unfortunately continue to wage
asymmetrical warfare.
On 20 May, in line with the Constitution, the
National Assembly of Chad voted to extend the
mandate of our defence and security forces deployed
in the three aforementioned countries. Despite Chad’s
limited resources and significant financial challenges
caused by falling oil prices, Chad has decided to pursue
its commitment against Boko Haram so long as that
group continues to operate.
At the same time, while welcoming the efforts
of the Economic Community of Central African
States to mobilize 100 billion Central African
Francs — equivalent to $80 million — to assist Chad
and Cameroon, it should be noted that the costs of the
participation of the 5,000 Chadian soldiers with all the
necessary materiel and equipment, including air support,
far outstrip the financial capacity of the countries
concerned. The same applies to relevant action to be
taken in addition to military operations, particularly
as regards the rehabilitation of affected communities
and areas, the return of refugees and displaced persons,
quick impact projects and peacebuilding initiatives.
Consequently, while hailing the invaluable support
in terms of equipment and expertise provided by our
partners, particularly France and the United States
of America, we call on all bilateral and multilateral
partners to continue to provide material and financial
support to affected countries, including in the areas of
training, equipment and technology.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate my
country’s commitment to continuing its counterterrorism efforts. If we are to vanquish terrorism, we
need determination and multifaceted action, with the
participation and support of all States and regional,
subregional and international bodies. I thank the
United Nations entities — in particular the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) — as well as States for their efforts and
support. It dare to believe that international solidarity
will allow us to overcome the difficulties facing many
States, in particular with regard to capacity in terms of

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

equipment and technology, with a view to combating
terrorism effectively.
Mr. Martínez Vázquez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour to address the Security Council. I thank
the Lithuanian presidency for organizing this meeting
and I believe that it is very judicious to incorporate the
perspectives of Ministries of the Interior, given the clear
responsibility they shoulder in the fight against the
threat of terrorism. This is a very positive initiative that
highlights something that we have also observed in the
European Union — the very close relationship between
domestic security and foreign policy. This meeting
therefore represents both an obligation and opportunity
to reaffirm our political commitment against terrorism
and to pursue our efforts to implement resolution 2178
(2014), which was adopted in September last year.
Spain’s experience reveals that, with considerable
effort and sacrifice on the part of society, it is possible
to defeat terrorism and radicalization, but it requires
a firm political and social commitment and decisive
and ongoing law enforcement and judicial action.
By adopting such a comprehensive view, and while
upholding the rule of law, Spain has been able to defeat
the terrorism perpetrated by Euskadi Ta Askatasuna
and other local terrorist groups. Spain also experienced
the scourge of international terrorism in a very painful
manner with the attack of 11 March 2004, which made
us the European country with the highest number of
deaths caused by terrorism.
On the basis of our experience in the fight against
terrorism, we have come to a number of conclusions.
First, a comprehensive response from all State
authorities is needed, as is robust and well-constructed
international cooperation. Secondly, the fight against
terrorism requires the utmost political and social
legitimacy. That is why Spain recently adopted a State
agreement to strengthen unity in defence of liberty and
in the fight against terrorism, thereby guaranteeing
optimum consensus and united political action.
Thirdly, the fight against terror should not focus solely
on repression; there is also a need to rely on intensive
preventive action and a counter-narrative that rejects
the language of radicalization. That must always be
undertaken in the presence of and with proactive
testimony and input of victims of terrorism.
We are facing terrorism with very new aspects,
necessitating a flexible and effective political response.
First of all, there must be a law enforcement response.
Since 2004, the year of the brutal attack in Spain, we

S/PV.7453

have carried out 124 operations to combat international
terrorism, resulting in a total of 568 arrests. Since late
2011, the Government I represent has carried out 38
operations in Spain and made 104 arrests.
We all know, however, that a law enforcement
response is insufficient. We are at a decisive moment
in building trust, sharing information and enhancing
our cooperation capabilities. That is why we in Spain
have stressed the need to work with the international
community to identify those displaced terrorist fighters
who return or will return to any of our countries more
radicalized, trained for combat and often with very
clear instructions to carry out attacks. We must make
a resolute political commitment in the light of that
common threat.
That is why, last autumn, the Spanish Ministry of
the Interior took a very strategic decision, in line with
resolution 2178 (2014), to merge its coordination and
criminal intelligence capabilities with the establishment
of a new intelligence centre against terrorism and
organized crime in order to combine our capacities to
combat those two criminal phenomena. In only a few
months, we have identified 200 links among different
areas, demonstrating that there is a relationship
between international terrorism and organized crime.
As we know, that fact is key to efforts to combat their
financing methods effectively.
Similarly, earlier this year, the Spanish Government
approved its national strategic plan to combat violent
radicalization. It is a multidisciplinary tool for detecting
outbreaks of violent radicalization and for taking timely
action against them from different perspectives — the
social, educational and communication — including
producing counter-narratives that serve as an effective
response against terrorist propaganda.
We have also been proactive with regard to
resolution 2178 (2014), which includes, among the best
practices identified by the Global Countererrorism
Forum, action within penal facilities. Last year, we
launched a new programme to prevent radicalization in
such facilities, with a view to preventing inmates from
taking advantage of their time in prison to recruit new
followers, increase their own radicalization and that
of those around them or to interact with other cells of
terrorist groups or common criminals.
Moreover, on 2 February, the Prime Minister
and the leader of the main opposition party signed a
State pact to combat international terrorism, which

15-1562917/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

they invited the entire political spectrum to join. The
pact has already borne preliminary fruit, by way of a
thorough reform of the penal code, passed with broad
parliamentary support, that criminalizes new behaviors
as crimes of terrorism, as requiresd by resolutionn 2178
(2014). Among other things, it also delinks the crime
of terrorism from membership in a given terrorist
organization, so as to effectively prosecute lone wolves.
It also addresses indoctrination and military training,
specifically including passive indoctrination and
training, with special mention of such via the Internet.
We also explicitely criminalize the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. And the criminal code now
also covers recruitment and training, encitement
to terrorist acts, defending terrorism, and victim
humiliation.
At the moment, we are modifying our criminal
procedure act in order to ensure greater certainty with
regard to technological research. Specifically to that
end, we will update provisions concerning undercover
agents with respect to future activities under assumed
identity in the context of closed communication
networks in order to allow the recording of images and
conversations when necessary.
On another front, in urder to comply with the
requirement in resolution 2178 (2014) to prevent
terrorists from crossing borders by ensuring effective
border controls, we are aware of the fact that we
should strengthen the security of our land, sea and air
borders. As part of that effort to improve security at
our borders and prevent the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, Spain actively advocates for the adoption of
the European Union policy on such fighters coming
from our continent. That is our responsibility as a State,
which has suffered a great deal as has always remained
at the forefront of the fight against terrorism in all its
manifestations.
That is also the message that we uphold in
international forums that serve as our point of reference,
such as the United Nations, the European Union and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as well as in regional forums where we see
international cooperation as a vital and irreplaceable
tool. To cite the most recent meetings in that regard, I
would mention those held by the group of five Sahelian
States and by the conference of 10 countries of the
Western Mediterranean.
I should like to reiterate my gratitude to the
presidency of the Council for affording ministers
18/30

29/05/2015

of the interior this opportunity to share their views.
The capacity for political commitment is the measure
of our strength to face the threat of foreign terrorist
fighters. I am therefore convinced that this political
momentum will imbue the spirit of the meeting we
will hold in Madrid next July, which will be devoted
to counteracting the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
It will be an honour to welcome participants to Spain.
Mr. Sedwill (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate
today. I also thank the Secretary-General, Committee
Chairs and the Secretary General of INTERPOL for
their briefings.
As a diplomat now running an interior ministry, I
particularly welcome this initiative to use the convening
power of the United Nations to address vital issues of
domestic as well as international security.
At September’s summit on foreign terrorist fighters
(see S/PV.7272), my Prime Minister highlighted the
mortal threat that we face from the rise of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which has killed
hundreds of civilians, most of them Muslim, who have
refused to take an oath of allegiance to its extremist
worldview. They have recruited people from across
the world, not only to become foreign terrorist fighters
but to become citizens of their so-called caliphate.
As we heard in Ambassador Van Bohemen’s briefing,
there are now 25,000 foreign fighters, from over half
the Members of the United Nations — and as many,
who have not travelled, have also been radicalized and
inspired to commit acts of terrorism within their own
countries. This is a serious threat that affects all of us
all.
As you reminded us in your national statement,
Mr. President, we must ensure that our response is
collective, comprehensive and consistent, at home
and abroad. In national security there is no longer a
distinction between the domestic and the international.
Secretary Johnson highlighted how together we
should take concrete acctions to deal with foreign
terrorist fighters. The United Kingdom agrees. We are
implementing resolution 2178 (2014) and offering our
experience to any partners who wish to benefit from it.
Let me set out some of that.
We have strengthened border security. We prosecute
individuals for recruiting, financing, and travelling for
terrorist-related purposes. We can control and prevent
travel by cancelling passports, revoking nationality,

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

seizing travel documents at ports and operating a
no-fly scheme. Our national border-targeting centre
uses advanced passanger information and passanger
name records. We hope that our European partners
will follow suit and agree on effective implementation
of the former within, as as well as into, the European
Union. We have linked to the Schengen Information
System to exchange data on foreign fighters. And we
provide details on stolen and lost travel documents to
INTERPOL in order to aid partners around the world.
Furthermore, we aim not only to tackle the
symptoms but also the root causes of terrorism.
Therefore, 2 million public servants in thousands of
public authorities in the United Kingdom now have a
legal duty to seek to prevent people from being drawn
into terrorism and extremism. And we will introduce
additional legislation later this year.
We all need to do more on this. We should inspire
young people to make choices based on reality, not
ISIL’s gangster fantasies. In today’s world, this reality
has to extend into the virtual territory of the Internet,
as our Malaysian colleague said in his remarks. The
Internet and social media empower people throughout
the world through new technology — breaking down
barriers between people and peoples, empowering the
individual citizen and strengthening the democratic
process. Socially responsible companies should not
wait for Governments to regulate and re-regulate as new
technologies develop. Just as we expect banks to ensure
that their facilities are not used to for money laundering,
Internet compaines must ensure their services are not
used by criminals and terrorists to exchange videos
of children being abused, to launder money through
virtual currencies, to buy or build weapons, to plan
attacks or to radicalzse the vulnerable. In the United
Kingdom our own Counterterrorism Internet Referrals
Unit, working with many of those companies to remove
offensive or extremist material that breaches their
terms and conditions, not just the criminal law. We
welcome the new Europol Internet Referrals Unit, to be
in place in July; and we encourage other Member States
to develop their own such capabilities.
As several colleagues have said, we must also
counter the ISIL narrative — wherever it is — with
courage, conviction and a renewed energy, while
promoting our core universal values, the values of the
United Nations, to people from across the globe who
abhor the terrorists’ barbarism towards Sunni and Shia
Muslims, Yazidis, Christians, minority communities

S/PV.7453

and women and girls of all faiths. We must counter their
false claims of success, statehood, moral supremacy
and religious authority and reach those vulnerable to
terrorist and extremist propaganda. We must give a
voice to those best placed to expose their myths and to
the victims, whose pain reveals their real agenda. We
must confront not just violent extremism but extremism
of all kinds in which violence breeds.
The United Kingdom welcomes the role the United
Nations has played in providing a global analysis of
this threat and of Member States’ responses and in
coordinating those responses. We call on all Member
States to implement resolution 2178 (2014) and, as I
have said, offer our experience to those who would find
it useful. Like us, Member States must ensure that any
measure taken to counter terrorism complies with all
their obligations under international law.
The United Kingdom also supports the efforts of
the United Nations — and especially the SecretaryGeneral — to achieve political settlements in Syria, Iraq,
Yemen, Libya and elsewhere. We urge the development
community to redouble its efforts to tackle not just
conflict itself, but the drivers of conflict from which
terrorism, extremism, sectarianism, violence, crime
and abuse spills out. We must re-energize and refocus
these efforts as we finalize the sustainable development
goals later this year.
Let us remind ourselves of the overall picture.
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham, ISIL,
Daesh or whatever the next mutation turns out to be
are not Islamic, and they are not a State. They are a
death cult devoted to mayhem and destruction. So from
today’s session and the work that follows, they must hear
a united message from these United Nations. We will
not tolerate their intolerance. We will not compromise
our values. We will contain them, challenge them and
disrupt them. We will stand united, and united we will
defeat them.
Mr. Magaji (Nigeria): My delegation thanks you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important briefing.
We also thank the briefers — the Secretary-General,
the Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities, the Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Secretary
General of INTERPOL — for their briefings.
The adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) last
September was a clear demonstration of the Security

15-1562919/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Council’s determination to address the problem of
foreign terrorist fighters. The resolution obliges
States to deter and disrupt the movements that will
bring terrorists to theatres of conflict. The Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004)
contends that there are currently 25,000 foreign
terrorist fighters from more than half of the countries
of the world. The demographics of this phenomenon
show that a large number of foreign terrorist fighters
are from comfortable middle-class homes. Many are
university students or graduates, and a significant
number are women. Foreign terrorists are lured through
the internet and social media by other foreign fighters
as well as specialized recruitment centres outside Iraq
and Syria.
While much of the world’s attention is focused
on the Middle East, it should be noted that Africa
has not been spared the effect of the foreign terrorist
fighters phenomenon. The increase in violence and
extremism in the area of operations of foreign terrorist
fighters has emboldened African insurgent groups to
pledge allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS) and other terrorist groups. Boko Haram pledged
allegiance to ISIS in March 2015. That development
coincided with the defeat of Boko Haram in key towns
in north-eastern Nigeria. The Nigerian Government
views that move by Boko Haram as a sign of weakening
operational capability. It amounts to an indirect
invitation for foreign terrorist fighters aligned with
ISIS to join Boko Haram.
Whatever the reason for the declaration of
allegiance, one thing remains certain — Boko Haram
has signalled its intention to be part of a global jihad
while it continues to pursue its locally driven agenda.
The change has led not only to a shift in strategy in terms
of copying foreign terrorist fighters’ model of terror,
but also to a change in terms of ideology, recruitment
and propaganda methods. Recourse to mass executions
and public beheadings were also embraced by the group
as a terror tactic.
Growing radicalism in sub-Saharan Africa is
aggravating local conflicts. Terrorist groups are
capitalizing on ethnic tension and violence in the Sahel
and North Africa to advance recruitment campaigns and
expansion, especially within the Touareg communities
in the Sahel. That calls for greater vigilance on the part
of the international community in general and African
States in particular.

20/30

29/05/2015

My delegation notes with satisfaction the efforts
by the United Nations counter-terrorism entities, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), to contain the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. We also note the challenges
they face, as reflected in the CTED report on the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014) by a State
affected by foreign terrorist fighters.
We see the need to shrink the operating space of
foreign terrorist fighters rather than just deter and
disrupt their movements across borders. Foreign
terrorist fighters can only function if a theatre of
operation exists. Likewise, terrorists can only incite,
recruit and lure would-be fighters if there is a war to
be fought. We believe that no effort should be spared,
including the use of applicable international instruments
at the disposal of regional and subregional groupings,
to keep domestic malcontent local in order to shrink
the operating space for all external parties, including
foreign terrorist fighters.
Member States should earnestly address local
socioeconomic grievances through formulating
policies that ensure broad-based transformation
through job creation without discrimination, the
equalization of opportunities and expansion of access
to social services. Respect for human rights, strong
accountability and institutions, an equitable delivery
of services and political inclusion are also essential in
fostering harmony and giving a sense of belonging to
all members of society.
For our part, the Government of Nigeria has
established a presidential initiative for the northeast within the framework of our soft approach to
countering violent extremism. The initiative seeks to
promote the sustained socioeconomic transformation of
north-eastern Nigeria into a region of safety, security
and prosperity. In so doing, the Government aims to
address the root causes of radicalism.
The problem of foreign terrorist fighters requires
the international community to work together in the
search for sustainable solutions. Nigeria stands ready to
engage with all Member States, relevant international
organizations and other stakeholders to deal with this
major threat to international peace and security.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative taken by Lithuania to convene
this Security Council briefing on combatting foreign
terrorist fighters. I welcome you, Mr. President, to

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

New York to preside over this meeting. I would like
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ambassador
Van Bohemen, Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities;
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee; and Mr. Jürgen Stock,
Secretary General of INTERPOL, for their briefings.
Currently, the international counter-terrorism
situation is grave. Regional conflicts have provided
fertile soil for terrorist and extremist organizations.
The organizational structure of terrorist forces has
become more decentralized, with new forms and means
of conducting terrorist activities. The phenomenon
of the transnational flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and the use by terrorist organizations of the Internet to
conduct terrorist activities have become more serious.
Many young people, incited by extreme ideology, have
joined extremist and terrorist activities.
Terrorism is the current enemy of humankind as
a whole. The international community should closely
cooperate and take effective action to combat that
scourge. International counter-terrorism activities
should give full play to the leading role of the United
Nations and the Security Council, observe the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of countries so as to solidify the widest possible
common understanding among Member States and
take coordinated actions. International counterterrorism activities should uphold uniform standards.
Terrorism in whatever form, wherever, whenever and
against whomever or whatsoever it is conducted, must
be resolutely fought against. There must be no double
standards, and still less should terrorism be linked to
specific ethnic groups or religions.
International counter-terrorism activities should
address both the symptoms and the root causes of
terrorism. On the one hand, we should strengthen
information-exchange regarding the new forms,
developments and trends of terrorism so as to establish
and adopt appropriate responses in a timely manner. On
the other hand, we should take integrated measures in
the political, security, economic and ideological fields,
especially to commit ourselves to eliminating the root
causes and breeding grounds of terrorism.
Recently, the notable increase in the number and
movement of foreign terrorist fighters has caused
increasing harm and become a new topic for and

S/PV.7453

challenge to ongoing international counter-terrorism
endeavours. The presence of foreign terrorist fighters
has exacerbated the intensity of regional conflicts and
made it more difficult to resolve them. It seriously
threatens the stability and security of countries of
origin, transit and destination, and poses an enormous
potential threat of the spread of terrorism. China wishes
to make four observations concerning our efforts to
effectively curtail the transnational flow of foreign
terrorist fighters.
First, we should greatly strengthen international
cooperation through multilateral and bilateral
mechanisms. We should fully leverage the advantages
of the United Nations and relevant international
organizations and establish a counter-terrorism
database as soon as possible so as to share intelligence
resources. Various countries, in particular those
bordering on conflict zones, should strengthen border
control and law enforcement cooperation so as to cut
off the flow of terrorists. Countries should strengthen
their cooperation in financial regulation so as to block
the channels of terrorist financing.
Secondly, we should resolutely fight against the
use of the Internet for terrorist purposes. In recent
years, terrorist organizations have consistently used
the Internet and other new media to spread extremist
ideologies and plot terrorist activities, causing serious
harm. The international community should take
effective measures to combat the use by terrorist
organizations of the Internet to publish audio and video
materials portraying terrorist violence, spread extremist
ideologies, recruit fighters, raise funds and plan and
conduct terrorist activities. Governments should
effectively implement the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions and strengthen their
regulation of the Internet. Internet companies and
operators must exercise self-discipline. We need to
formulate a global code of conduct for businesses in
that area as soon as possible.
Thirdly, we must remain highly vigilant against
the backflow of terrorist fighters, which could pose a
serious threat to the countries and regions concerned,
and even to international peace and stability. The
international community should give its full attention
to that problem, strengthen coordination and effectively
respond to the problem of the backflow of foreign
terrorist fighters.
Fourthly, countries should work together to punish
those who spread extremist ideologies and close facilities

15-1562921/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

used for that purpose, in accordance with the law. The
United Nations and the international community should
energetically advocate the spirit of intercivilizational
dialogue characterized by mutual respect, openness
and tolerance; create a social environment in which
different ethnic groups, cultures and religions treat
each other equally and co-exist harmoniously; and
build a new kind of international relations with good
will and cooperation at their core.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has stressed that
China will push forward with parallel counter-terrorism
efforts at the international and domestic levels. China
will continue to strictly implement the relevanty
Security Council resolutions, step up its efforts to fight
terrorism in accordance with the law, and severely
punish violent and terrorist crimes. China will continue
to take an active part in and promote counter-terrorism
cooperation at the bilateral and multilateral levels
and, within the limits of its capacities, will provide
developing countries with capacity-building and
material assistance. China is ready to join with other
members of the international community in responding
to the threats and challenges posed by terrorism, and
to work together to maintain international peace and
stability.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): On behalf of the
Republic of Angola, I should like to welcome you, Sir,
to New York to preside over this important debate. We
express our appreciation to the Lithuanian presidency
for organizing this debate on an issue that is a matter
of great concern and deserves our full attention, with a
view to finding the most appropriate ways to counter a
dangerous trend in international life. The presence and
participation in this debate of a significant number of
eminent Ministers of the Interior are in themselves an
indication of the commitment of our Council.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General and to
the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities and the CounterTerrorism Committee, respectively the Permanent
Representatives of Lithuania and New Zealand, for
their insightful briefings, as well as to the Secretary
General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jürgen Stock.
In recent years, we have witnessed a very
disturbing development in international life, with
growing numbers of individuals getting involved
in various conflicts in different parts of the world,
thereby creating a new kind of international terrorist
22/30

29/05/2015

movement. Thousands of individuals of over 100
nationalities have become foreign terrorist fighters, as
the Security Council has labeled them, and constitute
an increasing threat to international peace and security.
Although this phenomenon is not new, the extent of the
involvement of foreign terrorist fighters in conflicts
and acts of terrorism is unprecedented.
We have to recognize that something is deeply
wrong in the world we are living in, and that the
benefits of material affluence and cultural, scientific
and technological development are being disgracefully
turned away from serving the common good. Scores of
young people have gone astray to take part in senseless
bloodshed and acts of terrorism in which obscurantism
prevails. The hatred of the other for being different,
the denial of the value of human life, and contempt
for humankind’s cultural heritage are taking the upper
hand.
The fundamental question we have to raise is:
Why is this happening? What have we done wrong
to push so many young people into committing of the
most despicable crimes and becoming associated with
the darkest forces of obscurantism and destruction? In
our view, finding the answers to those and many other
questions is crucial if we are to find the proper ways to
counter such phenomena. Other than taking repressive
legislative measures, we must wage a well-structured,
imaginative and energetic ideological struggle against
that trend and unveil the wrongdoings of the terrorists,
their nihilistic concept of life and the world, and the
nightmare that awaits these young people after the
dream is over.
Terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra
Front, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Boko
Haram and others recruit fighters from all over the
world, making their brand of terrorism a threat not only
to the targeted countries but also to terrorists’ countries
of origin and transit. The recent report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2015/358)
gives concrete evidence of the threat poses to the world,
given that there are currently more than 25,000 foreign
terrorist fighters of more than 100 different nationalities
acting in Syria, Iraq and Libya. That is a warning to the
entire international community of the need to identify
the causes of the threat and use the best approaches to
combat it.
Today, eight months since the Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), sponsored by 120
Member States, the threat posed by those individuals
15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

is greater than ever. Today’s debate is a good
opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved in
the implementation of that resolution, as well as to
identify shortcomings and obstacles. In that regard,
we reiterate Angola’s full commitment to combating
the threat posed by terrorist groups in general and by
foreign terrorist fighters in particular.
Due to the growing threat of international terrorist
groups and the ever more sophisticated recruiting
methods they use to attract young people, this year the
Angolan Government created a national anti-terrorism
observatory, coordinated by the Ministry of the
Interior. The observatory enjoys the participation of a
multisectoral expert group that includes, among others,
the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence, and State
security services, with the main objective of monitoring
and combating any potential threat caused by terrorists.
In line with our commitment, Angola has
participated in seminars conducted by the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Director, aimed
at formulating a counter-terrorism strategy for Central
Africa. We hosted one such seminar in February, in our
capital. We participated in the first counter-terrorism
seminar for Southern Africa and will take part in a
second one, to take place in Gaborone in June. The
Heads of State and Government of the ninth Summit
of the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region, held in Rwanda on 18 May, focused, among
other issues, on the terrorist threat. They decided to
strengthen the proactive sharing of intelligence among
member States to improve early warning mechanisms,
promote closer monitoring of border movements and
strengthen existing mechanisms to fight the growing
threat of terrorism in the region.
Within the framework of the effective implementation
of resolution 2178 (2014), Angola prohibits the
recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters on its
territory, in accordance with our pertinent national
legislation. Angolan legislation also criminalizes, with
imprisonment for 2 to 12 years, the actions of any
person collaborating with a terrorist group by providing
information or material resources — including
weapons, ammunition, shelter or meeting places — or
by helping such groups recruit new members. Angolan
law establishes mechanisms to verify the identify and
history of persons suspected of committing terrorist
acts before the granting of entry visas. An electronic
mechanism has recently been set up consisting of a data
base with the records of national and foreign citizens that

S/PV.7453

catalogues their potential to commit offenses, including
acts of terrorism. INTERPOL Angola, in collaboration
with international INTERPOL and the international
security services, are part of that mechanism.
With regard to the exchange of information and
administrative and legal cooperation for the prevention
of terrorist acts, there are exchanges among the members
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
and with the members of countries of subregional
organizations of which Angola is a member, specifically
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the Economic Community of Central African
States. With respect to the collection and sharing of
information inside SADC, the Regional Early Warning
Centre was created to improve communication among
the 14 members of that organization. Angola also
maintains contacts and cooperation with the African
Centre for Study and Research on Terrorism within
the African Union mechanisms with headquarters
in Algiers. International cooperation is pivotal to the
response to that threat, and resolution 2178 (2014)
provides a very crucial framework.
In conclusion, we reiterate our strong belief that
the root causes of the phenomenon must be identified
and and resolutely and properly addressed. Otherwise,
we risk making the mistake of limiting our action
to targeting the consequences of such a disturbing
phenomenon while ignoring its real or root causes. We
are convinced that together we can and shall prevail
over the challenge.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset allow me, Sir, to express our sincere thanks to
you for presiding over this important debate. I also
commend the role of the Mission of the United States
of America for taking the initiative to introduce
presidential statement PRST/2015/11, which we have
just adopted. We welcome that document.
Jordan is deeply concerned by the threat posed
by the increasing number of foreign terrorist fighters.
According to the report of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2015/358), there
are some 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters from 100
countries, which is more than half the number of
States Members of the United Nations. This diversity
amplifies the impact of terrorism on those nations.
Resolution 2178 (2014) established the main pillars for
combating the phenomenon and charted a road map for
addressing the challenge.

15-1562923/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Unfortunately, however, we are seeing increased
numbers of fighters. Despite the best efforts of nations
and international organizations, that requires us all
to take a firm stance and to reevaluate our gaps and
weaknesses. In that regard, we wish to stress the
importance of national legislative frameworks that
define the legal aspects of addressing the phenomenon.
Here let me note that Jordan has adopted a package
of national laws that will decisively confront this
phenomenon. It criminalizes the recruitment of or
attempts to recruit persons to join, or attempt to join,
any armed group or terrorist organization inside or
outside the Kingdom, in keeping with the terrorismprevention law.
Jordan reiterates that combating this phenomenon
at the national level alone is not enough. A deepening
and strengthening of regional cooperation will be
required. It is also very important that intelligence
services in the nations most affected share information
so as to foster sustained cooperation. Here Jordan
commends the efforts of INTERPOL, particularly
regarding the development of a database that includes
information on foreign terrorist fighters. We emphasize
the importance of expanding the cooperation between
States and INTERPOL through the provision by States
to INTERPOL of the information that they have
available on such fighters.
Despite the importance of undertaking measures to
address this phenomenon, it is also wise and prudent
to tackle the root causes that drive fighters to join
conflicts. Preventive measures are the cornerstone
of our efforts to address this phenomenon. On that
basis, Jordan emphasizes the importance of carefully
studying the reasons for which terrorist organizations
attract fighters in conflict zones. The most important
of those reasons are violent extremist ideologies,
foreign occupation, lack of awareness and education;
and economic, social and political conditions, as well as
the exploitation of information technology such as the
Internet in the systematic recruitment and propagation
of extremist ideologies through social networks.
Young people remain the segment most targeted for
recruitment by and the victims of terrorist organizations.
According to the Monitoring Team’s report, most
fighters are between the ages of 15 and 35. It is for that
reason that Jordan, as part of its international efforts to
combat this phenomenon, organized a meeting of the
Security Council presided over by his Royal Highness
Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II (see S/PV.7432).

24/30

29/05/2015

ordan emphasizes that facing the problem of youth
extremism will be facilitated through collective efforts
and a systematic and competent vision that includes
military and security aspects in the short term, as
well as the long-term aspects of renewing religious
discourse and rectifying misconceptions, particularly
among young people, spreading awareness among
them, educating them and addressing the reasons for
which they fall victim to such organizations.
His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein
emphasized, during the summit meeting held last September
over which United States President Obama presided (see
S/PV.7272), the importance of transparency in our efforts
to fight this phenomenon. These organizations rely for
their survival on deals, agreements and international
support. Accordingly, we must apply a policy of
zero tolerance towards any country or organization
or individual who facilitates, supports or finances
terrorist organizations, supplies them with arms or
promotes them, whether through the media, through
the exploitation of religious figures for incitement,
or by assisting in the recruitment of fighters for such
organizations. We must have complete compliance and
cannot allow a situation in which a country complies in
one aspect while wreaking havoc in another.
Facing this phenomenon requires a unified effort
with significant resources. Many of the States that want
to face this phenomenon still lack the capacity to do so.
Here we emphasize the importance of giving greater
attention to the issues of facilitating assistance, closing
gaps and building the capacities of States. We greatly
appreciate the assistance provided by donor nations
and organizations to other countries, and we urge them
to continue these efforts to achieve common benefits,
whose fruits would benefit both the recipients and
donors. It may be correct to call this mutual assistance,
considering the scope of the danger and the collective
threat that it represents.
In the same context, I should like to stress the
important role of United Nations entities, which have
made great efforts so far but need to do more in order
to achieve synchronicity among them. Also important
is the launching of projects and programmes aimed
at capacity-building with tangible impacts on the
ground, and that we move from awareness to supplying
equipment and capacities.
In addition to the role of these fighters in fuelling
conflict wherever they go and the danger that their
countries of origin face once they return, we must
15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

highlight the threat that nations neighbouring conflict
zones face. This was made clear in the report of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
which clearly stated that countries neighbouring
conflict zones, which include my own country, Jordan,
suffer security burdens, and that this requires us to
allocate greater resources to help them face the negative
impact of the presence of such terrorist fighters in
neighbouring countries.
Here we emphasize that Jordan is one of the
States most affected by this phenomenon because
of our geographical proximity. We are also at
the forefront of confronting this phenomenon by
all means — ideological, military and securityrelated — which has led to attempts by some of these
fighters to infiltrate Jordanian territory so as to carry
out terrorist attacks with sophisticated technologies,
particularly given that they have acquired paramilitary
skills.
In closing, Jordan stresses the importance of
giving due attention to border control. This will be key
to halting the flow of fighters. Here Jordan is making
tremendous efforts in terms of border control. This
is an extra burden for Jordan because of the presence
of terrorist organizations and extremist organizations
in neighbouring countries. Jordan reiterates its call
on international partners to provide the assistance
necessary to support Jordan in facing this danger and
shouldering the border-control burden, which has cost
us immensely to date. We hope that there will be an
international call to support countries such as Jordan
that are on the front lines of the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The fight against terrorism is a matter of principle in
which collective action is essential. That is why we are
especially grateful to Lithuania for having convened this
meeting on foreign terrorist fighters, thereby providing
an excellent opportunity to exchange experiences and
best practices on the implementation of resolution 2178
(2014). We also thank the United States delegation for
its work on presidential statement S/PRST/2015/11.
The position of our country on the subject
has remained unchanged, as demonstrated by the
participation of President Michelle Bachelet Jeria in
the open debate leading to the adoption of resolution
2178 (2014) (see S/PV.7272), which has called us
together today. The phenomenon of foreign fighters
is a collective threat against which the international
community has a responsibility and duty to act through

S/PV.7453

political action. That is why Chile co-sponsored
resolution 2178 (2014) and is committed to its full and
effective implementation at the global, regional and
national levels.
Resolution 2178 (2014) provides a comprehensive
framework to adequately respond to the threat of
foreign terrorist fighters by strengthening the Council’s
collective action to prevent the recruitment and travel
of young people from other regions. Today, we must
focus our efforts on its effective implementation to
address the phenomenon, favouring priority actions
in the short term, as well as long-term preventive
measures to counter violent extremism. In turn, the
role of regional organizations in implementation must
be strengthened. They can provide necessary technical
and financial assistance to countries that so require
and play a key role in information-exchange at various
levels so as to strengthen border-control capacities.
My country participates in various international and
regional cooperative bodies in addressing security
matters, including INTERPOL, the Latin American
and Caribbean Community of Police Intelligence and
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of
the Organization of American States, the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation and the Southern Common
Market permanent working group on terrorism.
On the domestic front, national security institutions
have assumed their responsibilities by assuming new
commitments and taking necessary measures to adress
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, taking
into account the measures suggested and resolutions
adopted by the Council. Thus, existing immigration
control mechanisms and the entry and exit of persons
are regularly updated by comparing the names and
lists provided by other countries and international
organizations. Furthermore, our authorities are willing
to share and exchange information with the specialized
organizations and agencies of other States, given the
value of international cooperation in countering the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
The Council has repeatedly expressed its concern
about the importance of analysing the underlying causes
of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, in
particular the relationship between the marginalization
to which young alienated people are subject and the
persuasive recruitment mechanisms employed by
entities, including Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
As another way to implement resolution 2178 (2014),
we believe it is essential to promote strengthened

15-1562925/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

democracy aimed at eliminating inequality, promoting
the greater inclusion of young people in political and
economic processes, and providing opportunities
to older youths. Chile considers the promotion of
inclusive development to be an ethical imperative and
an effective tool for overcoming various manifestations
of extremism, as well as a prerequisite of political
stability and peace.
In conclusion, Chile reiterates its commitment
to further strengthening the principles and values
necessary for improved understanding, tolerance
and understanding among cultures and civilizations.
Political will is critical to united, collective efforts
to minimizing the capacities of those that seek to use
societal differences to destroy the dignity and rights of
individuals and communities. We are confident that the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014) can help to
generate early warning and preventive measures that
will ultimately lead to the stability and social harmony
that form the foundation of international peace and
security.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Secretary General of INTERPOL,
Mr. Stock, and to the Chairs of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee for their instructive
briefings today. The activities of these subsidiary
bodies contribute substantially to strengthening the
central coordinating role of the United Nations and the
Council in international counter-terrorism activities.
The Council is not considering the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters for the first time today. The number of
such fighters is growing, despite measures undertaken
internationally, regionally and nationally. This
worrisome trend has been corroborated by the reports
presented today on the part of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. According
to reports, Iraq and Syria remains the epicentre of
terrorism, where extremists from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Jabhat al-Nusra operate.
A detailed analysis of these extremist groups has
concluded that they now pose a threat to those States.
Furthermore, the situation in other regions is also of
serious concern. ISIL is attempting to gain a foothold
in Libya and on the Afghanistan-Pakistan border.
According to the Monitoring Team, of the more than

26/30

29/05/2015

25,000 foreign terrorist fighters, 6,500 are located in
Afghanistan.
Unless we scale up international cooperation in
counter-terrorism efforts guided by the United Nations
and the Security Council, it will prove impossible to
address the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
Furthermore, we must take pre-emptive action, avoiding
politicization and double standards, to stop those
recruited into international terrorism from travelling
into areas of armed conflict.
We need a systemic approach that include information
exchange, border control and joint measures to establish
a database of evidence regarding the participation of
jihadists in terrorist actions. The use of the INTERPOL
database and the World Bank data on counterterrorism and other information-exchange formats
could be useful in addressing potential terrorists. It
is important to bolster bilateral cooperation channels
through special agencies and law enforcement bodies
and customs, border and immigration entities. It would
also be advisable to strengthen cooperation among
State financial bodies, mindful of the fact that, without
financing, terrorists would have trouble achieving their
purpose.
It will be of the utmost importance in the long
term to curtail the process of radicalization, which is
the root cause promoting foreign terrorist fighters. The
end game must be to establish an environment based
on a categorical rejection of terrorism and extremism,
howsoever cloaked in ideological, religious or
nationalistic slogans. Greater effectiveness is necessary
at all levels to counter radical ideologies and to create a
reliable barrier to the infiltration of such ideologies into
public consciousness. In that context, it is especially
important to counter the use of modern information
and communications technology — including the
Internet — that is aimed at extremist goals. Agreed
recommendations on such measures are contained
in resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178
(2014) and presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23 of
19 November 2014 and today’s presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/11.
A sine qua non for effective decisions on the part
of the Council is their unconditional implementation
on the ground. We call upon States to maintain
flexibility in adopting national legislation to counter
new threats emanating from terrorist fighters. The
Russian Federation has already undertaken legislative
measures that provide for the prosecution of those
15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

responsible for perpetrating international terrorist
acts. A federal law assigns criminal accountability for
the training of terrorists and participation in terrorist
activities, societies and organizations, including those
in foreign States. Addressing new challenges, the penal
code establishes accountability for so-called terrorist
tourism. As we speak, a procedure for the application
of such norms is being designed.
Russia actively participates in combatting foreign
terrorist fighters regionally and internationally with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Council of Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent
States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization. Guided
by our national experience, we actively participated
in the drafting of the Optional Protocol to the Council
of Europe Convention on Preventing Terrorism, which
should foster regional implementation on Security
Council resolution 2178 (2014). Guided by the need to
establish additional conditions to halt the activities of
foreign terrorist fighters, the Russian Federation has
added the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
Al-Nusra Front to its list of terrorist organizations.
We hope that, as a result of today’s meeting, the
added focus on practical measures for countering foreign
terrorist fighters will help all States — particularly
those in the most affected regions — to better counter
this threat.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela thanks the Lithuanian delegation for
convening this very important meeting. We also convey
our respects to Minister for Foreign Affairs Linas
Linkevičius of the Republic of Lithuania. We thank the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen,
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė, and the Secretary
General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jürgen Stock, for their
briefings. We are also grateful for the presence of other
ministers and authorities involved in the fight against
terrorism.
Venezuela pays special attention to all threats to
peace and international security, particularly those
caused by terrorist acts. In this respect, my country
reiterates its categorical rejection of the commission
of such acts in all their forms and manifestations,
regardless of their motives and wherever and by
whomever they are committed, because they constitute
a flagrant violation of international law, including

S/PV.7453

international humanitarian and human rights law. We
must stress that acts committed by terrorist groups
undermine the territorial integrity and political unity of
States, as well as the security and stability of regions and
the international community as a whole, as evidenced
by events unfolding throughout the world as we speak.
There are no good terrorists and bad terrorists. There
are no moderate terrorists. There can be no tolerance
for terrorism.
Today, the violent actions of terrorist groups and
their associated entities are inflicting sectarian violence
on various African and Middle Eastern countries,
leaving a trail of destruction in their wake. Worse yet,
by cloaking themselves in a sectarian interpretation
of religion, they are practicing ethnic and religious
cleansing in vast areas of Iraq, Syria and Libya, among
other countries. We believe that the birth, growth and
expansion of these criminal organizations have been
amplified by the external financing, logistical help
and military equipment that they receive from third
countries, which use non-State actors to destabilize or
overthrow sovereign Governments.
Resolution 2178 (2014) is a milestone in addressing
this phenomenon because it urges States Members of
the United Nations to adopt a set of legal and political
actions to stop the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
There are two approaches to addressing this problem.
On the one hand, the legal approach is aimed at revising
domestic legislation in order to punish and impose
sentences consistent with the seriousness of the crime
committed. On the other hand, the preventive approach
is to adopt initiatives in the fight against violent
extremism in order to prevent the radicalization,
recruitment and mobilization of foreign terrorist
fighters and the inappropriate use of information and
communication technologies. Regrettably, sometimes
both approaches are limited in their implementation
by ongoing differences in vision and capacities among
countries.
Given the complexity of the phenomenon, we
believe that both approaches should be addressed
simultaneously because they complement and strengthen
one another. We should not favour one over the other.
Moreover, it is of particular importance to address the
deep-rooted causes underlying this phenomenon in
order to develop effective strategies to combat social
exclusion, poverty, violence and intolerant ideologies
with a view to preventing radicalization, especially
among young people. We must also favour political

15-1562927/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

solutions to conflicts that promote the expansion of
terrorism.
Vulnerability to terrorist violence is global.
The existence of more than 25,000 foreign terrorist
fighters, including young people and women, from at
least 100 countries in all regions of the world, reflects
the gravity of the situation. We should ask ourselves
how it this flow has reached conflict zones in Syria
and Iraq. To what extent are the countries of transit
truly committed or able to fight this phenomenon?
The problem of foreign terrorist fighters exacerbates
ongoing conflicts and threatens the countries of origin,
transit and destination, as well as those neighbouring
conflict zones.
Another element that we must closely follow is
the financing and logistical and military equipping of
terrorist groups. These groups have achieved a very
high level of military capability that allows them to
occupy territories, despite the efforts of international
coalitions and the fight carried out by Governments in
the region. In this regard, we regret that resolution 2220
(2015), adopted by the Security Council on Friday,
22 May, did not explicitly provide for the specific ban
of light weapons to non-State actors.
Another key element in the strengthening and
expansion of terrorist groups is linked to the collapse
of States and institutions resulting from invasions of
and interventions in countries. Such was the case in
Iraq and Libya. The collapse of States opens the way
to the chaos, violence and intolerance characteristic of
terrorist groups, while the States of the region have no
capacity for containment.
Venezuela is convinced that the fight against
terrorism must be waged within the framework of
international cooperation, in accordance with existing
international and regional instruments and the norms of
international law, with full respect for the sovereignty
of States, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Failing to do so would contribute to the radicalization
of these individuals. It is crucial to create technical
capabilities to develop infrastructure, mechanisms
and processes relevant to the fight against terrorism,
including the mobilization of necessary resources.
Furthermore, the role of specialized agencies such
as UNESCO and the United Nations Development
Programme will be particularly important in promoting
a culture of peace and tolerance in order to achieve the
economic and social development of peoples, thereby

28/30

29/05/2015

preventing terrorist and extremist groups from taking
advantage of the lack of robust institutions in countries
in conflict.
Finally, we consider the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters to have reached such shocking levels that the
international community must continue to work on the
design, implementation and strengthening of strategies
to neutralize the rise of non-State actors. In this regard, it
is important that States openly combat this phenomenon
through compliance with the provisions of international
instruments and resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly that prohibit arms transfers
and the financing, training and sheltering of terrorists.
Otherwise, we will be encouraging by act or omission
the expansion of this deplorable phenomenon.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General, the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Secretary
General of INTERPOL for their briefings. The picture
is clear. The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
remains particularly worrying.
We also want to thank the delegation of Lithuania
for organizing this debate, which allows the Council
to take action on a serious threat to international
security. I thank the Secretary for Homeland Security
of the United States of America and the United States
delegation for having successfully led the negotiations
on the presidential statement that we have just adopted
(S/PRST/2015/11).
The Security Council summit held in September
2014 (S/PV.7272), which led to the adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014), was an essential step in the
international fight against terrorism, and in particular
against the foreign terrorist fighters. It enabled the
growing awareness worldwide of this phenomenon and
asks Member States to take the necessary measures
to contain it. The resolution 2178 (2014) also helped
to establish a robust legal framework to fight against
foreign terrorists fighters, a framework that shows its
operational nature every day.
Unfortunately, despite an increasingly mobilized
international community, the number of foreign terrorist
fighters continues to grow, as was rightly pointed out by
the Chair of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. This
phenomenon is a challenge of unprecedented scale, not
only for my country but also for many of our partners.

15-15629

29/05/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Nearly 1,700 French citizens or residents of France are
implicated in the Iraqi-Syrian track, and 470 of them
are currently in Syria and Iraq. Among them are many
young people; some are women. Some have committed
suicide attacks.
Faced with this challenge, France took the necessary
measures to counter this phenomenon early and without
waiting for the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014). The
answer is naturally a legal one, but it is also essential
to act as early as possible and prevent the phenomena
of indoctrination. That is why we have chosen to act
as soon as possible, staying close to families that are
often helpless in the face of the radicalization of their
relatives, working with civil society and associations
and operating under a logic of proximity.
For over a year, France has been implementing a
systematic plan against radicalization. The telephone
platform dedicated to the prevention of radicalization
set up by the Ministry of Interior a little more than a year
ago has received more than 2,000 reports of radicalized
individuals, nearly 25 per cent of whom are minors. We
also act in schools, making our children understand the
importance of defending democracy and the diversity
of our societies.
Furthermore, at the legislative level, France has
adopted new tools in order to adapt to the evolving
terrorist threat and while respecting its international
commitments to protecting human rights. The Law
of 13 November 2014 established a procedure for
preventing individuals suspected of wanting to travel
abroad to join a terrorist organization from leaving
the country. The Law also allows us to ask Internet
providers to block or delist websites advocating
terrorism. Blocking is targeted so as not to undermine
freedom of expression. Prime Minister Manuel Valls
recently announced the establishment of specialized
teams to counter the jihadist rhetoric on the Internet and
analyse the evolution of propaganda speech to better
combat it. We have also strengthened the capacity of
our security services to dismantle terrorist networks.
It is also essential to create support mechanisms for
people returning from conflict zones. A structure will
soon be created in France to this end to help those who
wish to regain a place in society, as long as they are not
being prosecuted for their actions.
The response cannot be limited to the national
level, of course. An intensification of international
community action is essential to face this threat, which

S/PV.7453

goes beyond our borders. It is imperative to strengthen
the legal instruments to stem the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters and violent extremism.
In this regard, we welcome the recent adoption on
19 May by the Ministers of the Council of Europe of an
additional protocol to the Convention on the Prevention
of Terrorism. This text will in particular allow for
better operational cooperation between States in the
fight against foreign terrorists fighters. We also work
with our European Union partners to strengthen our
inspection arrangements at external borders. France is
calling for the rapid creation of a European passenger
name record. These measures will be consistent with
the protection of personal data and fundamental rights
of citizens.
The presidential statement that we have adopted
today is another step in the fight against the scourge of
terrorism. This text will allow us to go further in the
implementation of provisions of resolution 2178 (2014)
adopted last September, which is more than ever our
shared compass.
The United Nations has an essential role to play
in supporting the work of the States. It is important
that the relevant United Nations bodies, particularly
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, with the support of CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, ensure
that the States fulfil their international obligations. On
the basis of evaluations, capacity-building programmes
should be implemented when necessary with the
help of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. France welcomes and encourages the ongoing
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and INTERPOL.
We are now facing a major threat to our societies.
If they are to be effective and sustainable, national
responses should be enriched by dynamic international
cooperation and fall within in the framework of
international law, including respect for human rights.
It is under these two conditions that together we can
defeat the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters while
remaining true to our values; indeed, one cannot be
separated from the other.
The President: There are no more names on the list
of speakers.
I would like to express the sincere appreciation
of the delegation of Lithuania to the members of the
Council and their respective staff and to the Secretariat

15-1562929/30

S/PV.7453

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of the Council for all the support they have given us
during our presidency. Indeed, it has been a busy
month, one in which the Council rallied to consensus
on important issues within its purview. I thank all
delegations for their hard work, support and positive

30/30

29/05/2015

contributions. I know I speak on behalf of the Council
when I wish the delegation of Malaysia good luck in the
month of June.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

15-15629
