Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

ber 1961 and 1762 (XVII) of 6 November 1962, is
closely connected with that of the banning of nuclear
weapon tests,
Considering that the Heads of State of five Latin
American Republics issued, on 29 April 1963, a declaration on the denuclearization of Latin America3 in
which, in the name of their peoples and Governments,
they announced that they are prepared to sign a multilateral Latin American agreement whereby their countries would undertake not to manufacture, receive, store
or test nuclear weapons or nuclear launching devices,
Recognizing the need to preserve, in Latin America,
conditions which will prevent the countries of the
region from becoming involved in a dangerous and
ruinous nuclear arms race,
l. Notes with satisfaction the initiative for the
denuclearization of Latin America taken in the joint
declaration of 29 April 1963;
2. Expresses the hope that the States of Latin
America will initiate studies, as they deem appropriate,
in the light of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of regional agreements and by
the means and through the channels which they deem
suitable, concerning the measures that should be agreed
upon with a view to achieving the aims of the said
declaration ;
3. Trusts that at the appropriate moment, after a
satisfactory agreement has been reached, all States,
particularly the nuclear Powers, will lend their full
co-operation for the effective realization of the peaceful
aims inspiring the present resolution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to extend to the
States of Latin America, at their request, such technical
facilities as they may require in order to achieve the
aims set forth in the present resolution.
1265th plenary meeting,
27 November 1963.

1962 (XVill). Declaration of Legal Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space

The General Assembly,
Inspired by the great prospects opening up before
mankind as a result of man's entry into outer space,
Recognising the common interest of all mankind in
the progress of the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes,
Believing that the exploration and use of outer space
should be carried on for the betterment of mankind
and for the benefit of States irrespective of their degree
of economic or scientific development,
Desiring to contribute to broad international cooperation in the scientific as well as in the legal aspects
of exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Believing that such co-operation will contribute to
the development of mutual understanding and to the
strengthening of friendly relations between nations
and peoples,
Recalling its resolution 110 (II) of 3 November
1947, which condemned propaganda designed or likely
to provoke or encourage any threat to the peace, breach
of the peace, or act of aggression, and considering that
a Ibid., Eighttfflth S,s.riOK, Anntsts, agenda item 74, document A/5415/Rev.l.

15

the aforementioned resolution is applicable to outer
space,
Taking into consideration its resolutions 1721 (XVI)
of 20 December 1961 and 1802 (XVII) of 14 December
1962, adopted unanimously by the States Members of
the United Nations,
Solemnly declares that in the exploration and use
of outer space States should be guided by the following
principles:
1. The exploration and use of outer space shall be
carried on for the benefit :md in the interests of all
mankind.
2. Outer space and celestial bodies are free for
exploration and use by all States on a basis of equality
and in accordance with international law.
3. Outer space and celestial bodies are not subject
to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by
means of use or occupation, or by any other means.
4. The activities of States in the exploration and use
of outer space shall be carried on in accordance with
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations. in the interest of maintaining internatiom 1
peace and security and promoting international cooperation and understanding.
5. States bear international responsibility for national activities in outer space, whether carried on by
governmental agencies or by non-governmental entities,
and for assuring that national activities are carried on
in conformity with the principles set forth in the present
Declaration. The activities of non-governmental entities
in outer space shall re<iuire authorization and continuing
supervision by the State concerned. When activities
are carried on in outer space by an international organization, responsibilitv for compliance with the principles
set forth in this Declaration shall be borne by the
international organization and by the States participating in it.
6. In the exploration and use of outer space, States
shall be guided by the principle of co-operation and
mutual assistance and shall conduct all their activities
in outer space with due regard for the corresponding
interests of other States. If a State has reason to believe
that an outer space activity or experiment planned by
it or its nationals would cause potentially harmful interference with activities of other States in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space, it shall undertake
appropriate international consultations before proceeding with any such activity or experiment. A State which
has reason to believe that an outer space activity or
experiment planned by another State would cause potentially harmful interference with activities in the
peaceful exploration and use of outer space may request
consultation concerning the activity or experiment.
7. The State on whose registry an obj~t launched
into outer space is carried shall retain jurisdiction and
control over such object, and any personnel thereon,
while in outer space. Ownership of objects launched
into outer space, and of their component parts, is not
affected by their passage through outer space or by
their return to the earth. Such objects or component
parts found beyond the limits of the State of registry
shall be returned to that State, which shall furnish
identifying data upon request prior to return.
8. Each State which launches or procures the launching of an object into outer space, and each State from
whose territory or facility an object is launched, is
internationally liable for damage to a foreign State or

General A11embl,-El1hteenth Se11lon

16

to its natural or juridical persons by such object or its
component parts on the earth, in air space, or in outer

space.
9. States shall regard astronauts as envoys of mankind in outer space, and shall render to them all possible assistance in the event of accident, distress, or
emergency landing on the territory of a foreign State
or on the high seas. Astronauts who make such a landing shall be safely and promptly returned to the State
of registry of their space vehicle.
1280th plenary meeting,
13 December 1963.
1963 (XVID). International co-opei:ation in the
peaceful uses of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1721 (XVI) of 20 December
1961 and 1802 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 on international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space,
Having considered the report submitted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,4
Mindful of the benefits which all Member States
would enjoy by participation in international programmes of co-operation in this field,

I
l. Recommends that consideration should be given
to incorporating in international agreement form, in
the future as appropriate, legal principles governing the
activities of States in the exploration and use of outer
space;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue to study and report on legal
problems which may arise in the exploration and use
of outer space, and in partict1lar to arrange for the
prompt preparation of draft international agreements on
liability for damage caused by objects launched into
outer space and on assistance to and return of astronauts
and space vehicles ;
3. Further requests the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space to report to the General Assembly
at its nineteenth session on the results achieved in
preparing these two agreements ;

II
l. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space concerning exchange of information, encouragement of international programmes, international sounding rocket facilities, education and training and potentially harmful effects of space experiments;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Co~mittee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to undertake, in cooperation with the Secretary-General and making full
use of the functions and resources of the Secretariat :
(a) The preparation of a working paper on the
activities and resources of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other competent international
bodies relating to the peaceful uses of outer space ;
( b) The preparation of a summary of national and
of co-operative international space activities ;
( c) The preparation of a list of available bibliographic and abstracting services covering scientific and
technical results and publications in space and spacerelated areas ;
• Ibid., agenda item 28, documents A/5549 and Add.I.

(d) The compilation, in co-operation with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, of reviews of information on facilities for education
and training in basic subjects related to the peaceful
uses of outer space in universities and other places
of learning;
( e) The establishment, at the request of the Government of India, of a group of six scientists to visit
the sounding rocket launching facility at Thumba and
to advise the Committee on its eligibility for United
Nations sponsorship in accordance with the basic principles endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution
1802 (XVII);
3. Notes with appreciation that, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1721 (XVI), the Secretary-General is maintaining a public registry of objects
launched into orbit or beyond on the basis of information being furnished by Member States;
4. N ates with appreciation that certain Member
States have, on a voluntary basis, provided information
on their national space programmes and invites other
Member States to do so;
5. Invites Member States to give favourable consideration to requests of countries desirous of participating in the peaceful exploration of outer space for
appropriate training and technical assistance on a bilateral basis or on any other basis they see fit;
6. N ates the considerable measure of co-operation
in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space under
way among Member States;
7. N ates that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America have reached
an agreement looking towards co-operation in the fields
of satellite meteorology, communications and magnetic
field mapping ;
8. Encourages Member States to continue and to
extend co-operative arrangements so that all Member
States can benefit from the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space ;
9. Believes that international co-operation can be
beneficial in furthering the exploration of the solar
system;
III
1. Notes with appreciation:

(a) The second report of the World Meteorological
Organization on the advancement of atmospheric
sciences and their application in the light of developments in outer space ;11
( b) The organizational and financial steps taken by
the Fourth Congress of the World Meteorological
Organization in response to resolution 1721 C (XVI)
and resolution 1802 (XVII), section III;
2. Endorses efforts towards the establishment of a
World Weather Watch under the auspices of the World
Meteorological Organization to include the use of satellite as well as conventional data, with data centres to
facilitate the effectiveness of the system ;
3. Urges Member States:
(a) To extend their national and regional meteorological efforts to implement the expanded programme
of the World Meteorological Organization;
(b) To co-operate in the establishment of the World
Weather Watch;
11 E/:1794

and Corr. I.
