"The situation in the Middle East: report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (S/14759)" ."

At the same meeting, the President read out the following
statement:
"The President of the Security Council and the
members of the Council, after hearing the report of the
Secretary-General,"' express their deep concern at the
extent of the loss of life and the scale of the destruction
caused by the deplorable events that have been taking
place for several days in Lebanon.
"They launch an urgent appeal for an immediate end to
all armed attacks and for the greatest restraint so that
peace and quiet may be established in Lebanon and a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East as a whole ... ,,

Resolution 493 (1981)
of 23 November 1981

The Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,'"
Decides:
(a) To call upon the parties concerned to implement
immediately Security Council resolution 338 ( 1973 );
(b) To renew the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for another period of six
months, that_ is, until 31 May 1982;
(c) To request the Secretary-General to submit at the
end of this rt:riod a report on the developments in the
situation and the measures taken to implement resolution
338 (1973).

At its 2293rd meeting, on 21 July 1981, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Democratic Yemen,
Egypt, Mauritania, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Yemen to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the question.

Resolution 490 (1981)

Adopted at the 2311th meeting hr
14 \'Oles to fW'1('. w

of 21 July 1981

The Security Council,
Reaffirming the urgent appeal made by the President and
the members of the Security Council on 17 July 1981."
which reads as follows:
"The President of the Security Council and the
members of the Council, after hearing the report of the
Secretary-General,'" express their deep concern at the
extent of the loss of life and the scale of the destruction
caused by the deplorable events that have been taking
place for several days in Lebanon.
"They launch an urgent appeal for an immediate end to
all armed attacks and for the greatest restraint so that
peace and quiet may be established in Lebanon and a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East as a whole.",
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General in this
respect,
I. Calls for an immediate cessation of all armed
attacks;
2. Reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Lebanon within its
internationally recognized boundaries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report back to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution as soon as possible and not la,er than forty-eight
hours from its adoption.

Decisions
At the same meeting, following the adoption of resolution 493 ( 1981 ), the President made the following statement
on behalf of the members of the Council:
"In connection with the adoption of the resolution on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council regarding the resolution
just adopted:
" · As is known, the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force'''
states, in paragraph 27, that "despite the present quiet
in the Israel-Syria sector, the situation in the Middle
East as a whole continues to be potentially dangerous
and is likely to remain so unless and until a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the
Middle East problem can be reached". This statement
of the Secretary-General reflects the view of the
Security Council.' ''"

At its 2316th me~tr~g, on 16 December 1981, the
Council decided to mv1te the representatives of Cuba,
Egypt, Israel, Kuwait, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey and Viet Nam to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The situation in
the occupied Arab territories: letter dated 14 December
1981 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab

Adopted unanimous!_,· at the
2293rd meeting.

Decision
At its 2311 th meeting, on 23 November 1981, the
Council proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled

" See Official Records of the Security Council, Thinv-sixth Year.
Supplement for October. November and December 198 I.
29
/bid., document S/14759.
" One member (China) did not participate in the voting.
" Document SI 14764, incorporated in the record of the 2311th meeting.

'" Official Records of the Securitr Council. Thi11,·-sixth Year, 2292nd
meeting.
27 Document S/14599, incorporated in the record of the 2292nd meeting.

5
