S/2022/103*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 February 2022
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2576 (2021)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2576
(2021), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since the previous
report of 11 November 2021 (S/2021/946) and the briefing to the Security Council by
the Special Representative for Iraq and Head of UNAMI on 23 November 2021.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
On 30 November 2021, the Independent High Electoral Commission announced
the final results of the parliamentary elections held in Iraq on 10 October. In his
statement, the Chair of the Board of Commissioners announced that the Ele ctoral
Judicial Panel had approved all of the Commission’s recommendations except those
pertaining to five seats, one each in Baghdad, Basrah, Erbil, Kirkuk and Ninawa
Governorates, which were reallocated following a partial recount. The Commission
subsequently reported that, of the 329 parliamentary seats, the Sadrist Bloc won 73
seats; the Taqaddum Alliance, 37 seats; the Dawlat al-Qanun Coalition, 33 seats; the
Kurdistan Democratic Party, 31 seats; the Kurdistan Alliance, 17 seats (all for the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan); the Fath Alliance, 17 seats; the Azm Alliance, 14 seats;
the New Generation Movement, 9 seats; Imtidad, 9 seats; and Ishraqat Kanun
Movement, 6 seats. Twenty-three other parties won 5 seats or fewer, for a total of 40
seats, including 5 seats allocated to quotas for minorities, while candidates registered
as independents gained the remaining 43 seats, including 4 seats allocated to quotas
for minorities.
3.
The results announced by the Commission showed that women had won 95
seats, 12 more than the minimum quota of 83 seats (25 per cent of seats) specified in
the Constitution, while total voter turnout was 43.54 per cent. On 1 December, the
Commission officially submitted the final results to the Federal Supreme Court for
ratification.
4.
On 30 November, the President of Iraq, Barham Salih, met with the President of
the Supreme Judicial Council, Judge Fa’iq Zaidan. In a statement from the President,
* Reissued for technical reasons on 17 February 2022.

22-01084* (E)

170222

*2201084*

S/2022/103

it was noted that the two had agreed on the importance of keeping the democratic
process on track, that electoral complaints and appeals should be dealt with in
accordance with the Constitution and that maintaining a high standard of transparency
and impartiality should be a priority to restore confidence in the polls.
5.
Following the announcement of the preliminary election results on 16 October,
some political parties and candidates submitted lawsuits directly to the Federal
Supreme Court. Those lawsuits served to challenge elements of the electoral process
and the legality of aspects of the electoral law, including provisions pertaining to seat
allocation and the demarcation of constituencies, as well as the results themselves,
with some seeking to annul the election results.
6.
The Shia Political Coordination Framework (a grouping of Shiite political parties)
was among those challenging the results. In a statement issued on 30 November, the
Framework categorically rejected the results of the current elections, reaffirmed its
position that the results were subject to significant manipulation and noted that it would
continue to pursue a lawsuit aimed at annulling them.
7.
On 2 December, the political bureau of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, which
had lost two seats on appeal, issued a statement alleging that the Presidents of Iraq
and of the Supreme Judicial Council had intervened to extend the period to submit
claims to the Electoral Judicial Panel. On the same day, the Independent High
Electoral Commission issued a statement highlighting its independence, providing
legal justification for the appeals period and emphasizing that neither President had
interfered in its work.
8.
On 3 December, a statement released by the committee organizing
demonstrations to reject the election results criticized the fact that the final election
results had been announced while appeals were ongoing, urged the public to join
demonstrations and called upon protesters to be steadfast and patient. In addition, the
statement questioned the work of the committee established by the Prime Minister of
Iraq, Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, to investigate the events that had led to casualties during
post-election protests on 5 November. The organizing committee reiterated its
demands in a statement issued on 17 December.
9.
On 27 December, the Federal Supreme Court announced that it h ad ratified the
results of the 2021 parliamentary elections. That same day, the Court issued decisions
rejecting all the lawsuits challenging the final election results.
10. In response to the Court’s decision, Muqtada al-Sadr, leader of the Sadrist Bloc,
welcomed the ratification and called for the maintenance of peace. The leader of the
Fath Alliance, Hadi al-Amiri, stated that he accepted the Court’s verdicts “out of
concern for Iraq’s security and political stability”, but maintained his previous
statements “that the election [had] involved much fraud and manipulation”. Similarly,
other leaders within the Shia Political Coordination Framework accepted the decisions,
albeit while expressing reservations. The leader of the Sunni Azm Alliance, Khamis
al-Khanjar, congratulated the winners, while the former Speaker of the Council of
Representatives and leader of the Sunni Taqaddum Alliance, Mohammed al-Halbousi,
welcomed the unanimous agreement to abide by the Court’s decisions. The Kurdistan
Democratic Party, while emphasizing that it had lost two seats “illegally”, and the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan also welcomed the ratification of the results.
11. On 28 December, the Shia Political Coordination Framework issued a statement
in which it called for an end to protests against the election results. The committee
organizing demonstrations later announced that its sit-ins would end on 1 January
2022 following the commemoration of the deaths on 3 January 2020 of the Iranian
General Qasem Soleimani and the Iraqi Deputy National Security Adviser and Deputy

2/15

22-01084

S/2022/103

Chairman of the Popular Mobilization Commission, Jamal al-Ibrahimi, also known
as Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, in an airstrike close to Baghdad International Airport.
12. Meanwhile, post-electoral meetings took place across the political spectrum
throughout the reporting period. On 2 December, leaders of the Shia Political
Coordination Framework met with Mr. al-Sadr for the first time since the October
elections. In a statement following that meeting, the Coordination Fr amework noted
that the attendees had discussed “outstanding issues and latest developments” and had
agreed to continue dialogue in order to develop “realistic solutions to the political
impasse”. For his part, Mr. al-Sadr called for a “national majority government” in a
social media post. Conversely, the leader of the Dawlat al-Qanun Coalition, Nouri
al-Maliki, stressed the need for the prompt formation of a consensus government
during an address to members of his party following the meeting with Mr. al -Sadr.
13. A further meeting between Mr. al-Sadr and representatives of the Shia Political
Coordination Framework was held on 29 December 2021. On 7 January 2022, the
Shia Political Coordination Framework issued a statement, in which it called on all
representatives of the largest social component, especially the brothers in the Sadrist
Bloc, to form the largest bloc to preserve the constitutional entitlement and the
stability of the political process. The same day, Mr. al-Sadr published a social media
post in which he stated that “the will of the people is a national majority government”.
14. In addition, meetings were held among political leaders and parties from across
the political spectrum, including from the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. On 22 December
2021, the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Nechirvan Barzani, received a
delegation from the Shia Political Coordination Framework, headed by Mr. al-Maliki.
According to a statement issued by the Office of the President of the Kurdistan Region
of Iraq, the two sides agreed on the need for all political forces to reach a common
understanding, the rejection of the election results by some parties notwithstanding.
The Coordination Framework’s delegation also met with senior figures from the
Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan.
15. On 7 and 8 January 2022, a joint delegation from the Kurdistan Democratic
Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan travelled to Baghdad and met separately
with delegations from the Sadrist Bloc and the Coordination Framework, as well as
with Shia and Sunni leaders.
16. On 8 January, the Azm and Taqaddum Alliances announced the formation of a
new coalition, to be presided over by Khamis al-Khanjar, and stated that they would
nominate Mohammed al-Halbousi as parliamentary Speaker. The same day, the
President of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, Masoud Barzan i, met with the two
alliance leaders in Erbil.
17. On 30 December 2021, following the ratification of the election results and in
line with the time frame established in the Constitution, Mr. Salih issued a decree
convening the first session of the new parliament. On 9 January 2022, the Council of
Representatives held the first session of the fifth electoral cycle, under the chairship
of its eldest member, Mahmoud al-Mashadani (Azm Alliance). A total of 325
Members of Parliament attended the session and too k the constitutional oath. During
the session, the Shia Political Coordination Framework and the Sadrist Bloc each
claimed to constitute the largest parliamentary bloc. The session was briefly
adjourned due to the departure of Mr. al-Mashadani from the chamber. According to
a Council of Representatives readout, Mr. al-Mashadani had exited the chamber
owing to a health condition. The session was resumed under the chairship of Khaled
al-Daraji (independent), and parliamentarians re-elected Mr. al-Halbousi as the
Speaker of the Council of Representatives. The new Council of Representatives also
elected Hakem al-Zamili (Sadrist Bloc) and Shakhwan Abdullah Ahmed (Kurdistan
Democratic Party) as the First and Second Deputy Speakers, respectively.
22-01084

3/15

S/2022/103

18. Mr. Salih and Mr. Al-Kadhimi were among those who congratulated the new
appointees. However, the Shia Political Coordination Framework, whose members
had left the parliamentary session prior to the vote, issued a statement on 9 January
in which it stressed that it did not recognize the outcome of the session for procedural
reasons. On 11 January, the Coordination Framework released a statement in which it
said that it would seek legal recourse through the Federal Supreme Court.
19. During the reporting period, the Government continued to address the situation
related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and maintained measures
aimed at curbing community transmission of the disease and reducing the impact
thereof. On 30 November 2021, the Ministry of Health authorized booster
vaccinations for individuals aged 65 years and older, those with underlying medical
conditions and health-care workers.
20. In Sulaymaniyah Governorate, university students took to the streets between
21 November and 5 December to demand improved living conditions. After
demonstrators set fire to a Patriotic Union of Kurdistan office and blocked access to
Sulaymaniyah University and several roads, members of the security forces used live
rounds and tear gas, resulting in injuries to 30 protesters and approximately 15 security
personnel, according to information verified by UNAMI. A number of demonstrators
were arrested, with the Sulaymaniyah police department alleging that demonstrators
had attacked the police. The protests ended after the Council of Ministers of the
Kurdistan Regional Government announced financial support for students and senior
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan members committed to addressing the students’ concerns.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
21. On 3 December 2021, following an attack attributed to Da’esh in the Makhmur
district, the President of Iraq, Mr. Salih, the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
Nechirvan Barzani, the Speaker of the Kurdistan Regional Parliament, Rewaz Fa’iq,
and other officials issued statements calling for enhanced coordination between Iraqi
security forces and the Peshmerga forces to address security gaps. On 4 December,
the Security Media Cell reported that a delegation from the Ministry of Peshmerga
Affairs of the Kurdistan Regional Government had visited the Iraqi Joint Operations
Command in Baghdad to discuss security coordination to combat terrorist attacks.
22. On 8 December, Mr. Al-Kadhimi met with the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
Regional Government, Masrour Barzani, in Erbil. According to a statement issued by the
Office of the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional Government, during the meeting
the two counterparts had emphasized the importance of a stable Iraq and of enhanced
security cooperation between the Iraqi security forces and the Peshmerga forces.
23. On 20 December, the Federal Ministry of Finance announced that it had
transferred 200 billion Iraqi dinars to the Kurdistan Regional Government, the fifth
transfer of its kind since 11 July, which contributed to the payment of civil servant
salaries in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq for the month of November. Those transfers
were made as the full implementation of article 11 of the 2021 Federal Budget Law
by both Governments remained stalled.

C.

Security situation
24. Da’esh continued to conduct asymmetric attacks during the reporting period,
primarily in Anbar, Babil, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al -Din
Governorates. From 23 November 2021 to 5 January 2022, 123 attacks targeting
security forces were attributed to Da’esh, in addition to the continued targeting of

4/15

22-01084

S/2022/103

community leaders, off-duty security personnel and civilians accused by Da’esh of
collaborating with Iraqi authorities. Iraqi security forces continued their counter terrorism operations in response to Da’esh activity.
25. On 28 November 2021, Mr. Al-Kadhimi met with the families of those killed
during an October attack in Diyala Governorate attributed to Da’esh. During the
meeting, he warned against sectarian strife and called upon the security services to
hold the perpetrators to account.
26. On 29 November, the National Security Adviser, Qasim al-Araji, gave a briefing
to the press on the initial findings of the investigation into an assassination attempt
on Mr. Al-Kadhimi, on 7 November 2021, which had been widely condemned by
political actors in Iraq and by the international community. Mr. al -Araji stated that
two explosive-laden uncrewed aerial vehicles had been used in the attack, one of
which had failed to explode.
27. On 3 December, the Security Media Cell reported that an overnight attack by
Da’esh against the village of Khidr Jijah in the Makhmur district had led to the death
of multiple civilians and members of the Peshmerga forces. The attack was
condemned by the President of Iraq, Mr. Salih, the Prime Minister of Iraq,
Mr. Al-Kadhimi (through his military spokesperson), the President of the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq, Mr. Nechirvan Barzani, the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region
of Iraq, Mr. Masrour Barzani, and other officials. They all reiterated earlier calls for
enhanced cooperation to combat terrorism and greater coordination between the
Peshmerga and the Iraqi security forces.
28. On 7 December, the Security Media Cell reported that an improvised explosiv e
device attached to a motorcycle had detonated in the city of Basrah, leaving four
civilians dead and four more injured. The same day, Mr. Salih issued a statement in
which he condemned the attack and called for unity to support the State and the security
services. Mr. Al-Kadhimi also issued a statement in which he ordered an investigation.
29. On 30 December, the Security Media Cell reported that a number of bodies of
civilians had been found in Jablah, Babil Governorate, following a security operation
against suspected terrorists. On 31 December, Mr. Al-Kadhimi ordered the National
Security Agency to investigate the matter and, on 3 January 2022, announced that he
had received a report in which it was indicated that there had been a clear failure in
the performance of the security system and that 14 participants in the crime had been
arrested, either for mishandling malicious information or for involvement in the
execution of the security operation. He also stated that a higher committee had been
formed to expand the scope of the investigation and that other judicial measures had
been taken, including the dismissal of the Babylon police chief, the Babylon director
of intelligence and the Jablah director of intelligence, all of whom he said would be
referred for immediate investigation. The National Security Adviser, Mr. al-Araji, was
tasked with submitting a report on the organization of security and intelligence
entities in order to avoid similar incidents.
30. From 25 November 2021 to 5 January 2022, 44 attacks were reported against
trucks belonging to Iraqi companies contracted to carry supplies for the international
counter-Da’esh coalition, in Anbar, Babil, Baghdad, Basrah, Dhi Qar, Muthanna,
Qadisiyah and Salah al-Din Governorates. Responsibility was claimed by five
different armed groups for 38 of those attacks. No casualties were reported.
31. On 9 December, the Security Media Cell reported on social media that members
of the Iraqi Military Technical Committee had met with their counterparts from the
international counter-Da’esh coalition. The same day, the international counterDa’esh coalition announced that it had “completed its transition to a non -combat
mission”, adding that its new mission was “to advise, assist and enable Iraqi forces”.
22-01084

5/15

S/2022/103

32. On 29 December, Mr. Al-Kadhimi issued a statement on social media in which
he confirmed that the international counter-Da’esh coalition had “fully completed
their combat role after transfer of personnel and material outside Iraq”. Going
forward, he stated, the coalition’s role would be “to advise and assist … security
forces per the outcome of the Strategic Dialogue”. In addition, Mr. Al -Kadhimi
thanked the coalition and “its members, our partners and neighbours in combating
Da’esh”. The previous day, on 28 December, the Coordination Body for the Iraqi
Resistance had issued a statement questioning the coalition’s intention to withdraw
and threatening to drive out any forces remaining in the country after 31 December.
The same day, the leader of the Fath Alliance, Hadi al-Amiri, also issued a statement
emphasizing the need for foreign combat forces of all kinds to be withdrawn from
Iraq by 31 December. For his part, on 30 December, Muqtada al-Sadr proposed
several conditions aimed at ensuring that the coalition’s combat mission had ended
and called upon Mr. Al-Kadhimi to implement them.
33. On 3 January 2022, the spokesperson for the Commander-in-Chief informed the
media that air defence systems had destroyed two uncrewed aerial vehicles targeting
a military facility in the vicinity of Baghdad International Airport. On 5 January, the
Security Media Cell reported that a rocket had landed in the same area. Responsibility
for both attacks was claimed by a group calling itself “Saraya Ababil”. In addition,
the Security Media Cell reported that Ayn al-Asad airbase in Anbar Governorate had
been targeted by two uncrewed aerial vehicles, on 4 January, both of which had been
intercepted; five rockets, on 5 January, all of which had landed outside the airbase
perimeter; and one uncrewed aerial vehicle, on 6 January, which had also been also
intercepted. The rocket attack of 5 January was claimed by a group calling itself
“Qassim al-Jabbarin”. In response to the latest attacks, the international counterDa’esh coalition described such attacks as a “dangerous distraction” from its current
mission and a threat to the Iraqi people. For his part, on 5 January, Mr. Al -Kadhimi
informed the Cabinet that attacks on Iraqi bases were “irresponsible” and were
designed to “disturb security and stability in the country”.
34. During the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence of Turkey reported
ongoing operations against Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) targets in northern Iraq.
In identical letters dated 4 November 2021 addressed to the Pre sident of the Security
Council and to me (S/2021/927), the Permanent Representative of Iraq drew attention
“to the fact that these violations of the sovereignty of Iraq that Turkey committed
were contrary to the principles of good-neighbourliness and violated the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law”. In the same letters, the
Government of Iraq reiterated its willingness to cooperate with Turkey with a view to
“finding common ground and arriving at peaceful solutions”. In a letter dated
8 October 2021 addressed to the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Permanent Representative of Turkey noted that Turkey had
been exercising its “inherent right of self-defence, as outlined in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations”, and had been “taking appropriate measures within the
context of the responsibility attributed by relevant Security Council resolutions to
States Members of the United Nations in the fight against terrorism”, adding that the
measures taken by Turkey were “in compliance with its obligations under
international law”.

D.

Regional and international developments
35. The Government of Iraq continued to strengthen its ties with the international
community in areas ranging from economic cooperation to security coordination in
counter-terrorism efforts. On 22 November 2021, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, Ann Christin Linde, met separately with Mr. Sahil and Mr. Al -Kadhimi in

6/15

22-01084

S/2022/103

Baghdad to discuss issues including counter-terrorism, regional cooperation, climate
change and investment opportunities. On 23 November, Ms. Linde visited Erbil and
had separate meetings with the President, the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime
Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq.
36. On 26 November, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq issued a statement on
Iraqi migrants travelling to Europe. On 30 November, the President of t he European
Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, reported that she had spoken by telephone with
Mr. Al-Kadhimi and that they were “cooperating closely on repatriation flights”. On
19 December, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesperson informed the media th at
10 evacuation flights had brought approximately 4,000 individuals back to Iraq.
37. Mr. Al-Kadhimi also had telephone conversations with the Crown Prince of Abu
Dhabi, Sheikh Mohammed Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, on 25 November; the Secretary of
State for Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Affairs of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Elizabeth Truss, on 6 December; and the Crown
Prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammed bin Salman Al-Saud, on 12 December. In
addition, on 9 December, Mr. Al-Kadhimi participated in the opening of the Summit
for Democracy convened by the President of the United States, Joseph R. Biden, Jr.
38. On 30 November, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation and Presidential Special Envoy for the Middle East and North Africa,
Mikhail Bogdanov, met separately with the President of Iraq, the Prime Minister of
Iraq and the Minister for Oil for discussions on bilateral security, defence and
economic cooperation, among other issues. On 1 December, Mr. Bog danov met with
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq before travelling to Erbil, where he met
separately with the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
Regional Government, and then with the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq.
39. On 12 and 13 December, the United States National Security Council
Coordinator for the Middle East and North Africa, Brett McGurk, visited Baghdad
and Erbil. A statement issued on 13 December by the National Security Council
spokesperson noted that Mr. McGurk had met separately with Mr. Salih,
Mr. Al-Kadhimi, Mr. al-Halbousi, Mr. Nechirvan Barzani and other officials. On
12 December, the Office of the President of Iraq reported that discussions had focused
on bilateral ties and on “putting an end to the combat role of the coalition forces in
Iraq and strengthening the capabilities of the Iraqi security forces by providing
military advice to the Iraqi troops”, as well as highlighting the importance of
combating terrorism and recent developments related t o the regional situation. In a
statement made on 13 December by the National Security Council spokesperson, it
was noted that Mr. McGurk had confirmed the commitment of the President of the
United States, Joseph Biden, to the results of the bilateral strat egic dialogue,
underscoring that there were no longer United States forces serving in a combat role
in Iraq. Among other things, he had also reaffirmed that the remaining coalition forces
would be present at the invitation of the Government of Iraq “with a mission limited
to advising, assisting and enabling” the Iraqi security forces.
40. The Federal Minister for Defence of Germany, Christine Lambrecht, visited Iraq
on 9 January 2022. She met separately with Mr. Al-Kadhimi and with her Iraqi
counterpart in Baghdad before travelling to Erbil, where she met with the President
of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq.
41. On 23 December 2021, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy, Luigi Di Maio, visited Baghdad, where he met separately with
Mr. Salih and Mr. Al-Kadhimi. Mr. Di Maio then travelled to Erbil, where he met with
Mr. Nechirvan Barzani.

22-01084

7/15

S/2022/103

42. Also on 23 December, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Fuad Mohammad
Hussein, and his delegation were received by the President of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Ebrahim Raisi, in Tehran. The Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs reported that
they had discussed bilateral relations between Baghdad and Tehran and developments
in the regional and international situation. The Iraqi delegatio n also met with the
Iranian Minister for Foreign Affairs.
43. On 27 December, Mr. Hussein spoke by telephone with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Saudi Arabia, Prince Faisal bin Farhan Al-Saud, to discuss bilateral
relations, regional developments and other issues. Together, they subsequently
co-chaired a virtual meeting of the Political, Security and Military Committee of the
Iraqi-Saudi Coordination Council, held on 9 January 2022.
44. In a statement issued on 21 December 2021, the Central Bank of I raq announced
the payment of $44 million, which it said completed “the full payment of the
compensation amounts approved by the United Nations Compensation Commission
of the Security Council under resolution 687 (1991),with a total of $52.4 billion”. In
the statement, it was noted that “it is hoped that the ending of compensation
payment[s] will contribute to removing Iraq from Chapter VII and its impact on
reintegrating the Iraqi banking system with the global banking system”. The United
Nations Compensation Commission was established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 687 (1991) and 692 (1991) to process claims and pay compensation for
“any direct loss, damage – including environmental damage and the depletion of
natural resources – or injury to foreign Governments, nationals and corporations” as
a result of the unlawful invasion and occupation of Kuwait by Iraq in 1990 and 1991.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the United Nations
country team
A.

Political activities
45. Following the 10 October 2021 parliamentary elections, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, based on her good offices mandate,
continued to engage with the three presidencies, senior leaders of the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq, political parties, electoral stakeholders and others. In her meetings,
she emphasized that outstanding electoral complaints should be dealt with through
the appropriate legal channels and within the timelines specified by the law. She
called upon all parties to exercise restraint, to respect the outcome of the electoral
appeals and dispute adjudication processes, and to await the final decision of the
Federal Supreme Court on the ratification of the election results.
46. In addition, my Special Representative encouraged all Iraqi political actors to
work towards a constructive and forward-looking post-electoral environment,
including through the expeditious formation of a government capable of addressing
the multiple challenges that Iraq faced.
47. On 28 November, the Special Representative attended a conference on gender
equality and women’s empowerment strategies in Erbil. In her remarks, she
acknowledged the increased participation of women as voters and candidates in the
election. She noted that the preliminary election results predicted that a historic
number of women would be elected to the Council of Representatives, surpassing the
25 per cent quota, and stressed that such a strong electoral performance should ideally
translate into women’s meaningful representation in the next government. With
reference to the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based Violence campaign, the
Special Representative called for the enactment of the draft anti -domestic violence

8/15

22-01084

S/2022/103

law in order to provide legal protection for victims of all forms of domestic violence
and to ensure accountability for such acts.
48. Following the Da’esh attack in Makhmur on 2 December, the Special
Representative expressed her condolences to the families of the victims and
underlined the importance of strengthened cooperation between Iraqi security entities
in the fight against terrorism. In strongly condemning the attack on 7 December in
Basrah, she stressed that holding perpetrators accountable and strengthening national
unity would prevent similar attempts to destabilize Iraq. Emphasizing the need for
peace and stability, she continued to call upon the rele vant parties to the Sinjar
Agreement to take all necessary measures to expedite its implementation.
49. As part of her broader electoral outreach, the Deputy Special Representative for
Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance, Ingibjörg Sólrún Gísladóttir, held a meeting
with the Women’s Advisory Group and civil society organizations on 6 December.
Attendees shared their observations regarding women’s participation in the elections,
including their experiences throughout the campaign period. My Deputy Special
Representative highlighted the need for women to work together across political party
lines and to support relevant legislative work in the Council of Representatives.

B.

Electoral assistance
50. During the reporting period, UNAMI continued to provide electoral assistance
and technical support to the post-election activities of the Independent High Electoral
Commission, including the procedures for examining challenges against the
preliminary election results, the manual recount of challenged polling stations and
preparations for the announcement of the final election results.
51. UNAMI was present during the manual recount process conducted by the
Commission in Baghdad. On 25 November 2021, the Commission announced that it
had completed the manual recount of the 870 polling stations that were subject to
legal challenges, noting that its findings had been forwarded to the Electoral Judicial
Panel for decisions thereon.
52. UNAMI assisted with the quality control of data and the display s et-up for the
Commission’s announcement of the final election results on 30 November. UNAMI
also advised on public information activities in relation to the status of electoral
complaints, challenges and elections results, and countering misinformation.
53. On 6 December, UNAMI facilitated a meeting with the Commission and
representatives of Member States and international organizations that had contributed
to the joint UNAMI and United Nations Development Programme project entitled
“Support to Iraq’s electoral process”. During the meeting, the Chairman of the
Commission shared the electoral body’s priorities for further capacity development,
particularly in the areas of voter registration, results management, communication
and the electoral legal framework. With UNAMI support, the Commission is
conducting a post-election review that is expected to result in a lessons learned
document with recommendations for future elections.

C.

Human rights and rule of law developments and activities
54. From 1 October to 31 December 2021, UNAMI documented 28 incidents
resulting in at least 115 civilian casualties (50 deaths, including 9 boys and 1 woman;
and 65 injured, including 23 boys, 2 girls and 2 women). A total of 52 civilian
casualties (30 deaths and 22 injured) were attributed to Da’esh; 50 civilian casualties
(18 deaths and 32 injured) to unidentified armed elements; 12 civilian casualties

22-01084

9/15

S/2022/103

(2 deaths and 10 injured) to unexploded ordnance; and one injured civilian to Turkish
military airstrikes against Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) targets in northern Iraq.
On 30 November, the Ministry of Defence of Turkey stated during a press briefing
that all the operations that it was conducting concerning the terrorist threat against
Turkey were carried out in accordance with international law, respecting the borders
and territorial integrity of all its neighbours, including Iraq, within the scope of the
right of self-defence and targeting only terrorist elements in the region.
55. On 28 November, UNAMI launched a social media campaign to raise awareness
of human rights relating to the criminal justice system, including fair trial standards.
In December 2021 and January 2022, UNAMI and the Higher Judicial Council
convened three workshops with judges and prosecutors to finalize guidelines on the
key rights of suspects and accused and detained persons at the different stages of
criminal proceedings.
56. In December, UNAMI held four round table discussions to mark the 16 Days of
Activism against Gender-based Violence campaign in Baghdad, Basrah, Kirkuk and
Mosul, attended by over 100 government and civil society representatives.
Recommendations from the meetings included adopting the draft anti -domestic
violence law, increasing civil society participation in discus sions on that law and
legally formalizing the role of civil society organizations in the provision of services
for victims of domestic violence.
57. In December and January, UNAMI and the Iraqi Network for Social Media held
six training sessions on digital rights, attended by approximately 200 human rights
defenders, bloggers and journalists. A digital security guide for activists, a digital help
desk, and tailor-made digital security assessments for Iraqi non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) were developed and made available online.
58. To mark Human Rights Day, on 10 December 2021, UNAMI and the Prime
Minister’s Adviser for National Components sponsored an exhibition of artworks by
members of 13 minority groups, reflecting the theme of equality. Governme nt and
diplomatic representatives attended the event alongside members of civil society
organizations.
59. On 12 and 13 December, UNAMI and the Office of Counter-Terrorism
conducted a workshop for 20 law enforcement officials aimed at strengthening the
compliance with human rights of counter-terrorism operations. At the workshop,
attendees examined the domestic legal framework of Iraq and relevant international
human rights law and identified areas for further improvement.
60. On 14 December, the Government carried out the death penalty against three
prisoners convicted of terrorism-related offences. In 2021, UNAMI documented at
least 22 cases in which the death penalty had been implemented, mainly in relation to
terrorism offences.
61. In order to promote accountability for human rights violations and abuses since
October 2019, UNAMI organized a capacity-building workshop, held on 20 and
21 December, for members of the Government Fact-Finding Committee mandated to
investigate demonstration-related violations, with a view to sharing international best
practices.
62. On 22 December, UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights released a joint report entitled “Human rights and
freedom of expression: trials in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq”. In the report, the
criminal justice proceedings were examined in four emblematic cases adjudicated by
the Erbil Criminal Court. The cases concerned 16 individuals prosecuted for alleged
crimes linked to the exercise of the right to freedom of expression. The report contains
recommendations on measures to prevent further violations of the right to a fair trial
and to provide redress for victims of violations.
10/15

22-01084

S/2022/103

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
63. As at 31 December 2021, the 2021 humanitarian response plan was 62 per cent
funded, having received $377 million of the $607 million required. Approximately
1 million people were reached with some form of humanitarian assistance, out of the
1.5 million people targeted in 2021.
64. As at December 2021, approximately 1.2 million people remained displaced in
Iraq, including 174,729 persons hosted in 25 camps administered by the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq and 5,264 people in 1 camp for internally displaced persons outsid e
the Kurdistan Region, in Ninawa Governorate. Humanitarian organizations recorded
a deterioration in living standards in some camps for internally displaced persons,
citing in particular a lack of food, water, sanitation, hygiene and fuel, owing to
shortfalls in humanitarian funding and the phasing out of government assistance to
camps. Assessments conducted by humanitarian organizations show that a majority
of the internally displaced persons who had left the camps in 2021 remained in need
of further assistance.
65. NGOs have reported new administrative regulations regarding the provision of
humanitarian assistance, including a request from governmental oversight bodies to
review all assessment forms and surveys prior to distribution. While the Government
has stated that the new regulations are aimed at facilitating NGO activities, NGOs
have expressed concern that the additional regulations could lead to delays in their
operations.
66. The Government of Iraq facilitated a further two rounds of voluntary re turns
from Hawl camp to the Jad‘ah 1 camp in Ninawa Governorate, on 8 December and
8 January respectively. A total of 447 households (1,778 individuals) have now
returned since May 2021. From 2 to 3 December, 43 households that had received
security clearances returned to their areas of origin, predominantly to Anbar, Erbil,
Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates. In total, 72 households returned to
their area of origin in Iraq.
67. As at 4 December 2021, the Office of the United Nations High Commissi oner
for Refugees (UNHCR) had provided emergency COVID-19 assistance through cash
grants to over 9,000 internally displaced persons and returnee families. As at
6 January 2022, over 12,870 refugee families had also received emergency
COVID-19 assistance. The assistance is intended to mitigate the impacts of
COVID-19 and to reduce reliance on harmful coping mechanisms. On 23 November
2021, UNHCR started its provision of winter assistance to help the displaced
population to overcome increased expenditures due to extreme cold during the winter
months. By the beginning of December, over 6,600 internally displaced persons and
returnee families and over 33,000 refugee families had received the assistance.
68. The World Food Programme continued to implement resilience activities in the
Anbar, Basrah, Dhi Qar, Maysan, Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates. Those
activities have reached 123,000 Iraqis and support climate change adaptation through
the use of innovative farming techniques and crops that better adapt to salinity. The
activities were carried out as the Paris Agreement on climate change came into force
in Iraq, on 1 December.
69. Meanwhile, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
supported the food security and agricultural livelihoods of 700 out-of-camp internally
displaced and returnee households residing in Salah al-Din Governorate through the
provision of cash, agricultural inputs and training. Furthermore, FAO completed several
parts of the Al-Jazeera Irrigation System in Ninawa Governorate, enabling 35,000
vulnerable farming households to plant their land and produce a variety of crops.

22-01084

11/15

S/2022/103

70. The World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) continued to work closely with the Government of Iraq in the roll-out of
vaccines obtained through the Government’s self-financed COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access (COVAX) Facility programme. Iraq has received over 22.3 million
vaccine doses, including 7.9 million doses through the COVAX Facility. According
to the Ministry of Health and Environment, as at 5 January 2022, a total of 14,491,369
doses had been administered, 8,627,607 of them as first doses, 5,837,048 as second
doses and 26,714 as third doses, representing 30 per cent, 20 per cent and less than
1 per cent of the population above 12 years of age respectively. Meanwhile, the
Government continued to review the situation related to the COVID -19 pandemic and
maintained measures aimed at curbing community transmission of the disease and
reducing the impact thereof.
71. UNICEF and WHO, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and
Environment and partners, continued to conduct a national campaign on COVID -19
vaccination. Key messages were aired on 19 television channels and 15 radio channels
from mid-August to the end of November 2021, reaching an estimated 17 million
people, and 63,000 banners were distributed across the country.
72. On 30 November, the United Nations Network on Migration helped to facilitate a
ministerial briefing on the International Migration Review Forum, attended by the
Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Migration and Displacement. The Ministry reiterated
its commitment to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
73. During the reporting period, the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
completed 29 projects in Iraq aimed at improving or rehabilitating basic services,
including water and health-related infrastructure projects. On 1 December, IOM
presented the National Assessment of Cultural Industries in Iraq in Basrah. The
assessment is the first step towards rolling out a series of grants for businesses in the
cultural industries.
74. In Mosul and Basrah, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) held 24 workshops on construction-related trades, funded
by the European Union. Of the 865 young participants (135 of them women), at least
484 (including 51 women) found jobs related to the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of cultural heritage sites in Mosul.
75. To strengthen the management and monitoring of educational services, UNESCO
provided training, from 21 November to 6 December, for 16 master trainers (including
3 women) from the General Directorate of Education on the Education Management
Information System developed by UNESCO in partnership with UNICEF.
76. On 8 December, UNICEF and United Nations Volunteers, in partnership with
the Federal Ministry of Youth and Sports and the Ministry of Culture and Youth in the
Kurdistan Region of Iraq, launched the National Youth Volunteering Platform, an
innovative tool that allows young people in Iraq to be matched with volunteer
opportunities with private companies, NGOs and other organizations.
77. UNHCR, together with UNICEF, the Ministry of Education of the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq and the education sector, developed a formal policy for the integration
of refugee students into the school system in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. The policy
was formally endorsed by the Council of Ministers of the Kurdistan Regional
Government in November 2021.
78. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, through its Airport
Communication Project, collaborated with law enforcement authorities at the
international airports of Iraq to strengthen their capacity in maintaining border
security, including the identification and interdiction of passengers such as potential
foreign terrorist fighters. Training activities, held from 28 to 30 November, reached
12/15

22-01084

S/2022/103

more than 100 law enforcement officials and were focused on comprehensive
passenger screening, as well as ways and means to promote national inter-agency and
international cooperation.
79. As at 25 November, the Mine Action Service was training 30 Iraqi police
officers, including 6 women, in managing criminal explosive incident scenes and
collecting evidence. On 28 November, for the first time, an Iraqi NGO directly
managed and conducted clearance operations of improvised explosive devices in
Ninawa Governorate.

IV. Security and operational issues
A.

Update on security arrangements
80. The Department of Safety and Security monitored developments throughout Iraq
and implemented risk management measures to enable United Nations operations.
81. In the post-election period, the Department continued adjusting security
measures and contingency plans, liaising with host Government authorities and
disseminating information and advisories to maintain personnel awareness of changes
in the security environment.
82. The Department supported an average of 24 field missions per day across the
country, with assessed risk levels ranging from medium to high. Two very high -risk
missions were conducted during the reporting period. Close coordination with the
host Government continued to ensure the necessary security support for United
Nations operations, in particular, movements and access authorizations to regions still
affected by COVID-19 containment restrictions.

B.

UNAMI facilities, logistics, aviation, financial and legal issues
83. Construction projects were carried out in the United Nations Integrated
Compound in Baghdad, the United Nations Guard Unit camp, regional offices and the
Forward Support Base in compliance with strict health and security protocols.
84. UNAMI continued to support the United Nations funds, programmes and
specialized agencies and the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in the delivery of their mandates by providing office space, accommodation, aviation
and telecommunication services.
85. In collaboration with WHO, UNAMI continued its COVID-19 vaccination
campaign for United Nations personnel and dependants in Iraq. As at 10 January
2022, the Mission had administered about 5,257 first and second doses of COVID -19
vaccines.

V. Observations
86. The ratification of the final electoral results on 27 December 2021 by the Federal
Supreme Court concluded the national election process of 2021. I welcome the
increased participation of women as voters and candidates in the election. Th e final
election results indicate that there will be a historic number of women in the Council
of Representatives, surpassing the 25 per cent quota. I now call upon all political
actors to take the steps necessary to expeditiously form a new Government and to
create a political and security environment that is conducive to the delivery of a
22-01084

13/15

S/2022/103

government programme that builds trust in public institutions, leads to lasting
improvements in people’s daily lives and lays the foundation for a peaceful,
prosperous and sustainable future in which all Iraqis have an equal stake. A peaceful
political transition is key to the promotion of long-term stability in the country, in line
with the aspirations of the Iraqi people.
87. It is important to draw lessons from the October 2021 election with a view to
further improving the capacities of the electoral institutions of Iraq. I therefore
welcome the efforts of the Independent High Electoral Commission to conduct a post election review aimed at informing a capacity developm ent programme. The United
Nations remains a partner in this process. In this regard, I appreciate the continued,
strong support of Member States to ongoing electoral assistance activities, notably
through the joint support of UNAMI and the United Nations Development Programme
with regard to electoral capacity development.
88. Continued attacks perpetrated by Da’esh against civilians and Iraqi security
forces continue to adversely affect the overall security environment of Iraq. In this
context, I welcome the stated willingness of the Federal and Kurdistan Regional
Governments to enhance security cooperation, and I commend the efforts made, with
the support of regional and international partners, to eradicate the continuous threat
posed by Da’esh and its affiliates. Alongside effective counter-terrorism measures, it
is crucial to address conditions and root causes that are conducive to the spread of
terrorism and violent extremism. In addition, attacks targeting the international
counter-Da’esh coalition further contribute to exacerbating security concerns. I also
reiterate my call upon the regional and international partners of Iraq to support the
country’s efforts to promote stability and security through peaceful and constructive
negotiations and dialogue, and in accordance with the principles of respect for its
sovereignty, territorial integrity and good-neighbourly relations.
89. The promotion and protection of human rights remain essential for fostering the
rule of law, justice and solidarity in Iraq. I note the steps that have so far been taken
by the Government of Iraq and call upon the relevant authorities to take further
measures to strengthen accountability for human rights violations and abuses,
including by holding accountable the perpetrators of crimes against demonstrators
and other civil society actors, based on thorough and transparent investigations. In
addition, the adoption of the draft anti-domestic violence law remains a crucial step
towards the protection of women and the strengthening of accountability mechanisms.
90. The United Nations remains committed to the humanitarian and socioeconomic
response in Iraq with a view to providing support to vulnerable people, mitigating
poverty and building the capacity of government institutions. In ad dition, I reiterate
my calls for continued international support, the ongoing global economic constraints
notwithstanding. Progress on the humanitarian and socioeconomic fronts is essential
for promoting a peaceful and stable future for all Iraqis.
91. The commitment of the Government of Iraq to return additional households
from the Hawl camp in north-eastern Syrian Arab Republic is to be commended. In
this context, I encourage Member States to increase their assistance to related United
Nations humanitarian efforts and I continue to call upon all countries concerned to
follow the example of Iraq and others who have already taken steps to assume
responsibility for their own citizens in the Hawl camp.
92. As climate change is increasingly affecting the Middle East region, the
accession by Iraq to the Paris Agreement is to be lauded. I call upon Iraq to translate
its commitment into concrete and immediate action for the benefit of its people and
future generations. Iraq cannot do this alone; international and regional support and
expertise is required to address the urgent need in Iraq to use renewable energy

14/15

22-01084

S/2022/103

sources, tackle desertification and implement an adequate water management system.
The United Nations stands ready to assist Iraq in these endeavours.
93. Lastly, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Jeanine Hennis Plasschaert, and the United Nations staff in Iraq for their continued dedication to
implementing the Organization’s mandate, even during extraordinary times and under
challenging circumstances.

22-01084

15/15
