S/PV.8626

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8626th meeting

Wednesday, 25 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov/Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Croo
Mr. Wang Yi/Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Vargas Maldonado
Mr. Esono Angue
Mr. Lemoyne
Mr. Annen
Mrs. Marsudi
Sheikh Al Sabah
Mr. Balarezo
Mr. Przydacz
Mrs. Pandor
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
The contribution of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization in countering terrorist threats
Letter dated 13 September 2019 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/742)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-29199 (E)
*1929199*

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

13 September 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security

The Secretary-General: I am grateful for
this opportunity to address the Security Council
on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization in countering
terrorist threats.

The contribution of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization in countering
terrorist threats
Letter dated 13 September 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2019/742)
The President (spoke in Russian): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Mongolia, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Vladimir Imamovich Norov, Secretary-General of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization; Mr. Valery
Semerikov, Acting Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization; and Mr. Sergey Ivanov,
Deputy Executive Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Peter Burian, European Union Special
Representative for Central Asia, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/742, which contains a letter dated
2/39

25/09/2019

We face an unprecedented threat from intolerance,
violent extremism and terrorism. It affects every
country, exacerbating conflicts and destabilizing entire
regions, and it is constantly evolving. The new frontier
is cyberterrorism: the use of social media and the dark
web to coordinate attacks, spread propaganda and
recruit new followers.
In response to that unprecedented threat, we are
taking unprecedented action. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and related
Security Council resolutions provide a comprehensive
framework. Pursuing and dismantling terrorist groups
is vital, but it is just one among many measures. We
must complement security measures with prevention
efforts that identify and address the root causes, while
always respecting human rights.
We must build the resilience of societies so that
people and communities reject terrorist narratives that
prey on fear and hopelessness. We must reinforce the
social compact, including the provision of basic services
and opportunities, particularly for young people. Most
recruits to terrorist groups are between 17 and 27 years
old. We need to provide paths that offer a sense of hope
and purpose to our young men and women, including
education, training and jobs. We need comprehensive
and inclusive approaches, starting at the grassroots,
where families and communities are on the front lines.
The subjugation of women and girls is something
that many extremist and terrorist groups have
in common, regardless of ideology. That is not a
coincidence; it is foundational to their purpose. Gender
equality and engaging women and girls must be central
to our efforts to prevent and counter terrorism. We also
need to support victims of terrorism, who have the
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

greatest moral authority and who consistently call for
justice. Among the victims are the children of foreign
terrorist fighters, who will need help to overcome
trauma and stigma as they grow up.
International cooperation is the first priority of
our Counter-Terrorism Strategy. No single country or
organization has all the answers to the cross-border
challenges posed by terrorism and by returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters. Countries need to
cooperate with one another as well as with partners,
including the private sector and civil society, to
successfully address such challenges.
The three organizations that are the subject of
today’s ministerial debate are playing an important role
in promoting regional counter-terrorism cooperation
by facilitating the exchange of critical information
and knowledge and the implementation of joint
investigations and operations. The United Nations is
strengthening its institutional links with each of them.
Our partnership has established frameworks
for joint activities, exchanges of information and
collaboration on capacity-building assistance to
Member States, in line with the principles established by
the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact,
which guides all United Nations activities on counterterrorism.
I am particularly proud of our engagement,
together with the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, on the regional
Joint Action Plan for the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central
Asia. By developing a joint plan of action, the first
regional initiative of its kind, the parties involved have
shown what they can achieve with collective action,
leadership and political will.
The Joint Plan of Action contributes to
strengthening the capacities of Central Asian Member
States to enhance border security, prevent violent
extremism conducive to terrorism and foster dialogue
with religious leaders. I would like to commend the
important work of the Interparliamentary Assembly of
Member Nations of the Commonwealth of Independent
States to harmonize the counter-terrorism legislation of
its members. Parliamentary engagement is critical in
creating comprehensive approaches that are effectively
resourced and anchored in human rights and the rule
of law.

S/PV. 8626

Terrorism is fundamentally the denial and
destruction of human rights, and terrorist groups share
an agenda that is authoritarian, intolerant and frequently
misogynistic. Our efforts to counter terrorist ideology
must be founded on respect for the dignity and human
rights of all.
The counter-terrorism cooperation between the
United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
is deepening as it covers a growing range of issues. I
look forward to our continued cooperation as we work
together to end the threat of terrorism and build a more
secure and prosperous future for all.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Norov.
Mr. Norov (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would
like to express my gratitude to the Russian Federation for
the invitation to take part in today’s meeting. This topic
is extremely timely and relevant, especially in today’s
world where factors of instability are increasing, owing
to the terrorist threat and the merging of terrorism and
transnational organized crime.
Foreign terrorist fighters returning from hotspots
are striving to create new strongholds in various
parts of the world, including in the Eurasian space.
The threat of their gaining access to radioactive and
toxic substances, as well as to new types of financing
and weapons, is growing. At the same time, the fight
against terrorism and related threats has been one of
the main priorities in the activities of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) from the very moment
the organization was created.
In 2001, three months before the tragic events in
New York, the founding Heads of State of the members
of the SCO signed a convention on the fight against
terrorism, separatism and extremism. The adoption of
this document demonstrated to the whole world that
our countries, even then, had a deep awareness of the
negative trends that were unfolding, and embraced a
path of an unwavering fight against these three forces of
evil. The SCO has a well-developed legal framework and
bases and practical mechanisms that make it possible to
conduct effective work in the area of security. Many of
them, including the SCO Convention against Terrorism
and the SCO Convention on Countering Extremism, are

19-291993/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

open to accession by any interested State. Developing
and putting into practice a common definition of
terrorism and extremism is rightly considered to be one
of the most important achievements of the SCO.
The SCO Regional Anti-terrorism Structure
has operated effectively in Tashkent. Just last year,
some 360 terrorist crimes were pre-empted and some
80 underground cells and 67 terrorists, including
10 ringleaders of terrorist groups, were eliminated.
Considerable work was done to cut off the financing of
terrorism, the illegal flow of weapons and explosives,
as well as recruitment through the Internet. The SCO
also significantly increased its capacity in combating
today’s challenges and threats, with new members India
and Pakistan joining the organization. The SCO is now
transcontinental, comprising countries accounting for
half the population of the entire world,
The Peace Mission anti-terrorist command and staff
exercises, as well as the Web International anti-drug
operation, are organized regularly. I would like to say
in particular that the SCO is not a military organization
focused on States or other international organizations.
It is an open organization geared towards broad
international cooperation. There are no small or large
States in the SCO: all are equal, and all decisions are
taken by consensus.
One of the key factors of strengthening security
and stability in the region is to resolve the conflict in
Afghanistan as soon as possible. The SCO is making
a significant contribution to this end by activating
dialogue through the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group.
The road map for future actions of the Contact Group,
which was approved at the SCO summit in Bishkek, is
aimed at supporting further efforts to restore peace and
facilitate the economic development of the country, as
well as combat terrorism and drug trafficking.
In order to combat the link between drug trafficking
and terrorism and address the threat of drug trafficking
from the territory of Afghanistan, a renewed SCO
anti-drug strategy is being implemented. Over the
past five years, through joint efforts, we have seized
more than 40 per cent of the illegal narcotic substances
found in Eurasia. We also actively cooperate with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
regularly organize joint events on the margins of the
United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The
next meeting of the expert group of the Paris Pact
Initiative will be held with the assistance of the SCO
4/39

25/09/2019

secretariat in Shanghai this November. With a view
to implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and Security Council anti-terrorism
resolutions, we are actively developing cooperation with
relevant United Nations entities and other international
and regional organizations. We are strengthening our
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.
In that context, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 73/334, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the SCO, at the seventy-third session of
the General Assembly, which makes it possible to hold
regular consultations between the Secretaries-General
of the two organizations and to support the broad
cooperation of the SCO with specialized agencies of the
United Nations system. Cooperation between the SCO
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia
and INTERPOL has also been strength.
The SCO is consistently developing its cooperation
regarding humanitarian aspects of the fight against
terrorism and extremism and regional security efforts.
Guided by the spirit of Shanghai, we are developing
dialogue between cultures, religions and civilizations
on the basis of mutual trust, respect and equality of the
parties. . In this regard, we attach particular importance
to SCO cooperation with such specialized agencies of
the United Nations as UNESCO, the World Tourism
Organization, the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific and others.
At the same time, we believe it is important to
implement joint measures to deal with the root causes
and conditions of terrorism and extremism and prevent
youth from being recruited into terrorist groups and
also to reintegrate people who return from conflict
areas. We are improving our legal basis for ensuring
that young people are able to enjoy their full rights and
have access to knowledge and education. We attach
particular importance in that regard to drafting a United
Nations convention on the rights of youth.
States members of the SCO are in favour of strict
adherence to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and of strengthening the role of
the Security Council as the main organ for maintaining
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

international peace and security, and are ready to
complement the Council’s efforts at the regional level.
We call on the international community to strengthen
global cooperation in fighting terrorism, counter
efforts aimed at undermining the role of the United
Nations as the universal multilateral organization for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and stability, and strive to reach consensus on the issue
of adopting a comprehensive convention to combat
international terrorism.
The SCO will continue expanding its multifaceted
cooperation with the United Nations and its Security
Council. Currently, we are preparing to conduct our
third joint special high-level event with the United
Nations to counter terrorism and its financing, and we
would like to invite all those present in the Chamber
today to take part in it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Norov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Semerikov.
Mr. Semerikov (spoke in Russian): I wish at the
outset to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for the invitation to participate in this meeting
of the Council. I am convinced that our meeting
today will help us to work out additional practical
cooperation mechanisms and help to pool the efforts
of the United Nations and regional organizations
for the purpose of maintaining peace and security.
Our organization — the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) — is considered a partner in
this kind of interaction, as expressed at the seventythird session of the General Assembly and set out in
resolution 73/331, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization”.
The resolution states, inter alia, that in the 25
years since the signing of the Collective Security
Treaty, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
has transformed into a multifunctional structure with
the potential to provide an adequate response to a
wide range of threats and challenges within the area of
its responsibility.
Joint efforts are particularly necessary today
against the backdrop of potential major conflict, the
very real threat of the existing international security
architecture being dismantled, a crisis in terms of trust
and an atmosphere of confrontation. The world is facing

S/PV. 8626

the threat of global terrorism, which now covers a larger
geostrategic space and has expanded its subversive
activities using new technologies, in particular
information and communications technologies and
social networks.
In terms of steps to pool the efforts of the
international community, we deem very important the
fact that Mr. António Guterres placed the combat against
terrorism high on his list of priorities as SecretaryGeneral and singled out as a key area in this respect
the need to undertake broad international cooperation.
Combating terrorism and extremism is one of
the main elements of the activities of the CSTO. In
2016 our Heads of State considered the situation in
our area of responsibility and decided to implement
a set of measures aimed at countering international
terrorism and extremism. These include a number of
practical organizational activities as well as political
and military measures aimed at developing the CSTO’s
capacity to combat terrorism, most of which we have
already implemented.
Given that trafficking in illegal drugs and
weapons, as well as illegal migration, fuel the activities
of terrorists and extremists, we have increased
the effectiveness of our annual special preventive
activities, for example Canal, aimed at combating
drug trafficking, and Nelegal, aimed at curbing illegal
migration. In the course of these operations, in 2018 we
seized more than 16 tons of drugs, including various
kinds of synthetic drugs. We also confiscated 470
weapons of various types. We apprehended 443 people
who had been wanted internationally, of whom 30 had
links to terrorist and extremist activities.
In order to prevent international terrorists from
using information and communication technologies,
including for the purpose of recruiting new members,
we conduct an annual operation aimed at countering
crimes committed through the use of such technologies.
In the course of such an operation in 2018, we
identified more than 10,000 sources that disseminate
information serving the interests of terrorist and
extremist organizations.
Given the threat posed by international terrorist
organizations, we enhanced our collective rapidreaction force, adding special units dedicated to the
fight against terrorism. In the course of exercises
involving that force, we focus closely on counterterrorism activities.

19-291995/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In order to enhance our efforts to counter terrorism,
we are working on coming up with a single list of
terrorist organizations recognized as such in our States;
the scope and importance of this work is impossible to
overemphasize. We are also reacting to the threat of the
return to their countries of origin from the Middle East
of foreign terrorist fighters trained by terrorist groups
and who have participated in their activities. To that
end, last year we conducted Operation Mercury, whose
goal was to block terrorist recruitment channels and
fighters’ entry into and exit from our countries with
the goal of participation in terrorist activities, and to
neutralize the resource base of terrorist organizations
in CSTO areas. We can already state that as a result, the
operation was effective, necessary and timely and made
a direct contribution to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017).
We view the measures that I have just listed as
best practices elaborated by the CSTO, as corroborated
by the fact that our activities have been of interest to
United Nations agencies, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, as well as those of individual States,
especially in the area of countering drug trafficking.
They all participated actively in the organization and
implementation of those activities and monitored them.
We believe that in order to promote international
cooperation in stemming the spread of terrorist
ideology and propaganda, in line with Security Council
resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2354 (2017), we must pool
our efforts in the area of information security. We attach
special attention to the development and acceptance,
under the auspices of the United Nations, of universal
norms and principles of responsible conduct in the area
of information.
Despite the measures we have undertaken in order
to combat terrorism regionally, the States members of
the CSTO, as well as other countries, are increasingly
encountering new forms of terrorism and tactics used
by terrorists. The CSTO Permanent Council, in a
statement adopted in November 2018, determined that
one of the organization’s priority aims was to enhance
joint efforts to combat terrorism and extremism.
Recently we have noted with concern that efforts have
been made by certain forces to relocate their terrorist
activities to Central Asia and Afghanistan, towards the
southern CSTO borders, as made clear by the various
terrorist acts committed in Afghanistan. We were
6/39

25/09/2019

therefore compelled to react in order to ensure the
security of our States in the region. In particular, the
Council of Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Council of
Defense Ministers and the Committee of Secretaries
of Security Councils prepared, for the consideration
of our Heads of State in November, a list of additional
measures aimed at lowering tensions on the border
between Tajikistan and Afghanistan. At the same time,
we enhanced our work on developing and accepting a
targeted inter-State programme on strengthening the
border between Tajikistan and Afghanistan.
Security issues in Central Asia are also reflected
in the updated plan of the collective activities of CSTO
States aimed at implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy for the 2019-2021 period.
The main lesson that we can draw from our
experience in countering terrorism is that we need
to enhance our collective efforts to fight terrorism,
without double standards or exceptions, on the basis
of the strict implementation of Security Council
anti-terrorism resolutions and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We believe that
here it is important to act in line with the Code of
Conduct towards Achieving a World Free of Terrorism,
which was initiated by Kazakhstan at the opening of
the seventy-third session of the General Assembly (see
A/73/PV.13) and acknowledged by most countries.
We are by and large pleased with the way our
cooperation with the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism is developing, as well as that with CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, within
the framework of existing memorandums, and we
advocate for the broadening of such cooperation. We
deem it useful and effective to have contacts with the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011).
In that connection, we would like to express our
gratitude for the appraisal of the work done by the CSTO
in the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism strategy, as set out in resolution
73/331, on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization.
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We see great potential in ensuring security in the
area of responsibility of the CSTO to consolidate the
efforts of international and regional organizations.
Sometimes, however, at the political level, actors and
regions behave in a manner that is more autonomous,
which means that various processes in certain regions
are less unified than one would think. Figuratively
speaking, just as we look at small-scale maps, we also
need to look at more detailed, large-scale maps and
see the bigger picture. If we take a comprehensive
global and regional approach to issues of international
security, including the issue of fighting terrorism, it
is important to make sure that we do not see those
elements as opposites other, but rather find links
between the general and the specific.
In
conclusion,
as
the
international
community — international and regional organizations
in particular — consolidate their efforts to counter
terrorism, I would like to ask the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the States members of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization to consider and respond to the
open letter of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
States of the CSTO calling for increasing trust and
fostering cooperation on issues related to countering
global threats and challenges. The call was made by
the CSTO Council of Foreign Ministers in May and
circulated here at the United Nations. We still hope that
that call will be heard.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Semerikov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ivanov.
Mr. Ivanov (spoke in Russian): I am pleased to
welcome the participants in this meeting on behalf of
the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS).
One of the priority areas of cooperation among
the States members of the CIS is to jointly ensure
security, which is based on common views of existing
external threats and challenges and the determination
to collectively counter them. The focus of cooperation
in the security sphere over the past few years has been
on countering terrorism. It has a respective normative
and legal basis and an effective system of cooperation
among competent bodies.
Member States are constantly improving and
developing those two components based on evolving
demands and needs of the times. Last year, the

S/PV. 8626

agreement on information-sharing within the CIS
to counter terrorism and other forms of violent
extremism entered into force, as did the agreement on
cooperation in combating criminal activity in the area
of information technology. Such documents provide
concrete follow-up for information-sharing, develop
further cooperation in the area of counter-terrorism
and allow the efforts of States’ specialized entities and
competent bodies to be optimized in an entire range of
law enforcement activities in CIS territory to identify,
counter, investigate and terrorism-related crimes.
Measures are being taken within the CIS to
eliminate the conditions that contribute to the financing
of terrorist activities. That is the goal of cooperation in
the area of countering the legalization of profits obtained
through illicit means, terrorism financing and the spread
of weapons of mass destruction. We are successfully
implementing the programme of cooperation of the
CIS member States in combating terrorism and other
violent manifestations of extremism for 2017-2019. In
October, we plan to approve a similar programme for
the period 2020-2022. The main focus will be on taking
joint operational preventive measures, conducting
special operations and sharing preventive information,
best practices and experiences of cooperation with
other international organizations. As we implement
the programme, we are taking joint measures against
individuals who attempt to enter the territory of CIS
member States after being involved in the activities of
terrorist organizations. We also actively cooperate in
identifying and countering the flow of funds obtained
through economic criminal activities and counter the
attempts to use these funds to finance terrorism.
While preserving and strengthening the role of
competent law enforcement bodies actively engage
members of civil society, the private sector and the
media, and traditional religious leaders. We also
focus particular attention on countering the spread
of extremist ideas and recruitment by terrorists. We
cooperate to develop, produce and deliver modern
technology and equipment for the purposes of combating
terrorism. Modern technology is broadly used by
specialized services and other competent bodies of the
CIS to share information about individuals involved
in terrorist activity, identify their location, stop
them at border crossings as part of migration flows,
investigate-information technology-related crimes
and ensure security at major international, public and

19-291997/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

25/09/2019

sporting events , as well as in public transport and on
other critical sites.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

Cooperation between defence ministries and law
enforcement bodies is becoming a new area of focus.
Experience in Syria has shown that military operations
in connection with law enforcement operations can be
effective in fighting terrorism. In the light of that, the
joint military exercises Comradesip-in-Arms-2017 and
Issyk Kul-Counter-Terror 2018 have been conducted
over the past two years. During those exercises, the focus
has been on developing joint measures of competent
bodies with a view to taking action to release hostages
or to prevent terrorist acts being planned, and a military
exercise operation to block and eliminate armed terrorist
groups. A joint counter-terrorism exercise — AraratAntiterror-2019 —is being conducted now. To ensure
stability on the southern borders of the CIS, we have
developed a cooperation mechanism for competent
bodies when crisis situations occur.

Today we are all faced with the issue of terrorism,
which is more acute than ever before. Terror
International, which is led by the Islamic State in Iraq
(ISIL) and the Levant and Al-Qaida, continues sowing
fear and destruction throughout the world. As a result of
terrorist activities, there is a very worrisome situation in
the Near East, including in Syria and Iraq. The terrorist
threat from that region is spreading rapidly through the
African continent, including Libya. Central, Southern
and South-East Asia are also becoming the stage for
savage acts of terrorism.

I would like to underscore that cooperation among
the members of the CIS in combating terrorism is
conducted with important international organizations,
including the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, the relevant bodies of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Eurasian Group on
Combating Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing.
There is no doubt that effective cooperation in
combating terrorism can be achieved only on the
basis of an agreed legal framework. A leading role
in harmonizing national legislation is played by the
Interparliamentary Assembly of Member Nations of
the CIS, which constantly works to harmonize national
legislation to combat terrorism, while finding new ways
of implementing its mandate, as the Secretary-General
mentioned.
We have every reason to believe that the work we do
is an important contribution of CIS to ensuring regional
and global security. Given the increased terrorist
threat, it is now extremely important to strengthen
international mechanisms for cooperation and enhance
their operational responsiveness and effectiveness, as
well as forecasting and analytical activities. In that
regard, today’s discussion is important in developing
joint measures to counter terrorism in all its forms.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ivanov for briefing.
8/39

The issue of foreign terrorist fighters is now
at the forefront of our concerns, as the SecretaryGeneral mentioned earlier. Foreign terrorist fighters
are returning to their countries of origin or relocating
to third countries. Fewer and fewer States are spared
the threat of terrorism. In that regard, I draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that several years ago,
my country’s Federal Security Service established
an international databank on countering terrorism.
Fifty States and several international organizations,
including INTERPOL, participate in that initiative. It
provides genuine assistance in tracking the movements
of foreign terrorist fighters throughout the world. We
call on everyone to join that very important initiative.
The situation is such that the international
community is now making consolidated efforts to
counter terrorism. In 2015, right here at the United
Nations, President Putin called for the establishment of
a broad anti-terrorist front on the basis of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, without
politicization or preconditions (see A/70/PV.13). Today,
that initiative is becoming particularly relevant.
The double standards practiced by some States
make it difficult to respond to modern threats, including
terrorism. Ignoring the principles of a consistent,
collective fight against international terrorism is
fraught with dire consequences. I wish to emphasize
that using terrorist entities for political purposes is
unacceptable and there can be no justification for it.
Today, we are seeing an increased demand to
deepen cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Our meeting this morning
is dedicated to the role of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Commonwealth of
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Independent States (CIS) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) in the fight against terrorism in
cooperation with the United Nations. These regional
entities have a wealth of experience in combating
terrorist threats and make a weighty contribution to
strengthening stability across the Eurasian continent.
Their practical activities guarantee the security of their
States members and their effective counter-terrorist
efforts have led to a noticeable stabilization in the
situation in Central Asia. The importance of these
efforts is reaffirmed in particular in resolutions 73/331,
73/16 and 73/334, adopted by consensus this year by the
General Assembly, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO, CIS and SCO, respectively.
At the same time, we are concerned by periodic
attacks by foreign terrorists fighters on the territory
of Central Asian countries, as well as the recruitment
operations being conducted by various terrorist entities
in the region, including those associated with ISIL.
One of the most important aspects of the CSTO’s work
is combating the involvement of citizens in terrorist
activities at all stages, from ideological indoctrination to
returning from regions with increased terrorist activity
after having gained so-called terrorist experience.
Concrete steps are being taken to block channels for
recruitment into terrorist groups and to combat illegal
migration. A great deal of attention is being given to
identifying threats on the Internet, which has become a
tool for spreading extremist ideologies.
Interaction between the CSTO secretariat and the
United Nations is becoming increasingly substantive
in the area of counter-terrorism. The memorandum of
understanding between the secretariat of the CSTO
and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT) is being successfully implemented. At the
upcoming CSTO summit in November, the next CSTO
plan of action to continue implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy for 2019 to
2021, to which CSTO contributes on a regular basis,
will be discussed.
The SCO plays a significant role in ensuring stability
in the area. Its priority is to strengthen security in the
region, including by countering extremism, terrorism
and separatism. The defence ministries of member
States are also involved in counter-terrorism exercises.
The SCO has compiled a solid package of legal
documents regulating various aspects of the national
counter-terrorism activities of its member States, as the
Secretary-General of the SCO mentioned earlier. I wish

S/PV. 8626

to highlight the Convention on Countering Extremism,
adopted in 2017 at the highest level, which enshrines
the fundamental principles of international cooperation
in this area, with decisive roles and responsibilities
falling to States. The Convention is open for accession
by all interested States, and we invite them to do so. I
would also like to note that the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the SCO, which is sorely needed in Eurasia,
is working effectively. In March, a memorandum of
cooperation was signed between the SCO Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure and the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
The CSTO and the SCO are paying close attention
to the threats emanating from Afghanistan, including
threats to the Central Asian region. The north of
Afghanistan risks becoming a new platform for
international terrorist organizations led by ISIL. This
naturally requires appropriate external assistance to
Afghanistan in overcoming these threats and challenges.
Experience of recent years has shown that no plan for the
development of economic cooperation between Central
Asia and Afghanistan can be implemented without
an adequate response to threats emanating from this
State. In that context, I note that, based on this reality,
the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group is proceeding to
implement the road map approved earlier this year on
cooperation between SCO member States and Kabul.
The CIS Anti-Terrorism Centre has been active
since 2000 in ensuring the coordination of the work
conducted by national security structures, special
services and law enforcement agencies in the fight
against international terrorism. The Centre works
closely with the anti-terrorism sanctions committees
of the Security Council, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and UNOCT. I hope that all countries and
entities involved will continue their work.
I would like to conclude by expressing our
satisfaction with the fact that the CSTO, CIS and SCO,
as their leaders’ statements have reaffirmed today,
are open to further deepening cooperation with the
United Nations in the area of combating terrorism in
order to maintain both regional and international peace
and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.

19-291999/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
my friend and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, and your friendly country on your
able and professional leadership of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank Mr. António
Guterres, Mr. Vladimir Norov, Mr. Valery Semerikov
and Mr. Sergey Ivanov for their valuable briefings today.
Today’s topic — cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security — is
highly important for the State of Kuwait. Thus, during
our presidency of the Council in June, we organized
a high-level briefing on cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States and
the means necessary to strengthen such cooperation
(see S/PV.8548). In this context, we encourage the
Security Council to convene more meetings to review
and promote cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, which would promote many principles,
most important of which are multilateralism, diversity
and dialogue, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Experience has proven that no one country alone
can confront the increasingly diverse, complicated
and interconnected contemporary challenges that are
facing our world today, such as terrorism, transnational
organized crime and trafficking in drugs and in
people, inter alia. In order to effectively confront
these challenges, we require concerted and collective
efforts and the establishment of strong, regionally
owned frameworks to prevent conflicts and ensure
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That is
why we once again stress the important role of regional
and subregional organizations, given their proximity
and their knowledge of the history and culture of their
regions and their commonalities, which make them
better poised to understand the nature of regional
conflicts and disputes.
Central Asia is a vital and promising region, thanks
to its geostrategic importance and natural resources.
The three regional organizations we are discussing
today — the Commonwealth of Independent States,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization — have close
ties with the countries of Central Asia. They play an
important role by galvanizing collective efforts to
confront the challenges facing those countries.
10/39

25/09/2019

The phenomena of terrorism and violent extremism
are two of the ugliest forms of crime and threats to
international peace and security, targeting many
innocent civilians, including women and children. Given
the growing threat of terrorism to global security and
the developing modus operandi of terrorist operations
and manifestations, as well as the recruitment of new
terrorist elements, countries and organizations must
maintain and step up their efforts to promote their
counter-terrorism capacities.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is one
of those threats. Its growing nature and the increasing
number of individuals undertaking terrorist activities
have become a source of serious concern, especially for
countries of origin, transit and destination.
The United Nations and its counter-terrorism
bodies, such as the Security Council, the Counter
Terrorism Committee, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
all have a vital and important role to play in designing
international policies and strategies based on legal
frameworks, such as resolutions of the Security Council
and General Assembly and relevant international
conventions and treaties.
Despite all such international measures and actions,
we need more regional and effective cooperation. We
commend the vital and effective role of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in bringing the views of the countries of
Central Asia into convergence, convening them around
the negotiation table and strengthening dialogue, which
has led to many fruitful results.
We also commend cooperation and coordination
between the Centre and the three regional organizations
subject of our discussion today. The Centre plays a
pivotal role in cooperating with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and in
supporting efforts aimed at promoting security and
stability in Afghanistan in a number of areas, foremost
of which is countering terrorism, violent extremism
and organized crime, including trafficking in drugs.
We hope that such cooperation between the
Centre and relevant regional organizations will
culminate in supporting Afghanistan economically and
developmentally. The speediest possible achievement
of security and stability in Afghanistan is considered
essential to the maintenance and strengthening
of regional and international peace and security.
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Afghanistan has long suffered from terrorism and
violent extremism, which have adversely affected all
aspects of life there, including development.
We must seize the opportunity to help Afghanistan
to overcome similar challenges by encouraging relevant
parties to reach a peace agreement that would pave
the way for a road map for comprehensive national
reconciliation. A peace agreement is undoubtedly
a critical element in restoring security and stability
in friendly Afghanistan. In that regard, we value the
efforts of UNAMA and welcome the adoption by the
Security Council last week of resolution 2489 (2019),
on the renewal of the Mission’s mandate.
The State of Kuwait is a member of various
regional organizations, including the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We believe that
those organizations must shoulder their responsibilities
to confront the aforementioned challenges, in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. Those
organizations have already adopted a series of strategies
and plans and made intensive efforts in that regard.
For example, they have collectively contributed to the
adoption of relevant counter-terrorism instruments
and conventions, in addition to adopting strategies
that effectively contribute to promoting the efforts
of their Member States to combat terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, criminalize extremist
ideologies and establish a database on terrorism and
terrorist organizations. Those organizations have also
raised awareness through social media and moderation
centres. They have further renounced extremism and
sought to enhance the role of youth and the family,
while launching programmes to rehabilitate terrorists
returning from areas of conflict.
In closing, my country hopes that those discussions
will lead to further proposals and strategies in order
to expand, scale up and improve cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations as a means to consolidating our collective
capacity to effectively and swiftly address threats to
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and
Development Cooperation of Belgium.
Mr. De Croo (Belgium) (spoke in French): As
others have done, I would like, on behalf of Belgium, to

S/PV. 8626

thank the Secretary-General and the other speakers for
their briefings.
We welcome the constructive cooperation
between the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the United
Nations. That excellent cooperation is demonstrated
by the invaluable assistance provided to the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate by those
organizations during the visits of their member States.
It is important that the partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations be aligned
with United Nations documents, such as the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, Security
Council resolutions and fully embrace the values of the
United Nations. All measures taken by Member States
to combat terrorism must be based on the full respect for
obligations under international law, international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law. Indeed, any lack of respect for those
essential guarantees runs the risk of compromising the
success of combating terrorism and contributing to the
breeding ground for violent extremism.
An effective fight against terrorism involves
a resolutely comprehensive approach in which
prevention, punishment and due diligence to go hand
in hand. An approach that includes strengthening civil
society, promotes socioeconomic inclusion and avoids
the polarization of communities is essential. Only such
a method will bolster the resilience of our societies
against violent extremism and terrorism. In that regard,
I would like to express my sincere gratitude for the
work accomplished by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Natalia Gherman.
Struck by several devastating terrorist attacks,
the European Union has developed a comprehensive
anti-terrorist framework. The protection of citizens,
the prevention of radicalization and cooperation
with international partners are at the very heart of
that anti-terrorism fight. The signature of a counterterrorism charter by the European Union and the
United Nations in April is testament to the importance
that we attach to cooperation between those two
partners. That framework is based on the Charter of
the United Nations and advocates the strengthening
of international law and respect for the rule of law

19-2919911/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and human rights. The partners seek to increase their
respective commitments to Central Asia, South Asia
and South-East Asia. The European Union, in a holistic
spirit, is developing its efforts to combat terrorism with
its partners in the region.
With the Strengthening Resilience to Violence and
Extremism (STRIVE) programme in Asia, the European
Union is tackling the root causes of radicalization. At
the very centre of that project is an effort to increase the
role of women, promote dialogue among communities,
strengthen the capacity of the media and reinforce
the education sector to confront extremist ideologies.
The programme is also a good example of the close
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. STRIVE Asia is being implemented
because of the effective partnership among the United
Nations, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Development Programme.
The programme is part and parcel of a strategy
recently approved by the European Union for Central
Asia, which aims to take up common challenges, such
as the deterioration of the environment and terrorism,
and to strengthen cooperation with our partners in the
region in order to promote peace in Afghanistan. As a
donor, the European Union has allocated over €1 billion
for bilateral and regional assistance to the region over
the course of the past seven years.
Terrorism is not an abstract concept. It is a
tragedy that kills civilians on a daily basis and without
discrimination, whether they be men, women or
children. We owe it to our people, and especially the
most affected populations, such as in Afghanistan, to
respond jointly to this threat, without ever forgetting
the founding values of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of China.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
begin by expressing our appreciation to Russia for
convening today’s ministerial debate. I listened carefully
to the statements by Secretary-General Guterres,
Secretary-General Norov, Acting Secretary-General
Semerikov and Deputy Executive Secretary Ivanov,
and I commend the cooperation on fighting terrorism
between the United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Collective Security Treaty Organization.
12/39

25/09/2019

Terrorism is a public enemy of humankind and
counter-terrorism is a responsibility we all share.
We continue to face a complex and challenging
situation. Terrorism, separatism and extremism remain
rampant and are becoming increasingly pervasive and
home-grown. The close link between terrorism and
extremism is more visible than ever before. For this
reason, international cooperation against terrorism must
be strengthened, not weakened. We need to recognize
that we are in a global community with a shared future.
As such, we must take a holistic approach and deliver
our joint responses, tackling both the symptoms and
root causes of terrorism. Promoting political settlement
is the best option for addressing hotspot issues, and
different civilizations and religions should live in
harmony based on mutual respect.
The global fight against terrorism has lasted nearly
20 years, since the incident of 11 September 2001. The
experience gained and lessons learned over the course
of the global fight deserve to be closely reviewed. As
we confront a new round of resurgent terrorism in the
world, it is important that we take the following actions.
First, we should apply uniform standards and
keep up the pressure. All terrorist activities must be
resolutely combated, irrespective of who is behind
them and of when, where and why they are committed.
There should be no double standard or selectiveness in
this fight. No one should use terrorist forces to pursue
geopolitical gains, still less tie terrorism to a particular
country, ethnicity or religion.
Secondly, we should set clear priorities and
tackle the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes.
The Internet is not beyond the law and should not become
a haven for terrorists. We must prevent terrorist groups
from using the Internet for propaganda, recruitment,
financing, incitement or organization purposes.
Thirdly, we should pay more attention to preventing
and eliminating the root causes of terrorism. We must
take active deradicalization measures to stop the spread
of extremist ideas and thereby remove the breeding
ground for terrorism. We must promote exchange and
dialogue between civilizations that is based on equality,
respect and tolerance and reject the notion of the socalled clash of civilizations, leaving terrorist forces
no gaps to exploit. More importantly, we must pursue
development, especially sustainable development, if we
are to root out terrorism once and for all.
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Fourthly, we should step up cooperation and enable
the United Nations to play its central role. Fighting
terrorism requires the individual efforts of Member
States; however, at the same time, the United Nations
and its Security Council should fully play their key role
in order to ensure better coordination at the national,
regional and global levels. In that connection, it is
crucial to fully implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The United Nations and such regional organizations
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization shoulder a
particular responsibility in fighting terrorism. We
must enhance synergies through stronger cooperation
and contribute jointly to safeguarding world peace and
regional stability.
Under the stewardship of Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, the Office of Counter-Terrorism has done a
great job. It has hosted a series of high-level meetings
this year and has achieved positive outcomes. China
supports the Office in continuing to play its coordinating
role, as well as the holding of a United Nations counterterrorism week in June next year. We will favourably
consider hosting a high-level meeting on counterterrorism in China. China will stay deeply involved
in international counter-terrorism cooperation. We are
ready to work with all other countries to deny terrorists
safe havens, provide a safe and happy life to our people
and make our world a peaceful and secure place for all.
China’s efforts on counter-terrorism and
deradicalization, as an important component of the
global fight against terrorism, have made a valuable
contribution to global progress on that front. Let me
cite two sets of figures. Between 1990 and 2016, the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region was plagued by
violent terrorist activities, seeing thousands of violent
terrorist attacks which, at their peak, numbered one
incident per day. In contrast, there has not been a
single case in Xinjiang in the past three years. What
has made the difference? It is the vigorous measures
taken by the Government of the Autonomous Region,
including drawing on the good experiences of other
countries, to engage in preventive counter-terrorism
and deradicalization, in accordance with the law. Such
efforts have effectively curbed the frequency of terrorist
activities and ensure maximum safeguards for the right
to subsistence, the right to development and other basic

S/PV. 8626

rights of the nearly 25 million people in Xinjiang. The
measures have been supported and endorsed by people
of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang and across China. That
is a basic fact recognized by all foreigners who have
been to Xinjiang.
Past progress shows that the deradicalization
measures in Xinjiang have been highly effective. They
constitute useful experiments in preventive counterterrorism and concrete steps in implementing the United
Nations Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
as well as China’s important contribution to the global
fight against terrorism. The United States and other
individual Western countries have ignored those basic
facts and, in line with their own political agenda, have
engaged in smear campaigns against China’s legitimate
measures. China is firmly opposed to what they have
been doing, and the international community should
disagree with their actions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa.
Mrs. Pandor (South Africa): I thank you for this
opportunity, Sir. May I congratulate you on your role
as President.
I wish to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
of the United Nations for his briefing and the speakers
of the various organizations associated with this debate.
The debate today affords us an opportunity to
reaffirm the value of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations to address peace and
security challenges, including the scourge of terrorism.
Terrorism continues to threaten our populations and,
on the African continent, has begun to derail our
collective efforts to bring about peace, security and
sustainable development.
Continued terrorist attacks across the world have
shown us that no nation or region is immune to its threat
and there is no short-term solution to countering the
threat of terrorism and its devastating consequences.
If we are to triumph over this scourge, we will need,
in addition to our national efforts, a strengthening of
international, regional and subregional cooperation and
coordination efforts.
A multilateral framework, anchored in the United
Nations, remains critical to preventing and countering
the diverse and evolving aspects of this threat. With
near universal membership, the United Nations is best

19-2919913/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

placed to foster cooperation across the globe, as well
as to ensure support to Member States and regions
in implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy across its four pillars. The collective
sharing of experiences and information and the
adoption of best practices in dealing with our common
threats contribute positively to the development and
enhancement of our capabilities. It also improves
effectiveness in addressing our specific contexts in
countering terrorism.
We believe that regional organizations are key
partners of the United Nations in that important task.
South Africa has consistently prioritized an enhanced
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, not only in
countering terrorism but also in conflict prevention and
resolution. As a member of the Council, my country
continues to strive for closer partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. This takes into
account the volume of African conflict situations on the
agenda of the Security Council, as well as the growing
threat of terrorism across Africa.
Different regions of the world experience the threat
posed by terrorist groups and/or the return or relocation
of foreign terrorist fighters differently. We encourage
the development of partnerships with regional
organizations, given their understanding of local and
regional dynamics and of what would be required to
address the issue. In that regard, the international
community must find ways to support the efforts of
regional organizations aimed at fighting terrorism and
violent extremism, including by sharing experiences
and providing technical assistance and adequate
resources for capacity-building.
As we ponder solutions to this awful threat, it is
essential that we understand and address the root
causes and conditions that give rise to terrorism. We
should aim to seek political solutions aimed at resolving
long-standing conflicts in order to create the necessary
conditions for stability and a better future over the longterm. We should seek to address the marginalization of
some sectors of the population and socioeconomic and
political disparities.
More often than not, where there is conflict there
may also be a deficit of the rule of law, thus allowing
terrorists the space to entrench themselves and expand
their activities. We have seen this on the African
continent with the devastating effects of terror activities
14/39

25/09/2019

in the Sahel following the conflict in Libya, associated
with the free flow of arms and the rise of terror groups.
The African Union has been proactive in dealing
with the threat of terrorism, as evidenced by its
normative frameworks developed since 1999, primarily
the Organization of African Unity Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism and its related
Protocol of 2004, as well as its counter-terrorism
strategy, adopted in 2015. Likewise, our own Southern
African Development Community also adopted its
counter-terrorism framework and strategy in 2015. At
the domestic level, South Africa adopted its national
counter-terrorism strategy in 2013 and has an active
action plan in response to it.
South Africa believes that, owing to the very
nature of terrorism, it is difficult to defeat it militarily
or solely through the use of coercive measures. South
Africa therefore remains supportive of counterterrorism initiatives that focus on prevention measures,
addressing conditions that give rise to terrorism
and promoting dialogue, tolerance, diversity and
understanding among peoples, cultures and religions.
South Africa will continue to work with all
Members of the United Nations, the African Union, the
Southern African Development Community and other
relevant parties in addressing the scourge of terrorism
and all its attendant manifestations at the regional and
international levels.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate.
This topic is not a new issue for us, but remains very
relevant today. Therefore, Indonesia has set counterterrorism and synergy between the United Nations
and regional organizations as two of four Indonesian
priorities during its term on the Security Council. I would
like to underline once again that the link between the
two is indeed pertinent in today’s context, particularly
in addressing the current phenomenon whereby the
global terrorism movement has transformed itself into
small franchise cells, finding its breading ground in
our region and home.
One thing is for sure — terrorism will always
find new ways and forms in posing a threat to the
world. It is our job to be ready to deter it. That is why
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and subregional organizations is vital to preventing,
countering and safeguarding our community from all
present and future threats posed by terrorism. With
that in mind, there are at least three points on how we
can strengthen, expand and enhance cooperation in
this area.
First, there is the matter of strengthening efforts to
prevent the spread of terrorist ideology. There should
be no room, space or condition for the terrorist ideology
to grow. We need to ensure that there are no precursor
conditions that allow terrorists to spread their ideology.
Such precursor conditions — including, inter alia,
prolonged conflicts, poverty, religious intolerance,
violent extremism, Islamophobia and nationalist rightwing movements — must be addressed.
For prevention, we need to ensure fully functional
Government, advance socioeconomic growth and
development, promote inclusive and tolerant societies
and develop early warning mechanisms, among others.
Such efforts should begin at the national level and can
be supported by regional and global efforts.
Secondly, there is the need to strengthen regional
and subregional mechanisms in countering terrorism.
Developing the right tools and mechanisms is key to
addressing terrorism and its many manifestations. That
is why, in addition to the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Convention on Counter-Terrorism
and its 2012 plan of action, Indonesia, Malaysia and the
Philippines have also established trilateral cooperation
to address distinct transnational threats posed by
terrorist groups in the Sulu Sea. The framework enables
joint air, land and sea exercises and border patrols, and
has so far been effective in reducing the number of
terrorist attacks and incidents in the Sulu Sea.
Thirdly, we must replicate and align strategy at the
global level with those at the subregional, regional and
national levels. Efforts at the multilateral level should
strengthen our endeavour at the regional and national
levels. This has been the case in our region, where
the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism became the main point of reference
for the creation of ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent
and Counter the Rise of Radicalization and Violent
Extremism 2018-2025, which in turn has become
the main source of our draft national action plan on
countering violent extremism.
In conclusion, no country or region is immune from
the threat of terrorism. Therefore, global cooperation is

S/PV. 8626

the only feasible way to counter it. Our meeting today is
very useful for strengthening our global collaboration
in countering terrorism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Esono Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, for your exemplary leadership of this meeting of the
Council. I also express my appreciation and gratitude to
the Russian presidency for having convened this very
timely debate pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which helps raise the profile of
the role of regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
We also appreciate the statements of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, Mr. Vladimir Norov,
Mr. Valery Semerikov and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, which
provide clear examples of how collaboration between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations can help strengthen global efforts to ensure
lasting peace and security and sustainable development.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms that
terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security and that terrorist acts are unjustifiable
crimes, whatever their motivation and wherever they
are committed. We also reaffirm in that regard the need
to combat terrorism by all means and with consummate
respect for the sovereignty of States and in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, including the applicable norms of human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law.
The continuous and persistent illicit flow to
non-State actors of weapons, especially small
and light weapons, contributes significantly to
exacerbating insecurity and violence in various parts
of our continent, undermining social cohesion, socioeconomic development and the effective functioning
of institutions. My country, Equatorial Guinea, was
the victim of an attempted terrorist act with political
and economic objectives in December 2017 involving
foreign elements that, had it been successful, would
have had dire consequences for the security and
stability of the entire Central African subregion given
its level of integration and interconnectedness.

19-2919915/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We believe that the response to current challenges
to peace and security, especially terrorism, requires a
sustained and comprehensive approach that involves
active participation and collaboration, addressing the
root causes of the problem faced by all States and
international and regional organizations, in order to
stop, defuse, isolate and neutralize the terrorist threat.
The report of the Secretary-General on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations (S/2018/592) and the presentations we
have had the honour of hearing today have provided
clear examples of the advantages of cooperation
among such institutions, in particular for the various
regions, and, in this case, for the countries of Asia and
Eastern Europe, regions that are critical to the fight
against terrorism, whether in terms of peacebuilding,
the prevention of violent extremism and conflicts,
disarmament, the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction or, most especially, controlling the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters.
As established by the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council bears primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Recognizing the Council’s leading role in that regard,
we would like to point out that, as the presentations
showed, collaboration between the Council and regional
organizations facilitates the exchange of information,
good practices and lessons learned, which are all key
elements for mounting a more effective collective
response in our shared struggle against terrorism.
Such initiatives help build trust among participating
States through coordination and mutual capacitybuilding efforts in the fight against terrorism. Such
coordination also helps identify blind spots in the fight
against terrorism through a better understanding and
use of local knowledge and perspectives, which help
sustain political commitment at the regional level.
We recognize and encourage in that regard
the growing collaboration, among the regional
organizations of the United Nations, the offices of the
special representatives assigned to those regions, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the various
Security Council committees, to support the work of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States in implementing the resolutions of
16/39

25/09/2019

the Security Council and the General Assembly in the
fight against terrorism.
We believe that the experience in fighting terrorism
of the three organizations present here, which represent
a significant percentage of the world’s population and
territory and of many of its States, are valuable for the
development and strengthening of similar initiatives
in other regions, especially in Africa. During the
presidency of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in
February 2019, my delegation organized an open debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, on the theme “Silencing
the guns in Africa”, which adopted a focus similar to
that of today’s debate (see S/PV.8473).
We believe it is important to consolidate the
relationship between the Security Council and the
regional organizations and to make it more strategic.
Given the mobility of foreign terrorist fighters in Asia,
many of whom come from or return to Africa and
other regions, we encourage efforts by organizations
to coordinate with their counterparts in other regions,
in particular in Africa. We welcome in that regard the
collaborative efforts of the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
with the African Centre for Studies and Research on
Terrorism of the African Union, and encourage similar
efforts be carried out to strengthen regional security
and stability.
We also note the global efforts of the member States
of the three organizations, such as those of Kazakhstan,
to strengthen the global fight against terrorism through
the Code of Conduct Towards Achieving a World Free of
Terrorism, of 2018, to which the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea had the honour of subscribing.
We believe in conclusion that it is crucial to
recognize the need to invest in the root causes of
terrorism and conflict and thereby in sustainable and
equitable development and peace, especially through
the empowerment of women, young people and the
most vulnerable communities. We will be able in
that way to construct a compelling narrative against
terrorism and violent extremism. We note that the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States are taking that approach.
In line with Council press statement SC/13179, we
welcome further cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and those organizations in order
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to build the capacities of those regions to overcome
challenges with a view to achieving peace, stability
and the sustainable development of their peoples. We
encourage them to continue this important work so that
we can all learn to craft innovative collective responses
to the new terrorist threats.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Vargas Maldonado (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. It is a
pleasure to meet again in this Chamber to discuss
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional bodies in combating the international
terrorist threat.
We are particularly grateful to Secretary-General
António Guterres for his briefing, which provided
us with important information. We also extend our
thanks to the other speakers here today for their
informative briefings.
Terrorism is a latent threat with cruel and inhuman
effects that can destabilize international peace and
security. The problems of foreign terrorist fighters and
their return home, radicalization, recruitment through
the Internet and the financing of terrorist activities
continue to pose a terrible threat to the development
and well-being of our peoples. That is why it remains a
priority issue, not only for the members of the Council
but also for the various multilateral discussion forums.
Bilateral and multilateral cooperation has proven
to be key in the fight against terrorism. As a State, we
recognize the importance of cooperation with regional
and subregional bodies for the monitoring, seizure,
confiscation and recovery of assets derived from illicit
activities. Our country is actively working with the
Financial Action Task Force of Latin America on the
ongoing improvement of policies on preventing and
combating money-laundering, as well as on the recovery
of assets through the Asset Recovery Interagency
Network for the Caribbean.
In addition, in July the Dominican Republic
formalized its accession to the Egmont Group,
represented by our financial intelligence unit. These
organizations undoubtedly contribute significantly to
the creation and implementation of regulations at the
national level with regard to the development of State

S/PV. 8626

capacities, the creation of tools and the implementation
of international, regional and subregional regulations.
The fight against terrorism is also a fight for
political stability and the defence of human rights,
development and prosperity. We therefore applaud
the work of regional and subregional organizations,
especially that of the Inter-American Committee
Against Terrorism, which provides the States members
of the Organization of American States with legislative
assistance in the areas of terrorism and its financing,
as well as in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), maritime and port security, cybersecurity and
tourism security.
We believe that in order to ensure the continuity
of a successful collaborative relationship, these
organizations with shared objectives should always
rely on the United Nations, international human rights
law and international humanitarian law as a point of
reference. It is imperative that these bodies observe
and abide by the resolutions of the Council and the
General Assembly, and that they work closely with
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban; and
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities.
The Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment
to the struggle for a world of peace in which our peoples
can develop within the framework of societies that are
inclusive, just, full of opportunities and respectful
of fundamental freedoms and rights. We urge the
international community, especially the members of the
Council, to continue to pool their efforts and develop
strategic alliances to eradicate terrorism in order to
build a better world for future generations and to render
honour and justice to those who have lost their lives in
these cowardly acts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister of State attached to the Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Lemoyne (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking the Secretary-General, the
representatives of the Collective Security Treaty

19-2919917/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and the Commonwealth of Independent States for their
briefings on the actions of their respective organizations.
Terrorism is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security today. That threat
persists. Despite the loss of its territorial foothold,
Da’esh, to name but one terrorist group, continues to
pose a serious threat to international peace and security,
particularly through its affiliates and the attacks it
continues to inspire. The fight against terrorism is
therefore at the heart of the Council’s action. It requires
an organized, firm and united response from States
and the international community as a whole and cannot
be effective unless it fully respects human rights, in
line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted by the 193 Member States.
In that regard, the United Nations has a major and
growing role to play at the global level, which requires,
first, the creation of norms and obligations to ensure
that States have robust counter-terrorism mechanisms;
secondly, the adoption of sanctions to deprive
terrorist groups of the means to carry out attacks;
and, finally — and this is what brings us together
today — the strengthening of international and regional
cooperation to encourage States to collaborate further
and exchange good practices.
At the regional level, Central Asia continues to face
significant economic, political and security challenges,
as noted earlier. The deteriorated security situation and
political uncertainty in Afghanistan are, obviously,
destabilizing factors, especially for its neighbours. I say
that because I remember our recent visit to Tajikistan.
Our Tajik friends, who took in French contingents
when we were in Afghanistan, must know that we will
stand by them in the face of these challenges, and the
same applies to the other States of the region. The risk
of terrorism spares no one today and often thrives in a
context of social frustration, particularly among young
people who may be tempted by radicalization.
This fragile context makes cooperation essential
among all the actors in the region, particularly States
and international and regional organizations, whose
Secretaries-General I welcome today. The United
Nations has an important role to play in encouraging
such cooperation, as demonstrated by the Organization
in May at the regional conference of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism on the crucial issue of
18/39

25/09/2019

combating the financing of terrorism through drug
trafficking and organized crime.
The work of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia must also
continue. Its activities were welcomed by Sheikh Al
Sabah, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, and
Mr. De Croo, Deputy Prime Minister of Belgium, and
we associate ourselves with those words. Supporting the
countries of the region in developing national responses
to such challenges and encouraging them to strengthen
regional cooperation are priority objectives.
The European Union, as a regional organization,
also fully participates in the fight against terrorism,
particularly in Central Asia. Over the past decade,
we have developed important border management
programmes, namely, the Border Management
Programme in Central Asia, and counter-narcotics
programmes, such as the Central Asia Drug Action
Programme. A few months ago, in June, we adopted
a new Central Asia strategy, which explicitly seeks to
strengthen our counter-terrorism cooperation to prevent
violent extremism and radicalization by addressing the
root causes. The European Union is therefore fully
engaged and committed and intends to continue its
efforts in the area of regional cooperation. Moreover,
we may extend to Afghanistan certain dialogue and
cooperation frameworks established with the Central
Asian countries.
Young people and education are another significant
area of work under the new European Union strategy.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the synergies
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the fight against terrorism work. It is up to us, as
Security Council members, to support them. Rest
assured that France will fully play its role in that regard.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office
of Germany.
Mr. Annen (Germany): I would like to warmly
thank our Russian friends, the Secretary-General and
today’s briefers. It has become painstakingly obvious
over the past two decades that international, regional
and subregional cooperation are key to a successful
fight against terrorism and violent extremism. A
transnational threat can be overcome only by joint and
comprehensive international action, close partnerships
and the exchange of information among regional
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

organizations, the United Nations and Member States.
We therefore salute the successful efforts of the
organizations represented here today by the briefers.
Allow me also to make some remarks about
organizations that have not been invited today. In
addition to my French colleague, I also wish to make
some comments about the European Union, which, as
all those present know, cooperates closely with various
United Nations bodies. We have signed a framework
on counter-terrorism. We work very closely with the
joint United Nations Liaison Office for Peace and
Security in Brussels and with the Office of CounterTerrorism’s Brussels presence. That also holds true
for other organizations, such as the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe and NATO, which
has already been by one of our briefers, with successful
collaboration with all relevant bodies, including United
Nations entities. I think that that is very important.
We cherish such cooperation, including in
different and less known forums. Within the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF), Germany puts
particular emphasis both on issue-driven, such as the
use of drones by terrorists, for example, that being one
of the urgent issues we must tackle, and on regional
cooperation. Just this week, we are assuming the
co-chairmanship of the GCTF Capacity-building in
the West Africa Region Working Group, together with
our friends from Algeria. The objective is to support
West African countries in their fight against terrorism.
The speed and scope of that particular effort are
being defined by our partners from the region. Africa
therefore truly has an important role to play.
Allow me to make some short remarks about core
principles in the work that all of us here must do. If
we want to successfully counter terrorism and violent
extremism, we must not forget the glue that keeps us
together, as well as the important role of the Security
Council. I refer to our common set of universal human
values. We need to strictly adhere to the human
rights standards and principles on which we all have
agreed within the United Nations framework. Only by
upholding those values will we remain credible and be
able to defeat terrorist ideologies.
I think that it is very important to mention recent
reports that show that negative encounters with armed
forces, even if they are in a legitimate fight against
terrorism, are a major factor for young men and women
to join terrorist groups. Human rights, international

S/PV. 8626

humanitarian law and the rule of law must therefore be
respected, including in the fight against terrorism and,
I stress, without exceptions. Trust in the functioning
of the State, its institutions and the rule of law are
central elements for preventing violent extremism. My
point is that disrespecting such values is a factor that
can lead marginalized groups or individuals to violent
extremism and into terrorist networks.
I also want to flag another aspect that, in our view,
is very significant, since we in Germany are convinced
that including a gender perspective in preventing and
combating terrorist threats is also highly important and
a factor in prevention. As victims, women are impacted
in different ways when a terrorist attack occurs and
are often more vulnerable than other parts of society.
Furthermore, it is important to analyse the root causes
of terrorism and to understand that such causes are often
also gender specific. The reasons for the recruitment of
male and female terrorists, for example, often differ.
Finally, women are important agents of change and need
to be part of the strategy that we are discussing today.
Again, the in-depth experience of regional and
subregional bodies can be highly useful. That is why
we thank the Russian Federation for convening this
meeting. I would like to provide just one example
of what we are doing. We support the reintegration
of female Al-Shabaab defectors in Somalia through
psychological counselling and gender-appropriate
vocational training. We believe that that could be a
model approach and are more than willing to share our
experience with the Council and Member States.
Let me end with something that has been mentioned
by our colleagues from France, Belgium, South Africa
and other members. We need to look at the root
causes. I think that that is very important. We need to
understand that we cannot limit our focus to a single
issue. Suppression and prevention are two sides of the
same coin.
To conclude, let me be very clear: we need to be
morally and ethically superior to the terrorists by
strictly following the rule of law and fully respecting
human rights. In that regard, Germany is more than
willing and prepared to continue working with Member
States and the United Nations in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Under-Secretary of State in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Poland.

19-2919919/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mr. Przydacz (Poland): There is no doubt that
combating terrorism in all its forms is one of the major
challenges that the international community faces. In
today’s global world, terrorism, alongside organized
crime, the illegal trade in weapons and trafficking,
poses a major threat to international peace and security.
There is also no doubt that terrorism is constantly
evolving and that combating it always requires new
approaches, mechanisms and tools. Cyberterrorism
and foreign terrorist fighters have become challenges
that need to be addressed in a comprehensive and
concrete manner.
Terrorism can be effectively and ultimately
eradicated only when there is the common will and
determination of all stakeholders to do their part.
The unique role of the United Nations in combating
terrorism is undisputed. The United Nations not only
has the responsibility to act decisively on its own
but also should step up its efforts by reaching out to
other actors.
Bearing in mind the central role of the United
Nations in combating terrorism, cooperation with
regional organizations in that regard is not only
possible, as stipulated in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, but clearly welcome. It not only
helps to promote good governance, the rule of law
and other democratic values but also fosters regional
cooperation in economic, political and security affairs,
leading to the establishment of sustainable peace
and prosperity. Regional organizations, as they have
a narrower geographical focus, may sometimes better
understand regional specificities and better address
specific challenges locally. Strong and coordinated
action by the United Nations and regional organizations
in combating terrorism has significant potential
to strengthen the responsiveness and agility of the
international community.
Poland strongly supports close cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations and plays
an active role in such cooperation with, among others,
the European Union, NATO, the Council of Europe
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. It is of utmost importance, however, that the
spirit and principles of the United Nations be at the top
of any activities and decisions taken by all stakeholders.
Regional organizations will contribute to international
peace and security only if they act as honest brokers
whose actions are the result of consensus between all
their member States.
20/39

25/09/2019

Without clarity on this and without full respect
for such basic rules, it would be difficult to define the
goal of potential cooperation. The United Nations must
avoid any deviation from its own basic rules.
The common objective of the States members
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is
counteracting separatism, extremism and terrorism.
SCO member States assert that they respect the pivotal
role of the United Nations system and of the World Trade
Organization in shaping the global order politically
and economically, and hence it is justified to expect
the SCO member States to engage in accommodating
the activities of both these universal organizations to
present challenges and requirements.
It should be recalled that regional organizations
truly play their role only when they reflect the interests
of all their members and are not used as a tool for the
domination of a few. Let us not forget that regional
organizations willing to cooperate with the United
Nations in combating terrorism need to abide by and
promote among themselves and their member States
all the principles of the United Nations, including the
principles of the inviolability of State borders, the
recognition of existing borders and the rejection of
unlawful territorial annexations. Let us reiterate also
that international law imposes the obligation of the
non-recognition of the legal effects of illegal acts.
Unfortunately, the position of the SCO and of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Commonwealth of Independent States with regard
to the illegal annexation of parts of the territory of
Ukraine puts their impartiality in question. Their lack
of will to take the appropriate measures to respond to
the aforementioned conflict, as well as the conflict in
Georgia in 2008, unfortunately casts a shadow on the
organizations’ contribution to the promotion of peace,
security and stability.
In that light, I would like to reiterate that so long as
there is no common approach with regard to issues of
such fundamental importance to the global architecture,
the cooperation of the United Nations with such partners
in combating terrorism will be disputable.
The President (spoke in Russian): I do not
understand whether the representative of Poland spoke
on behalf of his country or of the United States, but that
is a different question.
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): My Minister
would have liked to have been here to deliver this
intervention, but the Ministers have cantered through
their interventions, unlike the normal business of the
Council, so I am afraid that he is tied up in another
event, and I apologize for that.
I wanted to start by agreeing with what the
French, German and Polish ministers have said about
the importance of international humanitarian law
in this area and, of course, about the work of other
organizations, including, but not limited to, the
European Union, NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, all of which, as
Ministers have explained, do very important work on
the agendas on prevention and protection and on the
combat against terrorism.
For its part, the United Kingdom very much
welcomes these counter-terrorism partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations. As terrorist
threats evolve, cooperation between partners is vital
to addressing the cross-border movement of many
people, ideas and materials. However, as the SecretaryGeneral affirmed this morning, such cooperation has
to be anchored in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and in Security Council resolutions,
and it has to reflect a balanced and comprehensive
approach, in compliance with international law, as
outlined by both the Security Council and the General
Assembly. We fully agree with the Secretary-General
that promoting gender equality, as Ministers have also
said, is an important component of countering terrorism
and violent extremism.
The United Kingdom welcomed the Council’s recent
adoption of resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), with
their increased emphasis on the obligation to protect
humanitarian activity. It is important that regional
partnerships and interactions reflect this obligation
and that counter-terrorism measures not be used as a
justification for ignoring this obligation or for violating
the Geneva Conventions or international humanitarian
law more generally. In that respect, we were pleased
to hear that the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
has increased its attention to humanitarian assistance,
and we hope that this will include the protection of
humanitarian activities while countering terrorism.
If I can turn to Central Asia, terrorism remains a
threat in that region, which is, of course, a key area
for this discussion. The attack in Tajikistan last August

S/PV. 8626

that caused the deaths of four foreign cyclists was an
awful reminder of that threat. We welcome the work
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia in implementing the United
Nations counter-terrorism frameworks and Security
Council recommendations. We also welcome the
engagement we have seen so far from Central Asian
Governments; we would encourage them to cooperate
more with one another, with the United Nations Regional
Centre, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. In that regard, it was good that the briefers
could tell us about stronger partnerships, but, at the
same time, I would like to stress the importance of a
harmonized approach, including on designations.
We have also touched on Afghanistan, which the
Council discussed recently. Like the rest of Asia, it has
great potential but faces great challenges. The United
Kingdom is pleased to see the countries of Central
Asia working together to support their neighbour
Afghanistan. Much has been said about the threat not
only of extremism but also of narcotics trafficking
emanating from the country. While we should recognize
those risks, it is important not to overstate them. It is
the Afghan people themselves who suffer most at the
hands of extremists. The international community and
regional partners must continue to work together, as
indeed we have for many years, to support peace and
stability in Afghanistan.
Turning to counter-terrorism cooperation, we hope
that we will be able to continue to work together to
prevent terrorism and violent extremism in all regions.
Military and law- enforcement measures alone will
not suffice; as the German Minister said, we need to
tackle the root causes. The United Kingdom therefore
encourages all partners in the field of counter-terrorism
to strengthen their collaboration with civil society and
to ensure that gender and human rights considerations
are always integrated across the full spectrum of
counter-terrorism efforts globally.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
human rights. We welcome the affirmations from the
briefers today on human rights; they are absolutely vital
to this issue. The General Assembly and the Security
Council have reaffirmed many times that the promotion
and protection of human rights is a fundamental pillar
of counter-terrorism. We have seen that violations
of human rights and fundamental freedoms have in
themselves often contributed to validating terrorist

19-2919921/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

narratives and enabling recruitment. It is particularly
important in Central Asia, where progress made on
human rights is fragile and needs to be protected. It is
imperative that the countries of the region and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia cooperate with regional actors to ensure
that counter-terrorism approaches comply with human
rights obligations.
For its part, the United Kingdom is active in
Central Asia. We collaborate and coordinate with a
range of international partners, as I mentioned at the
beginning. Our priorities are regional security, good
governance, human rights and prosperity. Our projects
support those priorities and we emphasize inclusion,
participation and support for those vulnerable to
extremism ideologies. We emphasize the need for the
countries of Central Asia to cooperate on cross-border
issues and to increase engagement with the rules-based
international system. Counter-terrorism offers a good
opportunity for both.
In conclusion, I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to share our views on this important peace
and security issue and to shine a light on a region that
is of increasing strategic importance.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes today’s meeting on the theme
“United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining peace and
security: the contribution of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) in countering terrorist threats”.
We welcome the Secretary-General and the various
ministers in attendance, whose presence underscores
the importance of today’s meeting and attests to our
unwavering commitment to combating terrorism.
We thank the representatives of the various regional
organizations for their excellent briefings.

25/09/2019

Europe to the Far East, are therefore the result of that
collective approach, which Côte d’Ivoire fully supports.
My country believes that those three organizations
have undeniable comparative advantages, based on a
good understanding of the local political, economic and
social dynamics. They are therefore better equipped
to develop conflict prevention and counter-terrorism
mechanisms that are adapted to the situation on
the ground.
Мy delegation also welcomes the excellent
cooperation among those regional organizations and
the United Nations, in particular through the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
With regard to regional crises, including the
conflict in Afghanistan, it is imperative to pay special
attention to the political and security situation. My
delegation therefore calls for increased support for
political dialogue among all actors in Afghan society,
including women and young people, as well as for
capacity-building in security institutions, in order to
address the many challenges facing the country.
In the area of preventive diplomacy, the work
of the SCO, the CIS and the CSTO should further
promote initiatives to ease tensions and promote
dialogue among the States of the region in order to
help build regional peace and stability. Côte d’Ivoire
also welcomes the gains made from the cooperation
among those three regional organizations, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the CounterTerrorism Committee. Despite several challenges, such
cooperation has yielded encouraging results in the
areas of counter-terrorism, anti-money-laundering and
combating arms and drug trafficking. The fight against
terrorism must also be accompanied by actions aimed
at reducing poverty and unemployment, which foster
radicalization and violent extremism.

Terrorism is one of the most serious contemporary
threats to international peace and security, to which
individual States cannot find solutions. Fortunately, the
awareness of the need for a collective approach to the
fight against the scourge has, in recent years, led States to
strengthen and better coordinate their efforts to combat
it, through regional and subregional mechanisms.

Like the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, many regional
organizations around the world have acknowledged the
threats that terrorism poses to regional and international
peace and security and recognized the need to establish
appropriate mechanisms to better unite and coordinate
their efforts.

The joint efforts of the SCO, the CIS and the CSTO,
which cover a vast geographical area from Eastern

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has in that regard adopted a counter-

22/39

19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

terrorism strategy, based on an integrated approach
that emphasizes coordination and information-sharing
among member States. On 14 September, ECOWAS
member States decided to take another step by taking
ownership of their collective security through the
adoption of a five-year (2020-2025) $1 billion priority
action plan to finance the fight against terrorism.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its
commitment to strengthening cooperation among
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the fight against terrorism with a view
to maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to thank Russia for convening today’s important
meeting, which is essentially a discussion about
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Latin
American countries actively participated in developing
that Chapter at the San Francisco Conference, which
led to the establishment in 1948 of the Organization of
American States, one of the first regional organizations
with links to the United Nations through Chapter VIII.
Today’s discussion is very important in that context and
we would commend it.
We would also like to thank and congratulate the
representatives of the three regional organizations for
their very useful briefings.
Today’s meeting is important as I said because it
addresses the issue of terrorism, which is one of the
main threats to our States. Intensifying the fight against
that scourge is crucial. That must be accompanied
in turn by specific mechanisms that enable us to
collectively prevent and combat the scourge. As some
representatives have already said, it must be done with
full respect for international law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
We listened carefully to the briefings. We would
like as I said to congratulate the work conducted by
those three regional organizations. We believe that
they help uphold the international commitments of
the States in their regions. We thank and support them
in particular for their role in promoting the national
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and in ensuring adherence to
Security Council resolutions.
We believe in that regard that the cooperation
agreements that those organizations have signed with
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism

S/PV. 8626

Committee, as well as with the Office of CounterTerrorism, are a useful practice.
We would also like to commend the role of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in coordinating those efforts in an effective
manner. We thank those organizations for their role in
diagnosing and developing a joint response to complex
threats, based on an approach that acknowledges and
is based on unique regional features, such as porous
borders and transnational organized crime, which are a
dangerous combination for the stability of Eurasia.
I would therefore like to highlight the recent adoption
of resolution 2482 (2019), under Peru’s presidency
and leadership of the Council (see S/PV.8582), which
addresses in particular the phenomena of terrorism and
international organized crime and the links between
them. The resolution justifies the role that regional and
subregional organizations are called upon to play in the
face of these challenges, including in the provision of
technical assistance and helping States to strengthen
their capacities.
We also believe that every strategy must adopt
a gender perspective, as some delegations have
already mentioned, as well as focus on safeguarding
the rights of children. The addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles and the key principles for the
protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of women and children with links
to United Nations-listed terrorist groups are excellent
tools in that regard.
I wish to conclude by reiterating Peru’s unwavering
commitment to preventing and combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, in particular through
the actions able to be undertaken by the Council, which
constitutes a forum for consensus that we must take
advantage of and strengthen.
I wish to make one final remark, if I may. As is
well known, there is a particular concern in America
regarding the establishment of, or links between,
terrorist groups, transnational criminal organizations
and the illegitimate regime of Nicolás Maduro.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We wish
to thank Secretary-General Guterres and our other
briefers for their presentations today. This is a timely
discussion as we work together to address a problem
that reaches beyond the capacity of any one State.

19-2919923/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Following the territorial defeat of Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in Iraq and Syria, we are
faced with the challenge of repatriating, prosecuting
and rehabilitating many Central Asian foreign terrorist
fighters who had travelled abroad to fight in terrorist
groups. The United States commends the Governments
of Central Asia for their actions to take responsibility
for their citizens in Iraq and Syria and their efforts to
repatriate them to their home countries.
On that issue, we can do more together than we
can alone. That is why the Council has taken a number
of significant steps to address the evolving terrorist
threat. We adopted resolution 2178 (2014) to prevent
foreign terrorist fighters travelling to battlefields and
resolution 2396 (2017) to deal with the challenges
of them returning to our own countries. We also
adopted several counter-ISIS financing resolutions
and expanded the sanctions regime of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities in 2015
to include ISIS. However, we only added Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant -Khorasan in Afghanistan to the
1267 list in May, and we need to designate the many
more ISIS affiliates operating across the globe.
In addition to our collective efforts at the United
Nations, we agree that regional and subregional
organizations continue to play an important role in
addressing the terrorist threat in Central Asia and
beyond. As other speakers have noted, NATO efforts
have expanded information-sharing, improving
preparedness and resilience to terrorist attacks and
increasing capabilities to defend against the use of
technology for terrorist purposes. The Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe has helped Central
Asian partners implement Security Council resolutions
on foreign terrorist fighters by holding workshops
to address this threat, as well as introducing new
programmes to counter violent extremism in the region.
In addition to regional organizations, platforms
like the C5+1 initiative, which includes the five
Central Asian nations and the United States, have
been useful in deepening counter-terrorism capacities
and facilitating dialogue on efforts to repatriate,
rehabilitate and reintegrate foreign terrorist fighters.
Just yesterday, under the auspices of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, the United States co-hosted
24/39

25/09/2019

a side event highlighting the experiences of those that
have repatriated their foreign terrorist fighters.
But regardless of organization, forum or platform,
all efforts to strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation
with the United Nations must be conducted in line
with Security Council resolutions, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and applicable
international law. Efforts to counter terrorism that do
not respect human rights ultimately breed resentment
and violent extremism. When Member States or regional
organizations conflate terrorism with non-violent
political dissent, they do a disservice not only to the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
but to our global effort to defeat terrorism.
Unfortunately, that is the dangerous approach we
are witnessing in Syria, where the Al-Assad regime
and its allies justify air strikes on civilians, schools,
ambulances and hospitals as legitimate counterterrorism operations, which have killed over 1,000
people since April and left over 2,000 wounded. In more
than 50 cases, Russian and/or Syrian attacks have hit
medical facilities deconflicted by the United Nations,
putting the Organization’s credibility and civilian lives
at risk. Those attacks must stop. Continued violence
in Syria will only further terrorist radicalization
and recruitment.
We are indeed deeply concerned by the situation in
Xinjiang, where more than 1 million Uyghurs and other
Muslims have been arbitrarily detained under the guise
of counter-terrorism. Men, women and children in
Xinjiang have been subjected to torture, forced labour
and invasive arbitrary surveillance, solely on the basis
of their religion and ethnicity. China, like all nations,
has every right to respond to actual terrorist threats,
but counter-terrorism cannot be used as an excuse to
repress the peaceful religious practices of Chinese
Muslims and an entire minority group.
Preventing and countering terrorist radicalization
and recruitment online and offline is a global concern.
The United States also works to ensure that terrorists
do not find safe haven online while we protect freedom
of speech. We collaborate voluntarily with technology
companies to share information in order to address use
of the Internet for terrorist purposes.
We urge regional organizations like the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States to look closely at revising how they
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

address terrorism in order to better avoid conflating
separatism, extremism and terrorism in their core
documents. We also urge them to fully promote the
observance of applicable international law.
It is important for the United Nations to work with
regional organizations to counter terrorism and prevent
violent extremism. However we must collectively
ensure that regional organizations reflect all elements
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, including engagement with civil society,
while promoting a human rights-compliant rule-of-law
approach to fighting terrorism. The United States is
committed to working with our Central Asian partners
and the broader international community to counter
terrorism and prevent violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of China has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
his statement, the representative of the United States
referred to the question of Xinjiang, making groundless
accusations in a smear campaign against China. China
resolutely rejects all such accusations.
In his statement, State Councillor Wang Yi described
the counter-terrorism and deradicalization measures
taken by the Government of the Xinjiang autonomous
region of China. All these counter-terrorism measures
taken by China have effectively curbed the spread and
the frequent occurrence of terrorist activities and have
safeguarded the right to survival and development of
all people in Xinjiang. I urge the representative of the
United States to not stand on the opposite side of facts
and justice or, indeed, not to stand against the various
ethnic groups found among the people of Xinjiang.
With regard to counter-terrorism, we should reject
double standards. A crisis in Libya has demonstrated to
us the spread of terrorist forces to sub-Saharan Africa,
leaving the Sahel region profoundly victimized.
The wars in Iraq and Syria have also led to
the return of terrorists and the worldwide spread
of terrorism. Should the countries that advocate
humanitarian intervention and push for regime change
not be held responsible? Should they not engage in
serious self-reflection?
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.

S/PV. 8626

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be brief. I just
wanted to say­, and should have said in my intervention,
that we share the American concerns on Xinjiang. On
humanitarian intervention, I do not think that it is a
topic for the Security Council today but we will be
happy to participate in discussions on that topic at a
different stage.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a further statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.
Since we are having a discussion on this topic, on
behalf of the Russian Federation, I want to say that we
express our full solidarity with China’s position.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tileuberdi (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
Please allow me at the outset to congratulate the
delegation of the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month and
to thank it for the invitation to participate in today’s
meeting. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the heads of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) for their very informative and
useful briefings.
During its term on the Security Council in 2017
and 2018, Kazakhstan paid special attention to the role
played by regional organizations in ensuring peace,
conflict prevention and conflict settlement. Those
bodies better understand the specificity of the issues
that arise in their regions. Close cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations allows
for more effectively countering the challenges and
threats in various parts of the world, and we welcome
the initiative undertaken by the Russian side to conduct
the discussion today.
The world is in a state of danger and uncertainty
today, owing to the rapid spread of terrorism and
extremism. The global security architecture and
international law have been weakened, as the situation
continues to worsen. At the seventieth session of the
General Assembly, the first President of Kazakhstan,
Nursultan Nazarbayev, proposed an initiative to form a
global coalition to combat terrorism (see A/70/PV.13).

19-2919925/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In pursuance of that idea, we developed a code of
conduct to achieve a world free from terrorism that 84
States have joined. It calls on all countries to undertake
10 steps that could help eradicate terrorism by 2045,
the centenary of the United Nations. We are grateful to
our partners for their ongoing support in implementing
that initiative.
Kazakhstan has also ratified all 19 of the United
Nations sectoral conventions on the suppression
of terrorism. We call on other Member States that
have not yet done so to accede to the code and the
relevant conventions.
In 2018, as Chairman of the CSTO, Nursultan
Nazarbayev defined as one of the five core priorities
of the organization its participation in the formation of
an international system to counter terrorism. Last year,
in Central Asia, we launched the third phase of the
joint plan on the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Kazakhstan
became the first donor funding the implementation of
that project.

25/09/2019

of transforming that universal pan-Asian structure
into an organization for the security and development
of Asia (see A/74/PV.4). During our CICA presidency
from 2020 to 2022, we intend to include the issue
of countering terrorism as one of our military and
political priorities.
The defeat of Da’esh in Syria and Iraq resulted in
foreign terrorist fighters moving back to their countries
of origin or relocating to other parts of the world. We
are trying to counter that process and have mounted a
humanitarian operation, known as Jusan, to bring back
from Syria 600 nationals from our country, the majority
of whom are children. Among those who returned were
men and women who participated in terrorist activities
and criminal proceedings have been initiated against
them. We are working with the remaining returnees in
a targeted manner to rehabilitate and reintegrate them
into society. The Jusan operation is ongoing. We are
currently working for the return of 12 children from
Iraq whose mothers have received life sentences for
terrorist activity.

We are committed to continuing our close
cooperation with the Office of Counter-Terrorism. In
pursuance of resolution 2396 (2017), together with
the Office, we are preparing the launch of an advance
passenger information and passenger name record
system in Kazakhstan and are ready to share best
practices with other Eurasian countries.

We are particularly concerned about the situation
in Afghanistan, where terrorist groups are cooperating
with organized criminal networks engaged in drug
trafficking. We must ensure that the efforts of the
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination
Centre for combating the illicit trafficking of narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances and their precursors are
more effective.

At the initiative of Kazakhstan, through the CSTO
and CIS, we are working on developing a single list
of international terrorist organizations, unifying legal
norms on the arms trade and regulating migration in
all the regional bodies. Within the framework of the
SCO, we took the important step of signing in Astana
in 2017 the SCO Convention on Combating Extremism,
which has created the legal framework to halt financial
resources for international terrorist organizations.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that
Kazakhstan will continue to take active efforts to
further strengthen the global counter-terrorism capacity
of the United Nations and regional organizations. I am
convinced that all the proposals voiced today, at such
a high level, will see their practical implementation
contribute to the eradication of terrorism throughout
the world.

I would like to take this opportunity to draw
the attention of those present to the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia
(CICA), established back in 1992 at the initiative of
Kazakhstan. It is also evolving dynamically, with new
and unique packages of confidence-building measures
on the Asian continent.
Yesterday, at the general debate in the General
Assembly Hall, the President of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, stressed the importance
26/39

The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Aidarbekov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
We are very grateful to the Russian Federation for
convening this meeting on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace
and security and for the invitation to participate.
The contributions of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the Shanghai Cooperation
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Organization (SCO) to countering terrorist threats
are important. We believe that the United Nations
and regional organizations have a unique and
complementary role to play, which, if successfully
coordinated, could make a significant contribution to
the cause of international peace and security.
On the importance of the United Nations cooperation
with the three regional organizations, it should be noted
that more than half of the world’s population live in the
member States of those organizations.
The threat of terrorism today is very serious.
States are constantly faced with that challenge. Today
this threat permeates virtually any dimension of life.
Countering that evil should be based on close exchanges
among States, organizations and entities. I would like
to note in that regard the efforts to ensure regional
security that we are making within the framework of
such organizations as the CSTO, the CIS and the SCO.
The cooperation between the CSTO and the United
Nations has been very meaningful and long-standing;
in 2004, the organization was given the status of
an observer to the General Assembly. A number of
important documents were signed with key United
Nations agencies relating to combating global terrorism,
drug trafficking, illegal migration and maintaining
peace and security. Representatives of the United
Nations agencies and the CSTO secretariat meet on a
regular basis and discuss topical issues of international
cooperation in the area of the maintenance of peace and
security .
It is encouraging to note that in the framework of
the CSTO, joint exercises and special operations are
being carried out. As members may know, the Kyrgyz
Republic has drawn the attention of CSTO allies to the
problem of foreign terrorist fighters returning to their
countries of origin and the risk they pose of creating
new hotspots and armed conflicts.
Therefore, we consider it necessary to coordinate
more effectively the measures of the international
community in relation to that problem. At our initiative,
at a meeting of the CSTO Collective Security Council
in November 2018, Heads of State adopted a special
statement noting with concern the attempts of certain
entities to transfer terrorist activities from the Middle
East, Syria and Iraq to Central Asia and Afghanistan,
closer to the southern borders of CSTO member States.

S/PV. 8626

This year, the Kyrgyz Republic is serving as the
president of CSTO. In order to enhance international
efforts to counter terrorism and the spread of terrorist
ideology, a draft decision of the CSTO Collective
Security Council has been developed on the plan of
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy for the period 2019-2020, for adoption
at the meeting of the Collective Security Council to be
held in Kyrgyzstan in November. I also believe that it is
important to mention the unified approach to counterterrorism within the CIS framework. Its member States
unanimously agreed that it was necessary to develop
a common doctrine of counter-terrorist security and
a mechanism to implement it, taking into account
national interests.
Since the CIS was established, a vast institutional
and legal base has been developed in the field of
counter-terrorism. Among the fundamental documents,
I would like to highlight the Treaty on Cooperation
among the States Members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States on Combating Terrorism, which
laid the groundwork for cooperation among CIS
member States in combatting terrorism, as well as the
programme of cooperation of CIS member States in
combating terrorism and other violent manifestations
of extremism.
In terms of practical measures, the CIS Heads of
State Council established the CIS Anti-Terrorism Centre
on 21 June 2000. I would like to mention the signing,
in Tashkent on 31 October 2018, of a memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the CIS Anti-Terrorism
Centre. The SCO has also developed a solid legislative
framework on combating terrorism in all its forms that
allows SCO member States to effectively cooperate in
that area.
The activities of the competent SCO bodies
relates to the practical implementation of the Shanghai
Convention on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and
Extremism, the SCO Convention against Terrorism
and the SCO Member States Cooperation Programme
on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism
for 2019-2021. SCO member States are guided by
the goals and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and strictly adhere to the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

19-2919927/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Furthermore, I would like to take special note of the
adoption of resolution 73/334, on 30 August, in which
the General Assembly noted that the SCO had become
an essential regional organization for addressing
security in the region, in all its dimensions. Kyrgyzstan
also chaired the SCO until June and those functions
are now performed by the Russian Federation. One
effective mechanism to maintain regional security is
the joint exercises conducted by the armed forces of
SCO member States, which are designed to enhance
their field training and the training of command
units, resolve logistical and deployment issues during
operations and address other important matters. In that
context, I would like to specifically mention the joint
military anti-terrorist command-staff exercises known
as Peace Mission, conducted within the framework of
the SCO, with the aim of preventing the penetration of
terrorist groups into our countries.
The States members of all three organizations
understand the central role of the United Nations in
combating the three evils of terrorism, separatism and
extremism. Our countries advocate for the development
and implementation, under the auspices of the United
Nations, of a global strategy, grounded in international
law, for combating new threats and challenges.
Kyrgyzstan believes that international cooperation is
essential to combating terrorism and advocates for its
legal basis to be strengthened in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.

25/09/2019

bodies were unanimously adopted (resolutions 73/334,
73/331 and 73/16), thereby confirming the wide
recognition of their contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security and testifying to their
international status.
We welcome the signing in November 2018 of
the memorandum of cooperation between the CSTO
secretariat and the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism. Let us be objective — the world is not
becoming any more predictable. A lack of trust in
the relations between States has led to an increase in
confrontational rhetoric and open disregard for the
norms and principles of international law, as well as
to attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of States
or to destabilize the situation in various regions and
countries of the world to benefit specific forces. That
situation has only contributed to the spread of one of
the main threats to international peace and security,
namely terrorism.
Unfortunately, terrorist activities do not stand still;
rather, they constantly evolve with the changing world.
We hear more and more about new and atypical forms
of terrorism. Most recently, a high-level international
conference on the topic of combating terrorism through
innovative approaches and the use of new and emerging
technologies was held in Minsk, in cooperation with
the United Nations.

Mr. Makei (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for your important and timely initiative to
hold a discussion in the Security Council on cooperation
with the three regional organizations, namely the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO).

The conference brought together countries of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and was an unprecedented event for our region.
Countries representing virtually all the international
organizations active in the European and Eurasian
region, including CSTO, CIS and SCO, took part. We
hope that the outcome of the conference will serve as
an excellent basis for intensifying the efforts of States
and international organizations to create a broad
international anti-terrorist coalition.

It is particularly pertinent to consider this issue
through the prism of maintaining international peace
and security, especially in the context of combating
terrorism. The Republic of Belarus is a member of CSTO
and CIS and an observer State of SCO. We greatly value
the potential of those organizations and contribute to
ensuring their effective functioning. It is important to
note that at previous session of the General Assembly,
three resolutions concerning cooperation with those

Speaking at the opening of the conference, the
President of the Republic of Belarus, Alyaksandr
Lukashenko, proposed an initiative to form a “belt
of digital good-neighbourliness”. In our opinion,
the conclusion of international agreements and
arrangements, both bilateral and multilateral, will make
it possible to ensure information security and restore
trust, as well as more effectively counteract the threats
and challenges of terrorism, including in cyberspace.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belarus.

28/39

19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I would like to note that under the CSTO
framework, an agreement on cooperation in the field of
international information security is already in force.
The success of bilateral and regional mechanisms
in that area could contribute to the development of a
common understanding regarding a global instrument
on international information security. It would be
very useful for CSTO, CIS, SCO and the OSCE,
and its platform for cooperative security, which is
a good mechanism for the cooperation of regional
organizations, to take an active stance in that regard.
We are convinced that only through decisive joint
efforts of all States and close coordination of the
efforts of international and regional organizations,
under the auspices of the United Nations, will we be
able to effectively counter terrorism and make a real
contribution to strengthening our common security.
That is why Belarus supports the development of
effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in order
to maintain international peace, security and stability.
This is a requirement of today’s world and a precondition
for sustainable development of countries and peoples
and for creating peaceful, secure conditions to achieve
progress and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tajikistan.
Mr. Muhriddin (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, I would like to thank the Russian delegation,
which is presiding this month over the Security Council
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), for
convening today’s timely meeting.
In recent years, the rapidly changing situation in
the world has been accompanied by an increase in
tensions and armed conflicts and new challenges and
threats to international security. The expanding crossborder nature of terrorism, extremism, drug trafficking
and organized crime is a matter of grave concern, as
is the rise in the number of returning foreign terrorist
fighters. I am convinced that, only through joint efforts,
will countries be able to effectively counter terrorist and
extremist organizations, which are deftly implementing
modern technologies and methods.
I should like to note that, during its 2018
chairmanship of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS), the Republic of Tajikistan focused on
importance of strengthening cooperation between CIS
member States and other international and regional

S/PV. 8626

organizations on countering such challenges and threats.
We also made efforts to step up the role played by the
CIS in addressing issues related to ensuring security
and stability and improving the work of CIS bodies
to combat terrorism, extremism, drug trafficking and
economic crime.
As was noted earlier, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) is making efforts and a significant
contribution to combating terrorism, extremism,
organized transnational crime, illicit trafficking in
narcotics and weapons, illegal migration, and illegal
trafficking in human beings. It has also been working
to strengthen its peacekeeping capacity and address the
consequences of natural and human-made disasters.
The agenda for cooperation between these two
organizations is very diverse and allows for addressing
a wide range of issues through sharing information,
organized visits, participation in conferences and
events, while taking advantage of both organizations’
potential. It is important to note the important role that
CSTO plays in helping ensure security on Tajikistan’s
southern border with Afghanistan.
In that context, we believe that, with the United
Nations playing the central role in resolving the
situation in Afghanistan through political dialogue as
soon as possible, coordinated efforts are one of the key
factors to strengthening security in the region. It is well
known that the Shanghai Cooperation Organization is
one of the most dynamically developing international
organizations and that it has a huge potential for
countering such challenges. As a full-fledged member
of the United Nations, the CIS, the CSTO and the
SCO, Tajikistan consistently contributes to the
implementation of those organizations’ programmes
and strategies in countering the challenges and threats
of our time.
We believe that the response to the increasing
threat of terrorism must be comprehensive and that
the United Nations must be a key coordinator. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
the relevant Security Council resolutions and United
Nations counter-terrorism conventions form the
basis of our collective struggle against terrorism. In
accordance with its international obligations, Tajikistan
is taking the necessary measures to combat terrorism
and extremism. We are party to all the United Nations
conventions and other foundational international and
regional instruments in this area.

19-2919929/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I would like to take this opportunity to invite
participants in today’s meeting to participate in the
high-level event entitled “International and regional
cooperation on countering terrorism and its financing
through illicit drug trafficking and organized crime”,
which is to be held on 27 September in Conference
Room 7. The event has been organized by the Republic
of Tajikistan in cooperation with the Office of CounterTerrorism and builds on the outcome of the high-level
conference on countering the financing of terrorism,
held in Dushanbe in May.
In conclusion, I wish the Russian Federation every
success as it presides over the Security Council and
the SCO.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to commend the Russian Federation for
its initiative to convene today’s important debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security.
Terrorism and related criminal activities continue
to represent a serious threat to international peace
and security, the enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
Members of the United Nations. Such activities also
impede social and economic development. Terrorism
constitutes one of the most serious crimes and must be
condemned and prosecuted. Instances of shielding and
glorifying terrorists should not be tolerated.
The sensitive geographic location of Azerbaijan
and continued existence of unresolved conflicts in the
region, together with the notorious ethnic cleansing
and occupation of my country’s sovereign territories,
increase the level of transborder threats, including
terrorism. Since the end of the 1980s, as a means of
realizing groundless and unlawful territorial claims
and as a method of warfare, externally directed
terrorist attacks have been repeatedly perpetrated
against Azerbaijan, claiming the lives of thousands of
its citizens, including civilians.
While recognizing the significance of addressing
all conditions that are conducive to the spread of
terrorism, it is critical that intensify conflict-resolution
efforts be intensified in various parts of the world.
30/39

25/09/2019

Areas of armed conflict, in particular territories
under foreign military occupation, often create fertile
ground for terrorists and organized criminal groups
and networks to benefit from the exploitation of natural
resources, illicit trafficking in drugs and cultural
property, money-laundering and other related crimes.
We recognize that significant efforts have been
made by the United Nations and other international,
regional and subregional organizations to develop
cooperation and coordination and strengthen the
capacities of Member States in combating international
terrorism and organized crime. As a member of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the
Republic of Azerbaijan is interested in maintaining
cooperation within that multilateral platform and
developing mutually beneficial economic, political,
legal and humanitarian relations with the member
States of the CIS on a bilateral basis in accordance with
the principles of sovereign equality and the territorial
integrity of States.
As a dialogue partner, Azerbaijan shares the
purposes and principles of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), which are based on respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States, and reiterates its full support for the continued
cooperation between the United Nations and the SCO.
Azerbaijan is pleased to be developing its partnership
relations with the SCO in strengthening regional
security and stability, countering terrorism, extremism
and separatism, drug trafficking and related criminal
activities, and promoting regional cooperation in other
areas of mutual interest and concern.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is essential for the promotion
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
In a number of instances, regional and subregional
organizations have proved to be indispensable
mechanisms to that end. At the same time, serious
challenges remain. While regional organizations are
normally well positioned to understand the threats and
challenges that their respective regions are facing, it
is obvious that not all of them can boast about their
ability, political will and institutional capacity to ensure
compliance by their member States with the relevant
statutory commitments.
First and foremost, regional organizations should
not let themselves be misused by those who gravely
violate international law and advocate the culture of
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

impunity. It is crucial that all Member States comply
with their international obligations as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions. They must also
ensure that their respective territories are not used for
terrorist and related criminal activities, in particular for
the financing of and providing, directly or indirectly,
any support for such activities under any pretext
or form.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the outset,
I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting and all
briefers for their valuable input.
Regional cooperation in countering terrorism is
imperative, particularly in such regions as Central
and West Asia, where the threat of terrorist groups is
pervasive. We value the role of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States, and underline the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and these organizations in
countering terrorist threats.
Regional cooperation is also long overdue in the
Persian Gulf. In this regard, we note with appreciation
and support the constructive proposal of the Russian
Federation for security in that region. This morning,
in his remarks before the General Assembly, President
Rouhani of the Islamic Republic of Iran presented an
important initiative on a new coalition, the Hormuz
Peace Endeavour (HOPE), a coalition for hope, and
invited all States of the Hormuz Strait community to
join this endeavour (see A/74/PV.5). HOPE is based on
the fact that all regional States have the responsibility to
ensure peace, stability and prosperity in the region, and,
together with the global community, share a common
vital interest in maintaining freedom of navigation and
energy security for all. Likewise, regional endeavours
are imperative to prevent war, conflict, violence,
extremism, terrorism and sectarian tension.
The objectives of HOPE include promoting
solidarity, mutual understanding and peaceful and
friendly relations and cooperation among States of
the region, ensuring the territorial integrity, political
independence and international boundaries of all
regional States, cooperating in eradicating terrorism,
extremism and sectarian tensions, peacefully resolving

S/PV. 8626

all regional tensions and conflicts, preventing tensions
through enhanced communication and early warning,
and ensuring energy security, the freedom of navigation
and the free flow of oil and other resources to and from
the Hormuz Strait community and beyond.
Those objectives can be promoted only through
adherence to such common principles as dialogue and
mutual respect; respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the inviolability of international borders;
peaceful settlement of all disputes; rejection of the threat
and use of force; non-aggression and non-intervention
in the internal or external affairs of other States; and
rejection of and non-participation in coalitions and
alliances against fellow States. Energy security and the
free flow of natural resources are further principles to
which we must all subscribe.
We have presented a plan of action that includes,
first, preparatory arrangements for a Hormuz Straight
community summit to commence deliberations
on a broad spectrum of security and cooperation
issues, including energy security, arms control and
confidence-building measures, military contacts,
the possible establishment of a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction, and the conclusion of a Hormuz
Strait community non-aggression pact. Secondly,
the plan also includes, secondly, the establishment
of joint task forces on various issues in relation to
practical measures to gradually expand cooperation,
including on early warning, prevention and resolution
of conflicts; combatting drugs and human trafficking;
joint investments and ventures in energy, transit and
transportation; and cooperation in cybersecurity.
Thirdly, the States of the Hormuz Strait community
will have periodic meetings at various levels, including
at the summit level. Such meetings may also have a
private-sector and academic components.
At the same time, on the basis of resolution 598
(1987), the United Nations will be invited to furnish
the necessary international umbrella and ensure the
legitimate interests of the international community. The
Islamic Republic of Iran stands ready to fully engage in
dialogue with countries of the region and the United
Nations to discuss all aspects of the HOPE initiative.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Kamilov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
Before starting my brief statement, I wish to align
myself fully with the thought expressed by many

19-2919931/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

previous speakers that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
has tremendous potential in terms of taking
preventive steps and countering such a major threat
as of our time terrorism.
It quite clear that terrorism represents the leading
and major source of violence around the world today.
Terrorism makes use of the latest technology, diversifies
its sources of funding, takes advantage of newly opened
international transit corridors and adopts new methods
and ways of attracting new recruits and income streams.
I am not going to dwell on the various conventions
and United Nations instruments to which Uzbekistan
is signatory, but will simply say that one of the most
important topics today is preventing the process of
radicalization among young people. I believe that this
issue is crucial to more than just Uzbekistan and our
region. As has been noted, a related and ever more
important issue is the return of foreign terrorist fighters
and of people who for whatever reason find themselves
in areas of conflict — not only adults from Uzbekistan
and our region, but also many women and children,
many of whom are currently in Syria and Iraq.
Uzbekistan has already transported 156 citizens of
Uzbekistan from Syria, mostly women and children,
in a complex and high-risk operation. Today we are
awaiting the return of 65 children from Iraq and 170
people from Syria. Accordingly, we certainly require
the support of international organizations and of States
directly involved in the processes under way in the
Middle East. In this regard, I am referring primarily to
the assistance of permanent members of the Security
Council represented here today.
We are ready to cooperate. We have experience in
the rehabilitation and reintegration of returnees into a
healthy and normal society. I hope that the successful
conduct of such operations can have a positive influence
so that new groups will not travel to conflict areas
in future.
In conclusion, I would simply like to draw
the Council’s attention to two points. First, when
discussing terrorism, it seems customary to mention
the region of Central Asia. We in that region would
very much like the international community not to have
the impression that Central Asia is a region with huge
potential for the spread of terrorism, extremism and
other, similar processes. We have been hearing for 25
years that Central Asia is on the verge of exploding.
32/39

25/09/2019

In fact, Central Asia is developing. There is a brand
new political atmosphere in the region and mutual trust
and cooperation among leaders are increasing. We have
managed over the past few years to resolve a number of
very complex issues, including the demarcation of State
borders, the management of water resources, and the
development of transport links, and established close
cooperation in the security sphere. All of this is to say
that Central Asia has significant capacity and potential
to ensure its own security, but, given the global nature
of the processes we are discussing, broad international
support is required. Today we heard about various
formats of cooperation between countries of our region
and the international community, including other major
States. Of course, we are very interested in pursuing
this kind of cooperation.
The second issue that I wanted to touch upon is that,
in this context, while it is quite justified, we always
mention Afghanistan when we speak of challenges
and sources of extremism and terrorism. However, as
neighbours of Afghanistan in the region that Afghanistan
has historically, culturally and economically always
been a part of, we note that Afghanistan is not only a
challenge, but is also a tremendous opportunity.
By way of example, if we manage to implement the
potential transport and connectivity projects, a quick
look at a map suffices to reveal what could be done
if the European continent were linked to Afghanistan,
Afghanistan to Central Asia and then, further on, to
South Asia. There would then be a direct link between
Europe and South Asia, with Afghanistan as the
lynchpin. Just by implementing these types of projects,
Afghanistan could reap considerable revenue that could
contribute to restoring its economy.
I will not talk about such obvious things as there
being no military solution to the Afghan problem. The
only way to move forward is through direct dialogue
between the Government and the opposition. That is
self-evident. Uzbekistan is actively pursuing a political
solution and is a part of the political process, and we
will continue to do all we can to contribute to further
bolstering the peace process that has begun to coalesce
for the first time in the past 40 years. In spite of a
certain level of tensions, Uzbekistan is implementing
widescale transport and communication projects and
links with Afghanistan and our trade in border areas is
growing. We have also established an education centre
for Afghan students, a medical centre and cargo centres.
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Experience shows that despite existing tensions
and problems, we need to work and look towards the
future. This is all being done not to satisfy the current
Government or political forces, but rather for the future of
Afghanistan, where an entire generation that has grown
up over the past 40 years has known only war. In this
regard, in terms of preventing youth radicalization, the
United Nations and other regional organizations, major
States and neighbours of Afghanistan all need to focus
on education programmes. Only through education and
enlightenment will we be able to counter the process of
radicalization among the young population.
Those are the two issues that I wanted to address
today. All the other issues have been covered here, and
I do not want to repeat what has already been said.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I thank the Russian
Federation for convening today’s debate. This meeting
is an important opportunity to recommit to effective
cooperation in countering terrorism, the scourge of
which has become more diffuse, with an increase of
terrorist acts, including those motivated by intolerance
or extremism.
No country in the world is immune to terrorism.
The international community should stand united
and work hand in hand to counter terrorism in all its
dimensions. Any attempts to justify those who inspire
or perpetrate terrorism and violent extremism or
those who incite hate crime and violence, especially
in conflict environments, should be decisively and
unequivocally condemned at all levels.
Armenia remains a staunch advocate of enhanced
international collaboration to combat terrorism,
regardless of geography, underlying motives or
narratives. It is our deep conviction that terrorism
should not be associated with any particular
civilization, religion, nationality or ethnic group. We
are gravely concerned about instances where entire
communities are deliberately targeted for the mere
fact of belonging to a particular ethnic or religious
group. The meticulously planned acts of barbarism
and vandalism against cultural monuments, as well as
the annihilation of several world heritage sites in Iraq
and Syria, are a case in point and a matter of serious
concern for humankind.

S/PV. 8626

Armenia was among the first Member States to
resolutely condemn the persecution of the civilian
population perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida and their
affiliates. The brutal crimes against the Armenian
population in the Syrian cities of Kesab and Deir ezZor, the deliberate destruction of cultural and religious
monuments and the mass atrocities committed by
terrorists from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham and the Al-Nusra Front have demonstrated that
terrorism is essentially a manifestation of the denial of
fundamental human rights. Armenia has demonstrated
consistent commitment to helping to bring lasting
change to the areas affected by the crisis, as reflected
through the deployment of our national humanitarian
mission in Syria.
Armenia remains firmly committed to the global
fight against terrorism and is actively engaged in
international and regional activities to this end. We
highly value the existing cooperative platforms aimed
at amplifying our national efforts and improving
bilateral dialogue to prevent and counter terrorism.
Armenia continues its thorough implementation of the
United Nations counter-terrorism conventions and their
additional protocols, as well as the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Security Council.
The recent visit conducted by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
to Armenia highlighted our country’s progress in
addressing terrorism-related challenges, including
through effective international cooperation. Following
the recommendations contained in the CTED report
on the follow-up assessment visit, Armenia began
the process of establishing and applying advanced
passenger information systems.
Regional and subregional organizations have
a pivotal role to play in promoting and facilitating
cooperation, including through sharing best practices
and building greater capacity to effectively address
the threats of terrorism. We give high priority to the
ongoing activities conducted in partnership with
the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the relevant structural
units of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO). The competent authorities of Armenia
continue to contribute to the effective implementation
of the 2017-2019 CIS programme of cooperation of the
CIS member States in combating terrorism and other
violent manifestations of extremism. Representatives

19-2919933/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of national security agencies, special services and law
enforcement bodies have consistently participated in
the joint counter-terrorism exercises of the CIS, under
the general coordination of its Anti-Terrorism Centre.
As we speak, the two final stages of the Ararat
Anti-Terror 2019 exercise are being carried out in
Armenia, with the participation of the competent State
security agencies from several CIS member States,
including Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
Armenia actively participates in the regularly conducted
joint operations of the CSTO member States — Kanal,
Nelegal, and Proxy — as well as in the joint counterterrorism exercises of the CIS, coordinated by its
Anti-Terrorism Centre.
Armenia attaches equally high importance
to its work within other regional and subregional
organizations of which it is a member or with which
it enjoys close cooperation. As a dialogue partner
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, we are
looking forward to further expanding the agenda of our
partnership and taking our dialogue forward.
Against the backdrop of the current international
agenda, with proliferating threats, challenges and
conflicts, cooperation among States from subregional
to regional to global levels has been and remains as
relevant as ever in helping identify common solutions
and sustainable dialogue for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan.
Mr. Qureshi (Pakistan): At the outset, I would like
to extend my gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation for organizing this ministerial
debate. Cooperation between regional organizations
and the United Nations is critical to combating the
emerging security threats, particularly terrorism.
Let me congratulate States members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
United Nations, on the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 73/334 on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
on 30 August. Pakistan was one of the sponsors of
the resolution.
The resolution builds on the strong foundations
laid down by the five previous such resolutions since
34/39

25/09/2019

2009 in strengthening dialogue, cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
SCO. We support and welcome the SCO’s burgeoning
cooperation with various United Nations specialized
agencies, organizations, funds and programmes with a
view to achieving common goals. The SCO also affords
us an important channel to underline our interest in
regional peace, stability and development for regional
cooperation against terrorism and extremism.
Pakistan condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including against people under illegal
occupation. Pakistan has proactively and successfully
taken action to eradicate the scourge of terrorism
and will continue its efforts in the same spirit, in
coordination with regional and international partners.
However, we also believe that there is a need to focus
on certain elements and factors indicated in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. such as
the first of the four pillars, namely, addressing the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
That is more pertinent to South Asia, which
continues to be challenged by common enemies: poverty,
illiteracy, disease and underdevelopment. Political
differences and unresolved disputes further compound
this predicament. Enduring peace and prosperity
in South Asia will remain elusive until the main
dynamic in South Asia is shifted from confrontation to
cooperation. It is important to seize the opportunities
for the peaceful resolution of outstanding disputes and
collective endeavours for regional prosperity.
Terrorism and organized crime continue to pose
serious threats to our countries. Despite the successes
achieved against Da’esh in Iraq and Syria, the group
continues to manifest and evolve its outreach and
tactics. In our region too, Da’esh has emerged as a major
security threat, which can be a major destabilizing
factor for all regional countries. The group continues to
be strengthened by returning foreign terrorist fighters.
Countering such threats requires greater
international cooperation, including among regional
organizations and the United Nations. In that regard,
we welcome the recent signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the SCO Regional
Anti-terrorism Structure (RATS SCO) and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). The memorandum provides an
important platform to enhance the strategic cooperation
between those two bodies in the fight against terrorism.
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

RATS SCO has also signed memorandums of
understanding for cooperation with the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO). It will be important to
use such cooperation mechanisms to develop strategies
and address the capacity needs of Member States in
the fight against terrorism and organized crime. In that
regard, Pakistan would like to propose the following.
First, several States members of the SCO, the CIS
and the CSTO have extensive experience in fighting
terrorism. The secretariats of the three organizations
should develop synergies, whereby those countries can
contribute to the capacity-building needs of others.
Pakistan stands ready to contribute to such activities.
Secondly, the movement of foreign terrorist
fighters from Iraq and Syria to other parts of the world
is a major challenge. The United Nations and the three
organizations must come up with innovative means for
countering that threat, including through mechanisms
for the sharing of information on the movement of
such persons.
Thirdly, as highlighted above, Da’esh in particular
relies on the use of modern communication technologies
for spreading its ideology. The United Nations and the
three regional organizations must develop strategies for
countering such activities.
Fourthly, the memorandum of understanding
between RATS SCO and CTED must be operationalized
at the earliest opportunity. Activities should be planned
for assisting SCO members in accordance with the
scope of the memorandum.
In conclusion, Pakistan firmly believes that the
goals and ideals espoused by the SCO are completely
in line with the principles and purposes of the United
Nations. Our membership of both those organizations is
an acknowledgment of the common principles, ideals,
aspirations and goals for which the United Nations
and the SCO stand. We will continue to follow those
guiding principles.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mongolia.
Mr. Damdin (Mongolia): Let me begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation to Minister Sergey
Lavrov for inviting me to speak at this ministerial
debate. I also thank other speakers for their remarks.

S/PV. 8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is essential to
effectively addressing the complex challenges facing
the world today, especially those related to terrorism,
violent extremism and transnational organized crime.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and its reviews have been instrumental in
providing the international community with solid and
updated guidance on addressing terrorism along its
four mutually reinforcing pillars. Furthermore, the
establishment of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and the subsequent signing of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact among the
36 United Nations entities, in addition to INTERPOL
and the World Customs Organization, laid the solid
groundwork for the whole-of-United Nations approach
to tackling the threats of terrorism. We expect that
such initiatives will further strengthen United Nations
cooperation with the relevant regional organizations
and better target its assistance to Member States in
enhancing their anti-terrorism and anti-organized
crime capacities.
Mongolia stands strongly committed to our common
struggle against the scourge of terrorism, having
become a party to all United Nations conventions against
terrorism and organized crime applicable to it, and is
taking all necessary measures for their implementation.
Moreover, as an observer of the SCO, we concluded
the Protocol between the Anti-Terrorist Coordination
Council of Mongolia and the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the SCO (RATS) in 2014, thereby actively
engaging in various activities organized under the
auspices of RATS.
In addition to our global and regional efforts to
counter terrorism, we have also been cooperating with
the countries of the region. Thus, Mongolia signed
cooperation agreements in combating terrorism with
the Kyrgyz Republic and the Russian Federation, as well
as an agreement on cooperation in combating crimes
with the People’s Republic of China. Those agreements
provide the legal basis for information-sharing and the
exchange of best practices and for conducting other
preventive measures among the relevant organizations.
As suggested by the concept note (S/2019/742,
annex) circulated for today’s meeting, I would like to
share some thoughts concerning possible modalities and
approaches to enhancing our cooperation in countering
the global terrorist threat.

19-2919935/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

First, there needs to be a more focused targeting of
capacity-building assistance — one of the pillars of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I
wish to recall that in my statement back in 2007 at the joint
Mongolia-Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe conference on countering terrorism, held
in Mongolia, I proposed the individual action plan of
small and medium-size developing countries on making
their territories immune from terrorism. The proposal
was made on the basis of the expectation that, after the
universal tightening of security regimes in most of the
developed countries following the 9/11 terrorist attack,
terrorist cells would be pushed to settle in weaker
economies, where rules and regulations tend to be
loose, weak and, often, corrupt.
After more than a decade, we can see that that
anticipation has become a reality. Today, we are
witnessing the trend of terrorist cells finding their
refuge and strengthening and spreading their hold in
some weaker economies to the extent that they are
capable not only of occasional strikes but also waging
wars. On the other hand, the situation is further
exacerbated by the phenomenon of home-grown
terrorism in developed countries.
Therefore, developed countries and international
organizations ought to provide technical assistance
to vulnerable countries in consolidating their
anti-terrorism and anti-organized crime capacities. As
a result of such technical assistance and cooperation,
we should have, ideally, a uniform anti-terrorism
capacity throughout the global legal jurisdiction. Once
the capacity of all countries is brought to the required
level, no space will be left for terrorists and criminals
to nest in and no Government will be too weak to
fight terrorism.
Secondly, we need to effectively address the growing
nexus between terrorism and transnational organized
crime, including trafficking in drugs, weapons and
persons. Profits from such illicit trafficking are
primarily used for financing terrorism. We should also
be aware of the emerging tendency to target and drag
nationals of smaller developing countries into drugtrafficking and other related crimes. In order to prevent
them from being seduced and lured into such illicit
activities, preventive measures through international
cooperation ought to be put in place.
Thirdly, the engagement of youth is critical
to preventing and countering violent extremism
36/39

25/09/2019

and terrorism. Rapid advances in cyberspace and
digital communication technologies bring not only
considerable benefits to societies but also risks
associated with its abuse by terrorist actors. With a
view to better utilizing social media in promoting a
culture of peace, non-violence, tolerance and mutual
understanding among youth around the world, my
Ministry, in collaboration with Facebook, organized a
Peacebook Forum in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, in April.
At the High-level Interregional Conference on
a Whole-of-Society Approach to Preventing and
Countering Violent Extremism and Radicalization
that Lead to Terrorism, organized by the Government
of Mongolia in collaboration with the Organization on
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, held in June this
year in Ulaanbaatar, we had a separate discussion on
inter- and intrareligious dialogue, within the religious
freedom discourse being supported and promoted by
the United States Administration.
Another initiative of ours related to employing
advances in technology for peace is the creation of a
completely digital peacebook journal of international
relations, which would publish and popularize research
on global issues by scholars and peacebuilders from
around the world. The benefits for young people in
creating such a journal would include the promotion
of a culture of peace, tolerance, intercultural and
interreligious dialogue and the enhancement of the voice
and participation of young people in decision-making
for the prevention and resolution of conflicts, including
decisions to counter violent extremism and terrorism.
Mongolia also supports other important initiatives
aimed at eliminating terrorist and violent extremist
content online, including the Global Counterterrorism
Forum and Tech against Terrorism, as well as the
Christchurch Call to Action.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our firm belief that
the very goal of preventing and countering terrorism
cannot be achieved by a single country. Therefore, our
joint efforts in implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be more productive if
supported by effective collaboration with the relevant
regional and subregional organizations. In that context,
I see today’s meeting as an excellent opportunity to
foster multi-stakeholder cooperation in countering
terrorist threats.
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister of State for External Affairs of India.
Mr. Muraleedharan (India): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate. We also
appreciate the circulation of the very useful concept
note (S/2019/742, annex), outlining the contours of
today’s discussion.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the heads of the regional security organizations for
their comprehensive and insightful briefings.
Today’s security problems are not constrained
by physical or political boundaries. Terrorism, drug
trafficking, transnational crime and the security
implications of new technologies are transnational
challenges that cannot be viewed in compartmentalized
terms. Our response to them therefore also has to be
coordinated across borders.
Terrorism is the single most significant threat to
peace and stability today. We are confronted by groups
that have linkages across regions and continents in
terms of recruitment, financing and operation. We are
committed to combating that menace in all its forms
and manifestations. There can be no justification for
acts of terror on any grounds whatsoever.
We believe that our fight against terrorism should
not only to seek eliminate terrorists and disrupt terror
organizations and networks; it should also identify,
hold accountable and take strong measures against
States that encourage, support and finance terrorism
or provide sanctuary to terrorists and terror groups.
We call upon all countries to work together to expedite
the adoption of the draft comprehensive convention
on international terrorism in the General Assembly
without any further delay.
Regional and subregional groups can play an
important role in fostering the cooperation and
coordination needed to effectively combat terrorist
networks. In recent years, India has put in place several
practical cooperation mechanisms with a number
of countries and groups. It is a careful and sensitive
process, as it involves building trust and common
working habits and methodologies. We have several
counter-terrorism and security dialogues, which bring
together experts from all relevant fields in regular
bilateral and multilateral interactions.
We also engage constructively with the work
of such forums as the Financial Action Task Force

S/PV. 8626

and United Nations counter-terrorism bodies to deny
terrorists financing and other forms of support. Of the
organizations being discussed today, India has been
a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) since 2017. We joined the SCO to secure peace,
progress and prosperity for the region and to create new
opportunities for economic engagement in the region.
In his visit to Bishkek earlier this year to participate
in the 2019 SCO Summit, Prime Minister Narendra
Modi urged all humanist forces to come together and
called for an international conference to combat the
scourge of terrorism. He also reiterated that a united,
peaceful, safe and prosperous Afghanistan is crucial
for the stability and security of the SCO region and
acknowledged the work of the SCO-Afghanistan
Contact Group in this regard.
We welcome the clarity shown by the SCO on
terrorism from its inception. We are determined to
strengthen cooperation within the SCO framework for
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security.
SCO members should also explore how the SCO
Regional Anti-Terrorism Structure can provide a more
effective platform for cooperation through exchange of
information, capacity-building, mutual legal assistance,
the sharing of best practices and cooperating in
multilateral forums such as the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
Mr. Burian.
Mr. Burian: I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very important debate. It is my pleasure
to represent the European Union (EU) at this debate
and to deliver this statement on its behalf and on
behalf of its member States. The candidate countries
the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, and the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, align themselves with this statement. The
European Union, being at the frontline in support of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, certainly has
its rightful place at this debate.
Today, as we all continue to face the imminent
threat of terrorism, a comprehensive and coordinated
approach from the whole international community is
needed more than ever before. Only together will we
be able to respond to this threat, and that is why the EU
is a convinced supporter of international and regional
cooperation on this matter.

19-2919937/39

S/PV.8626

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I am pleased to note that Central Asia was among
the first regions to adopt the regional joint action plan
for implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, prepared with EU funding.
This confirms that Central Asian countries share
a common will to cooperate on tackling the threat,
based on United Nations principles and approaches.
In this regard, I would like to recall and commend the
recent conferences, supported by the EU, along with
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as an example of
promoting regional cooperation to address terrorism
and its financing, strengthening regional synergies and
contributing to the global efforts of the United Nations.
We welcome the spirit of cooperation and engagement
in Central Asia, as mentioned by Foreign Minister
Kamilov, as the best way to address existing challenges
together. The EU wants to fully support this.
The EU recently adopted its new strategy for
Central Asia, presenting a vision and priorities for our
relations with this region, covering multiple dimensions,
including the security aspect. It conveys a strong
message vis-à-vis the EU’s commitment to developing
stronger, modern and non-exclusive partnerships,
including by enhancing cooperation in multilateral and
regional forums, with the United Nations at its core.
One of the key pillars of this strategy is promoting
resilience, with countering terrorism linked to other
important elements such as the rule of law and good
governance, inter alia.
In Central Asia, we are further strengthening our
support, including through our development assistance
programmes focusing on counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism. The Strengthening
Resilience to Violent Extremism (STRIVE) global
programme, funded by the EU and implemented by
the Hedayah International Centre of Excellence for
Countering Violent Extremism, is one of our flagship
programmes where we work in Central Asia. Another
example is the EU-United Nations joint initiative on
STRIVE Asia, for which the EU and the United Nations
are organizing a joint event here in New York tomorrow.
We share the view of previous speakers that it is
essential to address the prevention of radicalization and
focus on the root causes of terrorism. Deradicalization,
rehabilitation and reintegration must be dealt with as a
package in order to prevent the further spread of terrorist
ideology. The EU is ready to share its best practices and
lessons learned with its partners to that end. Preventing
38/39

25/09/2019

and suppressing the financing of terrorist acts is
another priority and obligation of States as recalled by
resolution 2462 (2019) and highlighted in the outcome
declaration of the High-level International Conference
on Countering Terrorism and Preventing Violent
Extremism, held in Dushanbe. Countering terrorism
financing must be a key part of our efforts to weaken
and degrade terrorist organizations. In this regard, we
must also ensure that our efforts are effective, while
not limiting the space in which humanitarian actors can
operate in a principled manner.
Foreign terrorist fighters and the international
travel of terrorists are another topic of the global
debate with particular importance for the region. The
EU is committed to ensuring the implementation of
resolution 2396 (2017), on threats to international peace
and security caused by terrorist acts, and to working
with partners on achieving its goals. It is crucial to hold
foreign terrorist fighters accountable for their actions
and maximize the possibility of successful prosecution,
while respecting international law, in particular human
rights law.
In this regard, we would like to commend Central
Asian countries for their willingness to repatriate
and reintegrate family members of foreign terrorist
fighters, especially children. We stand ready to support
capacity-building programmes in partner countries
having to cope with returning terrorist fighters and their
family members. Both border security and information
sharing are crucial in terms of countering relocating
foreign terrorist fighters, as stressed by resolution 2396
(2017). In this context, I would like to recall EU support
for effective border management through its Border
Management Programme in Central Asia as it enters
into a new phase with a significantly enlarged budget
and also including Afghanistan.
A strong multilateral, interregional framework
remains key to building a deeper understanding of the
nature of the challenges and establishing cooperative
mechanisms across continents. The role of the United
Nations is indispensable in this regard. We also would
like to commend the OSCE for its role in the region,
contributing to capacity-building in order to help
implement United Nations commitments.
Finally, I wish to underline that the fight against
terrorism is a long-term effort that requires strong
cooperation in spite of our differences. We are
actively seeking partnerships and collaborations with
19-29199

25/09/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

international, regional and subregional partners. In this
regard, let me once again reaffirm the EU’s keen interest
in working together with all partners, based on shared,
internationally agreed standards and best practices, in

S/PV. 8626

full compliance with universally agreed human rights
and within the boundaries of the rule of law.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

19-2919939/39
