United Nations

A/RES/55/231

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 116

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/532/Add.1 and Corr.1)]

55/231. Results-based budgeting
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/12 B of 19 December 1997 and 53/205 of
18 December 1998,
Recalling also the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the
Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods
of Evaluation,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on results-based budgeting
and the related addenda,1
Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions on the report of the Secretary-General,2
Having further considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the experience
of United Nations system organizations with results-based budgeting techniques,3 as
well as the comments of the Secretary-General thereon,4
Bearing in mind the intergovernmental, multilateral and international character of
the United Nations,
1.

Reaffirms its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986;

2.
Also reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in carrying out a thorough
analysis and approval of posts and financial resources, of resource allocation to all
sections of the programme budget and of human resources policies, with a view to
ensuring full and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and activities
and the implementation of policies in this regard;
3.
Further reaffirms the respective mandates of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Committee for Programme and
Coordination in the consideration of the proposed programme budget;

1

A/54/456 and Add.1-5.
A/55/543.
3
See A/54/287.
4
See A/54/287/Add.1.
2

00 57301

A/RES/55/231

4.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of
the Advisory Committee,2 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
5.
Notes that the measures proposed by the Secretary-General and
recommended by the Advisory Committee are intended to provide, in essence, a
management tool that should enhance responsibility and accountability in the
implementation of programmes and budgets;
6.
Decides that these measures, as approved by the General Assembly in the
present resolution, should be implemented in a gradual and incremental manner, in full
compliance with the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the
Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods
of Evaluation and the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the expected accomplishments
and indicators of achievement are directly and clearly linked to the objectives of the
programmes and in accordance with the different nature of the activities of the
programmes, taking into account rules 104.7 (a) and 105.4 (a) of the Regulations and
Rules Governing Programme Planning;
8.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that expected
accomplishments, indicators of achievement and objectives are defined, bearing in mind
the direct link between inputs and outputs, and that inputs are commensurate with the
needs of programmes, and taking into consideration the international character of the
United Nations, the purposes of its Charter and its legislative mandates, as well as the
fact that the objectives of the Organization may not be realized in one medium-term plan
only;
9.
Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, in presenting the
programme budget, expected accomplishments and, where possible, indicators of
achievement are included to measure achievements in the implementation of the
programmes of the Organization and not those of individual Member States;
10. Stresses in this regard the need for continued improvement in the
formulation of objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement
with the full involvement of the relevant intergovernmental bodies;
11. Decides that the design of programme objectives in the context of the
medium-term plan and in the programme budget should be enhanced as a key element of
results-based budgeting, in order to reflect in a more accurate manner the mandates,
policy objectives, orientation and priorities of the Organization, taking into account
regulation 4.2 and rule 104.7 (e) of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme
Planning;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the definition of terms and guidelines
under review and to bring the question of definitions to the attention of the Consultative
Committee on Administrative Questions of the Administrative Committee on
Coordination, with a view to obtaining the views and comments of the appropriate
bodies of the United Nations system of organizations in order to arrive at an agreed set
of key terms and guidelines pertaining to the results-based format of the budget within
the United Nations system;
13. Stresses that external factors specific to the objectives and expected
accomplishments should be identified in the proposed programme budget and that
assessment of performance should reflect, and not be distorted by, the impact of
unforeseen external factors;

2

A/RES/55/231

14. Decides that significant external factors should also be identified in the
context of future medium-term plans in order to illustrate their impact on the
achievements obtained by the different programmes;
15. Also decides that the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2002-2003 shall contain input data at the same level of detail as that provided in the
programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001,5 in keeping with the responsibility of
the Secretary-General to provide complete information in support of the financial
aspects of his budget proposals;
16. Notes the observation of the Advisory Committee, in paragraph 16 of its
report,2 that the Secretary-General already enjoys delegation of authority in programme
delivery, in particular in the transfer of resources within sections of the budget;
17. Decides that any transfer of resources between post and non-post objects of
expenditure would require the prior approval of the General Assembly;
18. Stresses that the use of indicators of achievement in the proposed programme
budget and assessment of the performance of the Organization in terms of all the
expected accomplishments should not constitute a method by which to adjust the level
of approved resources, or of staff, and that requested resources should continue to be
justified in terms of the requirements of output delivery;
19. Emphasizes that resources proposed by the Secretary-General should be
commensurate with all mandated programmes and activities to ensure their full,
effective and efficient implementation;
20. Notes that, in order to implement the present resolution, no revisions to the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations or to the Regulations and Rules
Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring
of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation are currently required, and, in this
regard, also notes that the application of rule 105.6 (a) of the Regulations and Rules
Governing Programme Planning should continue to reflect the understanding that
approval of the medium-term plan and the programme budget constitutes the
reaffirmation of mandates reflected therein;
21. Recognizes the difficulty of achieving the results of complex and longstanding political activities within specific time frames;
22. Reaffirms that, in accordance with rule 104.7 (b) of the Regulations and
Rules Governing Programme Planning, when an objective for Secretariat action cannot
be achieved by the end of the plan period, both this longer-term objective and more
specific objectives to be achieved within the plan period shall be set;
23. Emphasizes the need for the Secretariat to continue to improve its
programme evaluation capacity, in order to implement fully the Regulations and Rules
Governing Programme Planning by, inter alia, strengthening standard evaluation
methodologies in accordance with article VII of the Regulations and Rules Governing
Programme Planning;
24. Stresses that any proposals for additional flexibility in managing inputs
during budget implementation, if approved by the General Assembly, should always be
accompanied by increased accountability;
5

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/54/6/Rev.1), vols. IIII; ibid., Supplement No. 6A (A/54/6/Rev.1/Add.1); and ibid., Supplement No. 6B (A/54/6/Rev.1/Add.2).

3

A/RES/55/231

25. Also stresses that flexibility in terms of the use of resources should be
exercised with strict respect for the norms and decisions established by the General
Assembly and the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, in particular
in regard to the limits imposed by the General Assembly in the allocation of resources
for every section, the staffing table and the rules and procedures for personnel matters;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a detailed analysis of the
information, management control and evaluation systems required to implement the
proposals contained in his report,1 and of the capacity and limitations of existing
systems, and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly, through the Advisory
Committee, at the time of submitting his proposed programme budget for the biennium
2002-2003;
27. Stresses that the intention of the Secretary-General to focus the evaluation of
programme delivery on expected accomplishments should be implemented in a manner
that is flexible and complementary to the existing evaluation system;
28. Invites the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to develop on a
continuous basis and to implement an adequate training programme to ensure that staff,
as appropriate, are proficient in the concepts and techniques, including the formulation
of expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement, as described in his report.
89th plenary meeting
23 December 2000

4
