THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

6 JANUARY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2322)

. .. .. .. ..... . ... ... . .. .. ... .. .... ... I

I

Opening statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . , . , , . . . . . , . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

2

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (198 I);
(6) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821) . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . , , . . . . . ,

2

SlPV.2322 and Corr. 1

-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions rind
Decisions c?f the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2322nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 6 January

1982, at 3.30 pm.

Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

solutions to complex issues facing the Council, one
of which is the achievement
of a comprehensive
Middle East settlement.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

7. In welcoming amongst us the representatives of
the African continent, Togo and Zaire, we express
the hope that the fruitful participation
of the deiegations of those States in the Council will promote the
fulfilment of the aspirations of African peoples.

President:

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2322)

8. In welcoming the new non-permanent
members
of the Security Council, we express the firm expectation that their participation
in the Council’s work
will contribute to the successful settlement of important and complex problems facing the Council.

of the agenda

1
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (1981);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)
The meeting

9. T wish also to express our gratitude to the countries which were non-permanent
members of the
Council until the end of last year: the German Democratic Republic, Mexico, Niger, the Philippines
and
Tunisia. During their tenure, those outgoing members made a great and very positive contribution
to
the Council’s
work. The representatives
of those
States did a great deal to achieve mutual understanding in the Council and to find constructive ways
and means to solve complex problems facing the
Council.

WIS called to order ut 4.05 p.m.

Opening statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fborn Russinn):
As this is the first meeting of the Security Council in
this new year, I should like first of all to say a few
words of greetings.
2. I heartily wish my colleagues, representatives of
States members of this lofty body, the SecretaryGeneral and the officials of the United Nations Secretariat a happy new year, good health and further
success in their joint work for the cause of international peace and security for all peoples.

10. We wish the delegations of all those countries
and the heads of those delegations-Messrs.
Muiioz
Ledo, Taieb Slim, Alejandro Yango and IdC Oumarou-success in their further work. I venture to speak
especially about the delegation of the German Democratic Republic, which has earned deserved authority
in the Security Council. We express our specitil regret
at the fact that Mr. Peter Florin, who has headed the
delegation of the German Democratic
Republic for
all these years, is leaving his post as Permanent Representative. His outstanding diplomatic .talent and rich
experience have fruitfully contributed
to the Council’s successful work. We wish Comrade Florin great
success in his new post.

3. It is a particular pleasure for me to welcome
amongst us the new non-permanent members of the
Council: Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire.
4. On behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union,
I take special pleasure in welcoming participation
in
the Council’s work by the fraternal Polish People’s
Republic. There can be no doubt that people’s Poland
will make a worthy contribution to the strengthening
of peace and of international security.

II.
Mr. Jacques Leprette’s duties as representative
of France are also coming to an end. We have worked
with him for many years, particularly in the Security
Council’s work. We have had repeated opportunities
to appreciate his great diplomatic
talent, which has
been especially useful in solving complex issues facing
the Council. We therefore express our gratitude to
Mr. Leprette and wish him success in his future
activities.

5. We welcome Guyana, with which we have relations of friendship and co-operation that go back to
the first years of the existence of that country as an
independent State.
6. We welcome Jordan and express our conviction
that it will make its contribution
in the search for
1

,,

’

accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right
to vote, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

12. On behalf of the members of the Council, I should
like once again to express gratitude to my predecessor,
the representative of Uganda, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for
his skilful leadership of the Council’s work during
December 1981. We highly value his outstanding
diplomatic talents, which to a significant extent have
facilitated the successful solution by the Council of
many complex and delicate items that came before it
at the end of last year.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blurn (Isr(rel)
and Mr. El-Fottal (Syrian Arab Republic) took plr~ces
dt the cou,zcil
tnhle; Mr. Roa K~uI? (Cuba), Mr. Ashtal
(Dprnocr’crtic Yemen), Mr. A hulhrrssnn (Kulwit),
Mr. Kittikhoun
(Lcro People’s Democratic Republic),
Mr, Mrani Zcntcrr (Momcco),
Mr. ScwP (Senrgrrl),
Mr. Fonsekrr (Sri Lanka), Mr. Alaini (Yemen) rend
Mr. Kotnrrtinn (Yugoslavia) took the places
re.~e,vc~d
fiw them crt the side of the Council chamber.

13. On behalf of the members of the Council and on
my own behalf, I should like most heartily to congratulate and welcome the new Secretary-General,
who is attending a meeting of the Security Council in
that capacity for the first time today. Many of us
know Mr. PCrez de Cukllar as the former represen’ tative of Peru to the United Nations and the representative of that country to the Security Council.
His diplomatic skill and his devotion to the cause of
the United Nations were demonstrated
especially
clearly during his work as Under-Secretary-General
at the United Nations. We express the hope that in
his activities in the lofty post of Secretary-General
he will help to carry out the major task under the
Charter of the United Nations, to enhance the authority and effectiveness of the Organisation as an important instrument for the maintenance
of peace and
security. We pledge our support to the SecretaryGeneral in’his efforts to that end.

17. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation j?om Russian):
should like to inform the Council also that I have
received a letter from the representative of Jordan,
dated 5 January [S//4823], which reads as follows:

I

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled
‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’, in
accordance with the Council’s usual practices.”
18. The proposal by the representative of Jordan is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but if approved by the
Council the invitation
to participate in the debate
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights of participation as those
enjoyed by a Member State pursuant to rule 37. Does
any member of the Council wish to speak on this
proposal?

14. On behalf of the members of the Council, I should
like to take this opportunity to express our gratitude
to Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who has concluded his mandate
as Secretary-General.
We realize the complexity and
responsibility of the tasks which he had to cope with
during his 10 years as Secretary-General
of the United
Nations. His outstanding qualities as a statesman and
diplomat, his talents, his broad practical experience,
his skill and tact earned him great respect in his important and responsible post.

19. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
The United States opposes extending to the Palestine
Liberation Organization the same rights to participate
in the proceedings of the Council as if that organization represented a Member State. We have consistently taken the position that under the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, the only
legal basis on which the Council may grant a hearing
to ‘persons speaking on behalf of non-governmental
entities is rule 39. For 35 years the United States has
supported a generous invocation of rule 39 and would
not object in this case. We are, however, opposed
to special, nd hoc departures from orderly procedure.
In particular, the United States does not agree with
the recent practice which appears selectively to try
to enhance the prestige of those who wish to speak in
the Council through a departure from the rules of
procedure. We consider this special practice to be
without legal foundation and to constitute an abuse
of the rules.

15. In conclusion I should like to express the sincere
hope that co-operation between the members of the
CounciI and the President will be as effective and
fruitful in January as it was last month.
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (1981);
8) Report of the Secretary-General
(S/14821)

16. The PRESIDENT (interpf.etatio~z~clnz Russim):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Israel, Kuwait, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Morocco, Senegal, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and Yugoslavia, in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In

20. For those reasons the United States requests
that YOU, Mr. President, put the terms of the proposed
2

invitation to the vote. The United
against it.

States will vote

letter dated 17 December 198 1 from the representative
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the Secretary-General:
S/14813, containing
a letter dated 21 December from the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the
Secretary-General:
S/ 148 15, containing a letter dated
22 December from the representative
of Madagascar
to the Secretary-General
and S/14825, containing a
letter dated 5 January 1982 from the representative
of Mongolia to the Secretary-General.

21, The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtionfiom
Russicrn):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak
at this stage, I shall take it that the Council is ready
to vote on the proposal of Jordan.
A vote WNS taken by shulv of hcrnds.
Z/zf&~~~: China, Guyana, Ireland, Jordan, Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zaire
Against:

United

Abstaining:
Great Britain
The proposal
3 abstentions.

The first speaker is the representative
Syrian Arab Republic. I now call upon him.

27.

States of America

France, Japan, United
and Northern Ireland
WVNSadopted

Kingdom

of the

28. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian
Arab Republic):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month
of January. I am confident that the Council will begin
a fruitful year because of your wisdom and your
valuable experience.

of

by 11 votes to 1, with

29. We should like also to express our great admiration for the dynamic and unceasing efforts of your
predecessor, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda, who ran the
affairs of the Council with judiciousness
and proticiency during a month fraught with difficult and complicated problems.

22. The PRESIDENT
(inte~p,‘etation~~orn
Russion):
I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, MI-. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Orgganizntion) took the place reserved
for him rrt the side of the Council chamber.

30. We avail ourselves of this opportunity
to congratulate Mr. Perez de CueIlar on his election to the
very esteemed post of Secretary-General
of the United
Nations. We pledge that we will give him our full cooperation in his endeavours to enhance full respect
for the Charter of the United Nations and the implementation in good faith of the purposes and principles
of the Charter, of which he is the guardian and the
custodian.

23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion.fiom
Russian):
I should like further to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Jordan, dated 5 January [S/14824], which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council
to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States, to participate in the
consideration by the Council of the question entitled
‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’,
in
accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure.”

31. We should like also to express our gratitude and
admiration for the work done by the previous Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim,
and his excellent
performance and objectivity.
32. On 14 December last, the Syrian Arab Republic
requested an urgent meeting of the Council [S//479/]
in order to consider a very grave situation affecting
not only the Middle East but the world at large. I came
before the Council approximately
three weeks ago
[231&h meeting] to inform it of a stark act of aggression committed by Israel, which had decided to change
its lawless occupation
of Syrian territory into outright annexation.

24. If there are no objections I shall take it that the
Council agrees to comply with this request.
It wus so decided.
25. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The Council is meeting today in accordance with
paragraph 4 of its resolution 497 (1981). Members of
the Council have before them document S/14821,
which contains a report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral in pursuance of that paragraph.

33. We made it clear then, as we are making it clear
now, that our resort to the Council stems from our
confidence that it will take the necessary measures
under the Charter to compel Israel to rescind this
grave breach of international
law. But before the ink
had dried on the Council’s
unanimous
resolution
[resolution 497 (lUS/)] the Israeli representative
was
impudently
declaring
that his Government
totally
rejected its decision. Did he not say, “Israel cannot

26. I should also like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the following documents:
S/14805, containing a report submitted by the Secretary-General in pursuance of paragraph 7 of General
Assembly resolution 36/225 B; S/14807, containing a
3

.

’

and does not accept the resolution just adopted”
[23/9rh meeting, pwcr. 371? Since then, his superiors
in Tel Aviv, intoxicated with the fumes of their new
in affirming and
aggression, have been competing
reaffirming this defiant rejection.
And even those
Zionist voices which rose in criticism of Begin’s blitz
spoke of the timing of the act but not of its substance.

a series of Security Council
condemn Israel’s systematic
stice Agreement.

34. Resolution 497 (1981) contains three elements:
first, that Israel should forthwith rescind its annexaof
tionist measure; secondly, that the imposition
Israeli laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights is null and void and
without international legal effect; and, thirdly, that,
in the event of non-compliance by Israel, the Council
would meet urgently to consider taking appropriate
measures in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

41,. In its resolution
11 I (1956), the Council condemned Israel for its armed attack against Syria on
I 1 December 1955, calling that attack a flagrant violation of the cease-fire provisions of its resolution 54
(1948), as well as of the terms of the General Armistice Agreement
between Israel and Syria and of
Israel’s obligations
under the Charter of the United
Nations. In paragraphs 4 and 5 of resolution III (1956),
the Security Council, whose patience was running
out,

resolutions all of which
violations of the Armi-

40. In its resolution
100 (19.53), the Council asked
Israel to suspend drainage work in the demilitarized
zone-another
request which went unheeded.

35. In compliance with the request contained in
paragraph 4 of resolution 497 (1981), as well as in
paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 361226 B,
the Secretary-General submitted two reports [S/1482/
and S/14805] which confirmed
Israel’s refusal to
revoke its annexationist measures in the Syrian Golan
Heights, Both confirmed Israel’s defiance of the resolution of the Security Council as well as that of the
General Assembly.

~‘EX~I’CSSCS its grcrve concc’nz at the failure of the

Government

of Israel to comply with its obligations;

“Calls upon the. Government
of Israel to do so
in the future, in default of which the Council will
have to consider what further measures under the
Charter are required to maintain or to restore the
peace.”
42. Again, in its resolution
171 (1962), the Council
reaffirmed its resolution
Ill (1956) and determined
that the Israeli attack of 16-17 March 1962 constituted
a flagrant violation of that resolution and called upon
Israel scrupulously to refrain from such action in the
future,

36. It was not Israel’s rejection of the Council’s
unanimous resolution contained in its reply to the
Secretary-General’s report [S/14821, pnnr, 31 which
came as a surprise either to the Council or to us, but
the deceitful arguments to justify that crime against
peace-arguments
which portray the nature of Israel
and its perverted logic, with which the United Nations
is by now only too familiar.

3X. First, the justification
of the occupation and
annexation of the Golan is claimed by the Israeli
representative to be what he calls “the repeated
bombardment of the northern part of Israel and the
harassment of its population between 1948 and 1967”
[ibid.]. The Council’s memory is not so short as to
make it forget that the causes of tension along the
armistice lines and within the demilitarized
zones
were always the net result of Israeli violations of the
Israeli-Syrian
General Armistice
Agreement
of
20 July 1949,’

43. And yet the Israeli representative
lies to the
same Council which repeatedly
condemned Israeli
attacks against Syria, a Council which drew its information from the Chiefs of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO). In short,
Israeli policies and practices from 1948 to 1967, contrary to Israel’s claims, were systematically geared to
erode the Armistice Agreement
with my country in
order to undermine
the involvement
of the United
Nations in the Palestine question. The resolutions
that I have just quoted deny all Israeli claims that
Israel was the victim. Had it truly been the victim,
it would not have stopped attending, as early as 1951,
the regular meetings of the Israeli-Syrian
Mixed
Armistice Commission,
in violation of its obligations
under the Charter as well as the Armistice Agreement
itself.

39. Indeed, the Council, in its resolution 93 (1951),
decided that: “Arab civilians who have been removed
from the demilitarized zone by the Government
of
Israel should be permitted to return forthwith to
their homes”. Israel not only rejected that resolution
but went SOfar as to impose its administration,
jurisdiction, citizenship and sovereignty on the demilitarized
zones, in utter violation of articles II and V of the
Armistice Agreement. That resolution is only one of

44. Therefore,
Israel bears full responsibility
for
destroying
the armistice r&gime. Its encroachment
on Arab rights in the demilitarized
zones, its eviction
of Arabs from their homes and lands in those zones,
its traditional
practices which continue today to
change the demographic,
geographic and economic
character of Arab lands in pursuance of Zionist territorial aggrandizement,
culminating
in its premeditated
all-out blitzkrieg
against three Arab countries on

37. Three of those Israeli arguments
us as being particularly false.

have struck

4

,5 June 1967-all are but facts illustrating a systematic
and premeditated policy to terminate the Armistice
Agreements with Syria, Jordan and Lebanon, as well
as with Egypt. For armistice lines and international
borders do not agree with Israeli expansionism.

imported by his Government
will be dragged in.

49. The third and perhaps the most viciously misleading point in the Israeli rejection is the mention of
peace in the context of occupation and annexation.
We have learnt from history that the meaning of
peace in such a de ,fnctu situation imposed by force
is nothing but a surrender to aggression. Peace in the
Israeli lexicon signifies that the Arab nation should,
(I priori, kneel before the diktats of the Israelis and
bow to their fruits wcotnplis.
Meanwhile
Syria has
reiterated that for it peace signifies, first, the unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied
Arab territories, including Jerusalem, and secondly,
the exercise by the Palestinian people of their right
to return to their homeland, their right to self-determination and their right to establish their national
State without external interference.
Separate agreements with Israel have only encouraged Israel to
despoil the Arabs of their fundamental
rights. We
firmly believe that the Israeli annexation of the Golan
Heights was enhanced by capitulationist
agreements.
This cannot be allowed to recur, and Syria will never
capitulate.

45. Secondly, in his reply to the Secretary-General,
the Israeli representative
stated his Government’s
decision to “normalize”
the situation in the area in
question. In Zionist language, “normalization”
is a
euphemism for occupation and annexation. Or does
the deprivation of tens of thousands of Syrian citizens,
evicted by force 14 years ago and the denial of their
right to return to their homes and property, constitute
“normalization”,
as the Israelis put it? Is plundering,
bulldozing, dynamiting Arab houses “normalization”?
Do the imposition of curfews, the searching of homes,
the detention of citizens and the denial of fundamental
human rights fall under the Israeli concept of normalization? Has the Israeli representative forgotten that
there exists a Council resolution,
resolution
237
(1967), unanimously adopted, which, in paragraph 1,
called on his Government
“to ensure the safety, welfare and security of the
inhabitants of the areas where military operations
have taken place and to facilitate the return of those
inhabitants who have fled the areas since the outbreak of hostilities”,
as well as scores of other resolutions

and to future ones who

50. The Government
and the people of the Syrian
Arab Republic know the meaning of a just and lasting
peace. It certainly does not mean the accommodation
of Zionist aggression, nor does it mean stripping the
Palestinians of their inalienable
rights as defined by
General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX), which has
gained international
recognition,
nor does it mean
reaching a settlement under Israeli threats and diktat,
nor does it mean anything identical to or remotely
resembling the structural and institutional .injustices
inherent in the Camp David accords.

to this effect?

46. What property rights does the Israeli reply refer
to when our citizens under occupation and our displaced citizens watch their lands being confiscated?
Perhaps Mr. Blum would like to explain to the Council where his Government builds those colonies, on
whose lands they establish them and what is the
nationality of the land they confiscate and cultivate.

51. The United States refuses to understand our
Arab position and instead continues to provide Israel
with unlimited assistance and support in the military,
economic and technological
fields, thus encouraging
Israel to escalate its aggression against the Arabs.

47. As for education, is it not a mockery when our
children are denied the right to learn about their history, their geography and their Arab culture, and a
tragedy when our young men and women who opt to
pursue their higher education in Syrian universities
are denied the right to rejoin their families under
occupation?

52. Need we remind the United States that its extensive interests in our area are to be respected only to
the extent to which it is willing to respect our vital
national interests. It has been a basic and systematic
policy of the United States to support Israeli aggressive
policies, and the result of our present deliberations
will serve as a new test of United States willingness
to desist from protecting an enemy which threatens
our very existence.

48. Members of the Council who have read the
Israeli reply carefully will have noticed that Mr. Blum
has scrupulously omitted any reference to “Syrians”
in the occupied Golan Heights, When any mention is
made of the inhabitants of the Golan, they are called
“the local population”.
In the same way, the people
of Palestine are never referred to as Palestinians, so
now the Syrians under occupation have been rechristened “the local population”.
This is a ploy that we
have come to understand in the Israeli racist mind
-that is, if people and land are not called by their
names, in time they will sink into oblivion. The rights
of which Mr. Blum speaks apply to the Zionist colonial
settlers, and only to them, to those who have been

53. At one point in its rejectionist reply, the Israeli
Government
informs
the Secretary-General
that
“the Government
of Israel could not wait endlessly
for Syria to begin to show political will to make peace
and agree on sectire boundaries”,
No doubt Israel is
now introducing a new norm of international law, the
concept of impatience
as a justification
for aggression and annexation,
and abrogating another prin5

ciple of international
territory by force+

law, the non-acquisition

reaffirmed the principle that acquisition of territory
by force is inadmissible, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the principles of international
law, and relevant Security Council resolutions.

of

54.

The Israeli annexation was also justified in this
necessary to bring to an end the
anomalous situation regarding the Golan Heights”.
We fully agree that the situation in the Syrian Golan is
indeed anomalous.
For occupation,
colonization,
confiscation of land and property, deprivation
of
people’s right to return to their homes, the imposition
of Israeli nationality and identity cards, and repression, as well as other terroristic Israeli measures and
practices, render the situation indeed anomalous, to
say the least. But to use this anomaly to annex the
territory of another State is tantamount
to stating
that Syria’s sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and
independence are “anomalous”,
that the very consideration by the Security Council of the Israeli annexation is also an anomalous decision. The real anomaly
is that Israel is acting as a colonial entity in a postcolonial era.
reply as “urgently

60, Need I remind the members of the Council that.
after years of deliberation,
the General Assembly,
convinced that the adoption of a definition of aggression would contribute to the strengthening of international peace and security, came forth with a historic
resolution meant to dispel any equivocation or misrepresentation-or,
for that matter, any justification
of acts of aggression similar to the ones committed
by Israel against my country since 1967. Allow me to
quote from article 3, paragraph (a), of the Definition
of Aggression which appears as the annex to resolution 3314 (XXIX),
adopted by consensus on 14 December 1974. The article defines an act of aggression,
inter crlicr, as:
“The invasion or attack by the armed forces of
a State of the territory of another State, or any military occupation,
however temporary,
resulting
from such invasion or attack, or any annexation
by the use of force of the territory of another State
or part thereof ‘.

55. In paragraph 4 of its resolution 236 (1967), the
Council called for: “the prompt return to the ceasefire positions of any troops which may have moved
forward subsequent to 1630 hours GMT on 10 June
1967”. Yet Israel continues to view that resolution;
as well as previous resolutions, as anomalies in the
work of the Security Council.

61. Undisputedly,
the status of Israel is that of an
aggressor. Equally clear, this status was earned not
only on 14 December 1981 but as far back as June 1967
-this, in regard to my country, Syria, as well as the
other occupied Arab territories. But as regards the
Palestinian people, the Zionist aggression began in
1948 and continues to date.

56. Council resolution 497 (1981), unanimously
adopted on 17 December last, has been flouted by the
same aggressor. For Israel has avoided the mention of
the essence of that resolution, which demands that
Israel rescind forthwith its decision to apply Israeli
laws, administration
and jurisdiction
in the Syrian
Golan Heights. It has only reconfirmed its decision
to continue the application of the so-called Golan
Heights Law-No.
57421198 l-thus defying the spirit
and the letter of paragraph 2 of that resolution.

62. By changing the status of the Golan Heights
from that of occupied territory to that of annexed
territory, Israel is threatening the very foundations
of the international system. This double act of aggression-that
is, occupation, then annexation-if
allowed
to go unpunished, will return us all to the pre-Second
World War system, when States took the law into
their own hands, indulging in perverse acts of aggression such as the ones committed by nazism and fascism. The A1zsck1lrs.s of Austria, Czechoslovakia and
Ethiopia are but examples of a lawless world where
the stronger felt free to crush the weak-conditions
that inevitably led to general conflagration in Europe.

57. All the arguments advanced by professional
fabricators in the Israeli reply are meant to obfuscate
the central issue, which is that Israel abide by the
demand that the aforementioned
Israeli law be rescinded. This is a direct affront to the Council’s rights
and responsibilities under the Charter. This unlawful
law continues to be applied despite the Council’s
injunction.

63. We all heard the Israeli representative justifying
annexation:
at times, under the pretext of Israel’s
security interests; at other times, arguing for the
necessity “to normalize” the situation in the Golan
Heights; and yet again, stating that his Government
was heeding the advice of its friends and allies. Ironically, the truth emerged when he stated that: “Certainly every Government of Israel since 1967 has
declared that it would be impossible to return to the
pre-1967 lines” [2316th meeting, prrrtr. 421. But the
Council members have unanimously disregarded these
falsifications,
for, as article 5, paragraph 1, of the
Definition of Aggression states in the clearest of terms:

58. The suffering of our citizens under Israeli occupation aside, the anger of the Arab nation aside, the
indignation of the world at large aside, the Council
must, here and now, invoke the Charter of the United
Nations in order to weigh this act for what it is and
translate its own commitments-that
is, to take
“appropriate measures”-into
concrete action,
59. Article 39 of the Charter confers upon the Council the full power to determine the existence of any
threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of
aggression. In its resolution 497 (1981), the Council
6

“No consideration of whatever nature, whether political, economic, military or otherwise, may serve as a
justification for aggression”.

tion will not be sufficient; nor is that language that
Israel understands. Sanctions and only sanctions under
Article 41 of the Charter are the sole avenue left. We
demand that this privileged aggressor be deprived of,
inter alia, the benefits of international
trade and
military assistance, as well as diplomatic and consular
relations. If the international community
wishes to
avoid the disastrous consequences of this act of aggression and spare mankind untold suffering, it should
promptly and collectively act to castigate lawlessness
and penalize the aggressor. Israel may be under the
impression that it is above and beyond the law of
nations-and, admittedly, its allies and protectors have
encouraged this belief-but
the principle of equality
before the law applies to all of us. The United Nations
cannot afford to have a favourite child, or a spoilt
brat, or a raving mad Member bent on destroying order
in our universe.

64. Equally pertinent in this context is an invocation
of other solemn declarations of the United Nations,
all of which uphold a basic principle of the Chartel
-that is, that the territory of a State shall not be the
object of acquisition by another State resulting from
the threat or use of forcei no territorial acquisition
resulting from the threat or use of force shall be recognized as legal.
65. If we truly abide by the Charter, if we intend
to uphold the principles of international law and if
we believe in the validity of the principles and provisions that were codified by us all to protect us all, if
we genuinely adhere to the aforementioned
solemn
commitments,
then it is the duty and the responsibility
of the Security Council to determine the existence of
a threat to the peace, breach of the peace and a flagrant
act of aggression in this situation before us.

71. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): As this is the first
occasion I have had to address the Security Council
as a member of this body, it is only appropriate that
I should at the outset wish everyone in the Council
a Happy New Year.

66. If the Israeli act is still not considered a grave
act of aggression by the Council, then no self-respecting
country can claim that the United Nations was created
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war; no longer will any man, woman or child believe
that the United Nations was established to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to peace and for the suppression of acts
of aggression.

72. I wish also to extend my most sincere congratulations to our highly esteemed President for this
month of January, Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich
Troyanovsky of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, on
his assumption of the presidency in the present trying
circumstances in which the Council is now meeting.
His statesmanship,
wisdom and diplomatic
skills
have been widely acknowledged over the years in the
councils of the United Nations.

67. I reaffirm before the Council the position of my
Government that the Israeli annexation of the Golan
Heights constitutes a grave violation not only of international law and the Charter of the United Nations
but also of Security Council resolution 338 (1974), as
well as a unilateral revocation of the cease-fire, for
annexation is an act of war.

73. I should like also to pay a high tribute to my
colleague Mr. Olara Otunnu of Uganda for the outstanding manner in which he performed the duties of
the presidency during the month of December 1981
in similarly difficult circumstances facing the Council.

68. It is our right as a Member State to demand that
the Council fulfil its obligations by applying Article 41
of the Charter in order to compel Israel to abrogate
its annexation of the occupied Golan Heights, to withdraw unconditionally
from occupied Syrian territories
and to dismantle its colonial settlements in order to
enable us to exercise full sovereignty and to protect
our full territorial integrity therein.

74. It gives me great pleasure to welcome, on behalf
of my Government,
the new Secretary-General,
Mr. Pirez de CuCllar, whose outstanding abilities
are widely recognized, and to wish him every success
in his high office.
75. I wish, too, to pay a most profound tribute, on
behalf of my Government, to the outgoing SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who performed with
such excellence during his ten-year term of office.
We shall certainly miss him in the chambers of the
United Nations and we wish him continued health,
happiness and success.

69. In case of failure by the Council to discharge
its responsibilities
towards a Member State which
has been the victim of aggression, the Syrian Arab
Republic reserves its right, under Article 51 of the
Charter, to deal with this aggression.

76. Jordan, which I am privileged to represent in
the Council, is both proud and grateful for the confidence shown in it by the Member States of the General
Assembly in electing it, on the initiative of the Group
of Asian States, one of that Group’s two non-permanent members of the Security Council, It is an
honour which Jordan deeply cherishes and which

70. We are confident that all the members of the
Council will fully assume their responsibilities
and
face up to this aggression with the necessary sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter, as we have
already exhausted all other means to deter Israel
from its ever-growing aggression. A mere condemna7

carries with it heavy responsibilities,
opportunities
and challenges. I pledge Jordan’s determination
to live
up to the confidence placed in it, guided first and
foremost by unwavering adherence to and respect for
the letter and spirit of the Charter, to which the United
Nations is committed as the only guarantor of international peace, security and justice.
77. The Council is confronting today one of the
most ominous and dangerous situations in its almost
four decades of existence. An act of unbridled aggression, lawlessness, territorial expansion and unheeding
defiance has been committed by Israel in total disregard of Security Council resolution 497 (1981).

a

78. It is tantamount to an act of war with potentially
enormous ramifications,
which will no doubt unfold
in consequence of Israel’s blatant legislation, rammed
through within a few hours, theatrically and defiantly,
on 14 December, to apply “the laws, jurisdiction
and
administration of the State to the Golan Heights”.
79. That was the same procedure Israel I adopted
shortly after its occupation of the West Bank, Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and other occupied Arab territories as a prehrde to the subsequent stupendous and
incredible annexation of Jerusalem, which is close
to the heart of hundreds of millions of people in all
corners of the globe.

82. There are close to 200,000 Syrian citizens of the
Golan Heights who have been squatting and suffering
in refugee camps in and around Damascus during
15 years of Israeli occupation,
while the remnants
of the inhabitants-a
mere 12,000 to 13,000-are being
ordered to undergo a metamorphosis
which would
transform
them by vicious alchemy from Syrian
citizens, whose country is universally recognized as
one of the foremost cradles of world civilization, into
the bondage of an intruding Israeli armed horde.
83. After exhaustive analysis by the international
community of a precise definition of what constitutes
an act of aggression, the twenty-ninth session of the
General Assembly adopted without dissent resolution
3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 which, in article 3
of the annex, defines an act of aggression as
“The invasion or attack by the armed forces of a
State of the territory of another State, or any military occupation,
however temporary,
resulting
from such invasion or attack, or any annexation
by the use of force of the territory of another State
or part thereof ‘,
The Israeli acts in the Golan Heights, including massive
colonization
of the victims’ lands and resources, culminating on 14 December 1981 in an act of outright
annexation, are the ultimate end within the meaning
of an act of aggression.

80, Israel’s dangerous and highly provocative action
of 14 December 1981 is tantamount to the outright
annexation of an integral part of the Syrian Arab
Republic, a sovereign independent State and one of the
founders of the United Nations. It tears to shreds the
basic tenets of the Charter, the architects of which
painstakingly formulated it in the aftermath of one of
the most horrendous wars that humanity
had ever
suffered, in the determination
to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war,

84. By its resolution 497 (1981), the Security Council unanimously declared that the Israeli decision to
impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights was null and void and
without international legal effect. The Council further
decided that, in the event of non-compliance by Israel
within two weeks, the Council would meet urgently,
and not later than 5 January 1982, to consider taking
appropriate measures in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.

81. The architects of the Charter of the United
Nations were not simply armchair academicians;
they were great statesmen who had been deeply and
directly immersed in that gigantic war, triggered by
a deranged mind or minds bent upon conquest, hegemony , and the application of raw power to achieve the
enslavement of other peoples on this planet. Thus it
is that we have a Charter which spells out meticulously
what remedial action should be taken in all conceivable contingencies and situations. Yet we have been
witnessing over a long span of years a resuscitation
and reincarnation of that evil spirit of blatant conquest
and an unabashed and systematic policy of expansion,
colonization,
hegemony and annexation.
Jerusalem
and the West Bank have already been colonized to
the extent of aImost 40 per cent. Israel deliberately
s purports to undo both the spirit and the letter of the
;‘: Charter in all its aspects: not to mention the relevant
f’:;
::/ solemn Convention of The Hague” and subsequent
‘> *Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection
of
‘?,‘$Civilian Persons in Time of War.3

85. In his report to the Security Council of 31 December 1981 [S/14821], the Secretary-General
conveyed the Israeli occupying authorities’ reply. The
reply should have come as no surprise to anyone well
versed in Israel’s flagrant and undisguised policy of
conquest, expansion, colonization
and annexation,
which the Israeli leadership across the entire political
spectrum, though in varying modalities and forms,
upholds.
86. Mr. Shamir, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of
Israel, just to mention one, declared at a recent meeting
of the Herut Party, which is Menachem Begin’s party,
that withdrawal from Sinai was absolutely and categorically the last withdrawal that Israel was willing to
make and that it would in no circumstances submit
to any outside pressures. Evidently he does not recognize that the United Nations exists. That clearly
means annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights, expansion of Jerusalem which at present comprises one
fifth of the occupied West Bank, and the Gaza Strip.

87. The Israeli representative’s
reply to the Security
Council dated 29 December 1981 [ibid., pma. 31 not
only confirms his earlier replies of rejection but is also
loaded with the most dubious and distorted disinformation designed to mislead the Council,
without
regard to the most elemental facts. I could drive a
carriage and horse through it if I were not mindful
of the precious time of the Council. These diversionary issues are engaged in to distract attention from
an act of blatant aggression and annexation perpetrated against the sovereign independent Republic of
Syria.

He was the foreign mess adviser in the Prime
Minister’s office aid t’he purpose of his contribution now was to give the Israeli position an ideological wrapping. His main ‘ideological’
argument was
that most of the Palestinian Arabs were really new
immigrants who had come to Palestine only in the
last 100 years.”
General Dayan continues:
“The silliest part was his ‘proof that the Arabs
were strangers in the land of Israel. It was almost
certain, said Katz, that that was the reason why so
many Arabs had fled easily in the 1948 war. Farmers
rooted in their soil did not behave that way. The
only Arabs who really belonged to the country were
those who stayed, despite the war.”

88. The entire world knows of the savagery and
expulsion and the occupation of four fifths of Palestine in 1948, even before the end of the British Mandate and before the entry of a single Arab soldier
after I5 May 1948 to rescue the remnants of the Palestinian people, whose national life had been devastated
at the point of the bayonet. We all know who triggered
by calculation and design the 1967 war, by Israel’s
sneak attack on the Egyptian Air Force at dawn of
5 June 1967, the very same day on which the then
Vice-President of Egypt, Mr. Zakaria Muhyiddin,
was
scheduled to arrive in Washington
to resolve the
Straits of Tiran crisis.

General Dayan continues:
“Katz’s words were also in the cabled report and
when I read them I did not even try to guess what
the Americans must have thought when they heard
them. According to this criterion, the Arabs in the
Golan Heights fled in the six-day war because they
lacked a deep attachment
to their soil, whereas
the Arab refugees in the Gaza Strip, who had been
there less than 20 years when the 1967 war reached
them, remained during that war because their hearts
beat with the feeling that the miserable camps in
which they lived were their homeland.”

89. We all know that subsequent to the 1973 ceasefire and disengagement
agreements,
on the basis
of Council resolutions 242 (I 967) and 338 (1973)-designed to end the consequences of that specific aggression-the
Israelis torpedoed
the process and viciously dynamited and razed to the ground the entire
city of Qunaitra, the capital of the Golan Heights,
rather than giving it back in habitable conditions to
its lawful inhabitants,
in fulfilment of the disengagement agreement.

93. Incidentally,
the Palestinian
people, traditionalists as they are, whose natural and continued habitat
and marriage to the soil in Palestine date back over
5,000 to 6,000 years in a unique amalgam, regard a
fellow countryman whose ancestors have been there
for 500 to 600 years as a relative newcomer. The late
Mr. Day.an, reared in childhood
with Palestinian
children in the Tiberias area, was very much aware
of that fact.

90. The Council is aware of the massive colonization of the occupied Golan Heights which makes a
sham and a chimera out of any talk about peace, which
the Israelis are fond of paying lip-service to, while
their actions put Israel inexorably
on a collision
course not only with the whole of the Middle East
but with the world at Iarge.

94, The Israeli refusal to rescind its annexation
legislation,
which constitutes an act of aggression
according to the Charter and the Definition of Aggression adopted by consensus by the General Assembly
[resolution
3314 (XXIX), unnex], and its defiance of
Security Council resolution 497 (1981), which specifically demands that Israel, the occupying Power,
should rescind its decision forthwith, strikes at the
very heart of international
law and the Charter. It is
not only a challenge to Syria and to the Arab world,
but also to the international community in its entirety.
It poses a fundamental question to the Security Council concerning the safeguarding of world peace and
security. The response will determine the maintenance or the inevitable breakdown of the international
order as envisaged in the Charter.

91. The Israelis want peace, yes, but at the price of
Arab surrender and the abdication of any meaningful rights for the long-victimized
Palestinian people.
That is the peace of the grave but not of the living.
92. This mental block regarding the Palestinian
people and the penchant to see them disappear somehow from the face of the earth is revealingly described
by the late General Dayan in his last book, entitled
Breakthrough,
in which he narrates the process
leading to the Camp David accords. Describing the
talks which Begin was conducting with the President
of the United States, the then Minister for Foreign
Affairs Dayan writes:

95. Israel has over the years been encouraged in its
bellicosity and acts of aggression,by the failure of the
Council to pursue effective action in response to the

“After Begin had spoken at the morning meeting
with the aides present, Shmuel Katz took the floor.
9

ominous
challenges to its authority and to the continued
validity of the Charter.
96.
The time has therefore come when the Couneil
should
rise to the challenge of its solemn duties as
spelled
out in the reIevant provisions of the Charter.
The draft resolution which is now being formulated
and negotiated amongst Member States is not therefore a Syrian, a Group of Arab Sates or a non-aligned
document.
It could well have been formulated
by the
great architects of the Charter themselves, for it is
a verbatim
prescription of their vision, their foresight
and their wisdom.
97.
Because of permissiveness and depleted resolve,
one or more of the major Powers, I am informed, has
indicated
an unwillingness to go along with the draft
resolution,
suggesting conditions and negotiations
with
the aggressor after he has eaten the cake. This makes
it appropriate
to give a timely reminder of something
said by a great leader, who had been through the
excruciating
experience of the Second World War,
in a radio and television addresson 20 February 1957
concerning
what Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter say
about illegal acquisitions and occupations.
98.
President
Eisenhower, challenged by Israel’s
refusal
to withdraw from Sinai during the tripartite
invasion
of 1956, explained categorically:
“The use of military force to solve international
disputes could not be reconciled with the principles
and purposes of the United Nations. We are approaching
a fateful moment when either we must
recognize that the United Nations is unable to restore
peace in this area, or the United Nations
must
renew with increased vigour its efforts to bring about
Israeli withdrawal.

101. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait): At the outset,
Sir, allow me to express to you my sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month.
102. I should like also to congratulate your prede-‘
cessor, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda, for conducting the
affairs of the Council so adroitly.
103. It is a .pleasure for me to extend my delegation’s congratulations
to Mr. Perez de CuelIar, the
Secretary-General,
and to see him in our midst during
these important deliberations.
104. I should like to express my delegation’s appreciation of the valuable contributions made by the
outgoing members
to the Council’s deliberations;
J would also express my delegation’s congratulations
to the new Council members, the representatives of
Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire.

106. Once again we find ourselves face to face
with yet another situation in which we have to deal
with another case of Israeli defiance of the international will.
107. On 17 December
1981, the Security Council
unanimously
decided that the Israeli decision to
impose its laws and administration
in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights was null and void [resolution 497
(l9SlJ].

“We
cannot consider that the armed invasion
and occupation
of another country are ‘peaceful
means’
or ‘proper means’ to achieve justice and
conformity
with international law. But the United
Nations”
-and this is really timely and pertinent;
I am quoting President Eisenhower-“faces
immediately
the problem of what to do next. If it does
nothing,
if it accepts the ignoring of its repeated
resolutions
calling for the withdrawal of invading
forces, then it will have admitted failure. That failure
would be a blow to the authority and influence of
the United, Nations in the world and to the hopes
which
humanity
placed in the United Nations
as
the means of achieving peace with justice.”
really

100. The PRESJDENT
(interpretation
from Russitrrt): The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

105. I feel that I should be remiss if I let this opportunity pass without expressing to all present my delegation’s best wishes for a more prosperous and more
peaceful year for mankind.

“Israel
seeks something more. It insists on firm
guarantees
as a condition to withdrawing its forces
of invasion.
This raises a basic question of principle. Should a nation which attacks and occupies
foreign
territory in the face of United
Nations
disapproval
be allowed to impose conditions on its
own withdrawal?

That

99. Let us hope that by timely and decisive action the
Council can save the Middle East and the world from
the awesome consequences of the latest Israeli aggression.

108. As expected, it took Israel no time to reject
the unanimous decision of the international
community-on
grounds so flimsy that none but Israel
would dare to offer them on such an occasion if ever.
109. We are told that Israel had to do what it did
because, first, the Syrians did not show any sign of
negotiation and, secondly, it wanted to normalize the
situation.
110. What an affront to one’s intelligence.
We
wonder which international
law offers annexation as a
price for the lack of negotiation or as a method for
the normalization
of similar situations.

says it all.
10

’

-

L
*

111. Of course, the only law which Israel is applying-as
it has in similar cases-is the law of the
jungle, the kind of law which makes us wonder where
the analogy between Israeli thinking and Israeli actions
and those of the Nazis ends on such matters.

else not only to establish the rule of law and order
in the world but also to see to it that those extraneous
elements which so persistently endanger world peace
and stability are duly punished.

112. The non-stop Israeli determination
to violate
all international
laws should for a change be met
seriously and effectively by the international
community, whose tolerance and inaction on Israel’s lawless behaviour and its arrogant disregard of its dictates
have up till now given the Israelis all the encouragement they need to achieve all their expansionist designs
in all the occupied Arab territories without any fear
of punishment.

119. Even while the world community,
represented
by this body, is considering the latest Israeli aggression against the Syrian Arab territories, Israel, as if to
punctuate its disdain of world opinion, has reportedly
violated Iraqi airspace in the past few deays. Its
message to the world community
is only too obvious
-you can continue to judge our behaviour or OUI
action, but we want to assure you that nothing you
do or say will stop us from acting in the role of the
sword of Damocles all over the Middle East.

113. We have before us today a clear-cut situation
in which the prestige, reputation and effectiveness of
the world Organisation
are at stake. A unanimous
decision by the Council has been flatly rejected by
Israel, and the Council should now, in accordance with
its resolution 497 (1981), consider taking necessary
measures in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. The time has therefore come to take punitive
action against Israel in the form of measures which
would be commensurate
with the magnitude of the
Israeli aggression.

i20. This state of affairs cannot go on forever. Something should be done-and
done effectively-to
bring
Israel back to its real size and to bring back to the
United Nations the prestige of the world Organization, which has never been put to such a test as it has
been as a result of Israel’s arrogance and its repeated
acts of defiance of the world community.
121. The PRESIDENT
(interprrtntion
fknm RrrsGun): The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Senegal. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

114. On similar occasions in the past we have listened
. to a lot of rhetoric about what need be done, but
nothing has actually taken place, which is the very
thing that, on the one hand, has added to world frustration and, on the other, has whetted the Israeli
appetite to pursue its policies of nonchalance towards
the comity of nations.

122. Mr. SARRfi
(Senegal) (irzterprelrrtion
frnm
F~c>nch): First of all, I should like to renew my best
wishes for the New Year to the members of the Council, who have enabled me once again to participate in
a debate which is so decisive in the quest for a solution to a problem which is of concern inasmuch as it
involves international
peace, security and stability.

11.5. The Israelis are, as we know, not of a different
breed that needs to be granted a different kind of
treatment. If the Israelis consider themselves to be
a unique people with unique privileges and that makes
them think they are above international law, it is time
that notice be served on Israel and those of its friends
who grant it a special relationship despite its ceaseless crimes against its neighbours that there is a limit
to the patience and tolerance of the international
community.

123. I should also like to extend to you, Mr. President, my warmest and most sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
Your qualities
as a distinguished
diplomat,
your
common sense and the role played by your country
in the Council guarantee that our work will be crowned
with success-success
dedicated to peace.
124. To your predecessor,
Mr. Olara Otunnu of
Uganda, I shall simply say that I continue, as an
African, to take pride in the tribute paid him for the
dedication and competence with which he led the work
of the Council last month.

116. The only way that Israel will be forced to abide
by international law and to desist from pursuing its
arrogant behaviour is for the Council to assert its
authority by imposing sanctions as a last resort to
bring Israel back to its senses, if it ever had any.

125. I cannot fail to reiterate my warm and sincere
congratulations
to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier
Phrez de Cudllar, along with our wishes for success in
accomplishing
his lofty and noble duties dedicated
to a better understanding
among peoples and among
nations. He sets a good example; he is a diplomat;
he is well versed in international
relations; he is a
humanist. For all of these reasons, I am sure that he
will succeed in strengthening
the credibility
of the
Organization.
For the same reasons, his predecessor,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, is deserving of our appreciation.

117. Sometimes we fail to understand the double
standard displayed by certain Powers which hasten
to demand the imposition of sanctions on some other
countries whereas they stand steadfastly behind
Israel whenever there is any move made to stop its
criminal conduct through the imposition of meaningful
and effective sanctions.
118. Those Powers, with special responsibilitiks
towards world peace, are required more than anybody
11

13 I. Furthermore,
it should bring to bear all its
influence on all the parties concerned so as to create
conditions favourable to the establishment
of a sideby-side relationship
which should replace a face-toface confrontation,
which has, alas, proved sterile
thus far.
.

126. I also congratulate
the representatives
of
Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire on their
assumption of seats in the Council. I am sure that the
Council will benefit from their experience, as it did,
in other circumstances, from that of the representatives of the German Democratic Republic,
Mexico,
the Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia, to whom I pay
tribute.

132, A few weeks ago, the General Assembly adopted
a rt;solution on a year of peace, a month of peace and
a ‘day of peace [resolution 36/67]. We have begun the
new year with the consideration
of an issue which
involves the safeguarding of peace. Let us see to it
that our first decisions are fully in keeping with the
spirit and letter of that resolution. In so doing, we shall
be consistent in our actions.

127. On 17 December last, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 497 (1981), which, need I recall,
only reflected the world’s emotion and stern disapproval in the face of Israel’s decision to extend to the
Golan Heights-a
Syrian territory-the
laws and regulations in effect in Israel. The responsible attitude of
the Council in respect of a decision contrary to international law and morality could only be to the further
credit of the Organization. Better still, countries with
limited means of defence saw in it some hope for their
survivat.

133. The PRESIDENT
(irzteipretotion
from Russion): The next speaker is the representative
of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic.
I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

128. The Council, in its traditional wisdom, set a time
frame for the occupying Power to rescind its measures
without delay. According to the report of the SecretaryGeneral and the information available to us, nothing
has been done to date. Worse still, tension has even
increased in the region and, if care is not taken, that
tension might lead to a widespread war. Appropriate
steps must therefore be taken to compel Israel to comply scrupulously with the decisions taken by the
United Nations, of which it is a Member. Might must
give way to right. It is only with that in view that
nations will be able to live together in perfect harmony.

134. Mr. KITTIKHOUN
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (interpretationfiom
French): Mr. President,
first of all, on behalf of the delegation of the Lao
People’s Democratic
Republic, I wish to express to
you and to all the members of the Council my sincere
appreciation for allowing me to take part in the present
deliberations,
thereby giving me an opportunity
to
put forth the views of my Government
on the question before the Council. Since this is the first time that
as a young diplomat I have spoken in this lofty body,
I wish to show my respect for the Council and to
declare my full confidence in its ability fully and
effectively
to discharge its primary
responsibility,
which is to maintain international
peace and security for the benefit, of present and succeeding generations.

129. Is there any need to recall that the Golan issue
is only one aspect of the over-all problem of the Middle
East, for the solution of which the Organization
has
adopted some 260 resolutions over the past 33 years?
If we analyze all of those resolutions, they essentially
have the following main points in common, namely:
withdrawal by IsraeI from all the occupied Arab
territories; recognition of and respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the
States of the region; the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights to self-determination
and to the establishment of a State in its homeland;
and, finally, the full and responsible participation
of
the PLO in any process concerning the Palestinian
people.

135. In addition I wish to extend to you, Mr, President, the warm congratulations
of my delegation on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this first month of 1982, which has only just begun and
which will, we trust, usher in a new era in international relations, which recently have been marked by
a dangerous renewal of tension owing to the policy of
confrontation
deliberately adopted by certain Powers
whose responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and stability is, in everyone’s opinion,
particularly
important.

130. At the present stage of our debates, it does not
seem useful to my delegation to dwell again here on
the background of the Middle East issue, for that is
known to us all. I should simply like, on behalf of my
country, to renew our appeal to the members of the
Council for, since the Security Council wishes-and
it is its rote-to contribute effectively to the estabhshment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East,
it should, through the responsibilities
conferred on it
by the Charter, do everything possible to ensure strict
and speedy application of the relevant resolutions that
it has adopted on this issue,’

136. This situation has serious implications
for the
independence
and sovereignty of the peoples of the
world and, in particular, for the developing countries,
as is clearly shown by the present debate. In spite of
this, it is a pleasure to point out that it is auspicious
for the future development of international
relations
that it is you, a respected representative of the Soviet
Union, which advocates and implements
a policy
of peace and detente in inter-State relations, who
are presiding over the Council’s work as the year 1982
begins.
12

137. We consider it also a good sign that the new year
begins with the assumption of his post by the new
Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier PCrez de CuCllar, a
statesman and diplomat
of world-wide reputation,
to whom my delegation wishes every success in his
lofty and responsible position. Now and henceforth,
my country wishes to assure him of its full support
and co-operation in the noble activities that he will
be undertaking to strengthen peace and understanding
among all peoples of the world.
138. I take this opportunity
also to express the
heartfelt congratulations
of my delegation to all the
new non-permanent members, who will, I am sure,
make a positive contribution
to its work.

144. Bv that nrovocative act. the expansionist and
hegemohistic Iiaders in Tel Aviv once* again demonstrated that peaceful coexistence with the Arab States
and the Arab nation and a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East are not what they want. What they
want is to consolidate the acquisition of the lands of
others by force and to impose by acts of terrorism
the primacy or domination of the Zionist State in that
area, the nerve centre of the world, with the strategic
alliance agreement between Israel and the United
States as solid guarantee.
145. The delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic denounces and strongly condemns this policy
which undermines the peace and security of all peoples
in the Middle East, as well as universal peace and
stability.

139. Finally, on behalf of my delegation,
I wish
wholeheartedly to congratulate Mr. Olara Otunnu of
Uganda, who presided with rare skill over the deliberations of the Council in December, ttiereby to some
extent making up for the failings of the Council earlier
in 1981.

146. A just and lasting peace will never be established
as long as Israel stubbornly flouts the Charter of the
United Nations and the elementary principles of international law-in particular, the principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by forcecontinues to trample underfoot the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, including its right to create
an independent State in Palestine, and believes that it
can pursue with impunity its policy of aggression,
expansion and domination
at the expense of all its
neighbours, near and far.

140. The present deliberations
of the Council are
specially crucial. They are crucial because they will
allow each and every one of us to determine objectively whether the Council is willing and able to cope
with situations entailing risk of a breach of the peace
and a destructive armed conflict, as the Security
Council is mandated to do by the Charter of the Uriited
Nations. The case before us is undeniably
one of
those situations that I have just described.

147. With this recent measure to annex the Golan
Heights,
which,
notwithstanding
Israel’s
illegal
occupation, are an integral part of Syrian territory
-a measure which followed a long series of acts of
aggression and provocation,
in particular the raid
on the Iraqi nuclear reactor in Tamuz, the criminal
bombing of Palestinian refugee camps in southern Lebanon, the further momentum
given to the establishment of settler colonies in occupied Arab territories,
to mention only those-Israel
has made the situation
even more explosive than the one prevailing before
the outbreak of the 1967 conflict. There can be no
doubt that if this situation is not dealt with forthwith,
it might very well plunge the Middle East once again
into a widespread conflict infinitely more deadly and
destructive than before.

141. In this regard, a little more than two weeks
ago the Council met and unanimously adopted resolution 497 (1981); in which it decided that the Israeli
decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights was null
and void and without international
legal effect and
demanded that Israel would rescind forthwith its
decision.
142. Not unexpectedly, the injunctions of the Council, as well as the other decisions of the United Nations, had practically no effect on Israel, which, by its
arrogant response [S//482/, pwa. 31, made it known
quite clearly that it would never bow to the Council’s
decision.

148. My delegation m-gently calls on the Council to
take the kind of action required by the gravity of the
situation-action
of the sort that will make Israel
understand the language of law and justice. In this
context, we strongly support the decision of the plenary
meeting of the non-aligned countries, held in New
York on 5 January last, calling upon the Security
Council to take appropriate action under Cliapter VII
of the Charter to force Israel to respect the full sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic over all its territory [JCL’ S/14829, unne~x]. These measures are just
and are warranted by the circumstances: while furthering respect for the Charter and international law,
they would enhance the authority and prestige,of the
Council and the United Nations, which have all too
long been flouted by Israel,

143. For years now the Council and the United
Nations as a whole have been subjected to intolerable humiliation
as a result of Israel’s continued
defiance and Israel has benefited, and continues to
benefit, from the unconditional
support of its powerful
ally on the other side of the Atlantic, The most recent
XSraeli adventure of 14 December 1981, like many other
XSraeli acts of aggression which had taken place before
that date, never could have happened if the Zionist
leaders had not felt quite certain that they would have
the uncritical support of the United States, making it
Possible for Israel to escape international
sanctions.
13

Charter, it is incumbent

149, The Government and people of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
will stand firmlY by our friends
the Syrian people and other Arab peoples in their just
combat against the attempts of imperialism,
~4th
Israel as its agent, to expand and dominate.
,50a

The

PRESIDENT

(interpretntion

fiorn

their

international

disputes

upon all Members
by

peaCefllI

me:m*

to selt
Thgs

*

too, Syria

has adamantly refused to do* It has rejoclc
Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). There f‘*
certainly no justification for an aggressor, such ut+
Syria, having been defeated once in war% to 6” cjn fkqr
well over a quarter of a century and engitge in rclc*rr~*
less hostilities against its neighbour-hostilities
F)lIlIII*
tuated by two further wars of aggression initirtted 17>.!!,
And there is certainly no justification for thnt itggI-e~~\~~
State to be allowed to perpetuate 1 Stgtte of WLtf’ 18&r
decades or even centuries on end.

Rus-

si~,,zl: The next speaker is the representative of Israel,
on whom I call.
151, Mr, BLUM (Israel): Sir, at the outset, let me
my respects
to you on Your assumption of the
duties of the presidency of the SeCUritY Council for
this month. We trust that you will conduct the Council’s business with your customary skill, Prop-ietY and
impartiality.

pr,y

152. I should also like to take this opportunity of’
my compliments to the President of the Councii for the month of December, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda,
whose diplomatic skills we have alt come to appreciate.

paying

153. It also gives me great pleasure to join all those
who have welcomed the new Secretary-General,
Mr. javier PCrez de CuelIar. As he assumes the burdens and responsibilities of his high office, we salute
this great son of Peru and of Latin America and wish
him success in his endeavours. We trust that his broad
vision, coupled with his vast diplomatic experience
in the service of his country and of the United Nations,
will stand him in good stead as he embarks on the
fulfilment of his onerous duties as a servant of international peace and of better understanding among

156. Before 1948, Syria did everything in its pot&H
to prevent the establishment of ISWC~.
I:vcr S~IXC
Israel’s accession to independence in 194X, Syr’r+*
has refused to accept Israel’s right to exist LlS i\ s(\\&
ereign and independent State. When the conce,rtrrl
Arab attempt to crush Israel in 1948 eventually fritlcd,
Syria was the last of Israel’s neighbours to conclnrfe
an armistice agreement with it. That agreement \‘r;b*
to have been the first step towards a negotmted pcucr
between our two countries. Yet, in sharp contrif\t
to the spirit, intent and terms of the Israeli-Syri;tn
General Armistice Agreement of 20 July 1949,’ Syri,i
repeatedly unleashed against my country unrclcntin~
armed aggression and political warfare which tub
now has lasted for over 33 years,
157. The representative of Syria in his stittement
here today referred to the Definition of Aggrcssiclr~,
adopted by the General Assembly in the annex to it4
resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 1974. So, incidentally,
did
the representative of Jordan. With their oharacteristie
selectiveness, they have failed to mention article J of
that annex, which contains the central definition
of
aggression. That omission is most revealing, I invite
the representative of Syria to listen cl0selY to the
text of that article:

nations.

154. The Council would not have been meeting
today-nor, for that matter, last month-on the issue
before us were it not for Syria’s relentless enmity
towards Israel throughout the entire period of Israel’s
existence as a sovereign State. Syria’s attitude has
been one of persistent and adamant refusal to recognize Israel, to negotiate with it, or even to maintain
any semblance of tolerable neighbourly relations.
As our Syrian colleague, with the urbanity, refinement
and lucidity that have become his hallmark, has
repeatedly made clear in his statements before the
Council, Syria regards the very existence of Israel
as an ongoing act of aggression. This uncompromising
hostility has led a long succession of Syrian rkgimes
since 1948 into repeated acts of armed aggression
against Israel, with the attendant destruction and
suffering on both sides.

“Aggression is the use of armed force by a State”
against the sovereignty, territorial
integrity
or
political independence of another State, or in ;rny
other manner inconsistent with the Char&r of thr
United Nations, as set out in this Definition.
“Explancrto~y

note:

In this Definition

the term

‘State’:
“(~0.1,s used without prejudice to questions of
recogmtion or to whether a State is a Member of the
United Nations”.

is5* One of the basic principles of the Charter of
the United Nations iS that States are prohibited in
their international relations from the use or even
thyea!. Of force. If a State violates this fundamental
prrnclple of the Charter-as Syria has done without
interruPtion since 1948 bY alternately
using and
threatening force against my country-such
violation cert:iinlY does not create any rights for the vialater. Moreover, under Article 2, paragraph
3, of the

Article 2 goes on to state:
“The first use of armed force by a State in contravention of the Charter shall constitute prirm
fiwicl evidence of an act of aggression . . .’ ‘.
It is quite evident why the representative of Syria
should have omitted any reference to those articles.
He knows, as do all of us, that this is precisely the
14

c&duct that his country has been guilty of over the
past 33 years in its attitude towards Israel. Since the
Definition of Aggression so clearly incriminates
his
country, he simply disregards it. But if he attempts
conveniently to forget those central provisions of the
Definition of Aggression, this certainly cannot mean
that the rest of us have also forgotten about them.
.158. Here we have before us the root-cause of the
Arab-Israel conflict: the refusal of the rejectionist
Arab countries, including Syria, to come to terms
with Israel’s very existence and its right to exist,
irrespective
of territories
and boundaries.
They
regarded the very establishment
of my country as
illegitimate
in 1948 and they have had no change of
heart in this regard since 1948. They consequently set
out to destroy the State of Israel by force of arms in
clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and of the Definition of Aggression adopted by the
General Assembly. They are still committed to this
criminal objective. Syria and those in the same rejectionist camp with it deny the right of a sovereign
State, a Member of the United Nations, to exist and
to live in peace, as is the right of every sovereign
country and every State Member of the United
Nations.
159. In its sinister designs against Israel, the Golan
Heights were of paramount importance
for Syria,
which made the Heights the most advanced bridgehead for aggression and harassment of Israel and its
population.
Located some 3,000 feet above the Hula
Valley and the Sea of Galilee, the Golan Heights were
transformed by Syria from a peaceful agricultural area
into a gigantic army encampment.
Between 1948
and 1967 Syria turned the Heights into one of the
most fortified, well-equipped military strongholds in
the Middle East. The fire-power concentrated in this
minuscule area, which comprises about 450 square
miles in all, was truly unprecedented.
At the same
time, the civilian population of the Golan Heights was
placed under the direct command and administration
of the Syrian military authorities.

242 (1967). which affirms the right of every State in
the area ti live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries.
163. Instead,
in October 1973 Syria unleashed
another war of aggression against Israel. After having
repulsed Syria’s military thrust towards the Galilee,
Israel, in its quest for peace, withdrew considerably
from territory captured in its defensive operations
during the wars of June 1967 and October 1973. Israel
was entitled to expect that Syria would finally decide
to settle the outstanding differences between our two
countries through negotiations aimed at establishing
peace rather than maintain its policy of armed conflict.
164. Despite all this, and in disregard of Council
resolution 338 (1973), which calls for negotiations for
the establishment
of peace, Syria has refused to go
beyond the agreements on cease-fire and the disengagement of military forces. This Syrian position has
placed the Golan Heights and its inhabitants in a
limbo: if left to the policies of the present Syrian
Government, there would be no peace with Israel for
generations to come.
165. For its part, Israel could not wait endlessly
for Syria to begin to show political will to make peace
with Israel and agree on the establishment of secure
boundaries. Israel could not be expected to maintain
indefinitely
a military administration
on the Golan
Heights merely to accommodate
Syria’s interest in
persistent conflict. Israel had thus to act to normalize
the anomalous situation regarding the Golan Heights.
166. The Golan Heights Law was enacted almost
15 years after the six-day war of June 1967, which
Syria and other Arab States forced upon Israel. This
legislation seeks, in the absence of peace or even of
negotiations aimed at reaching peace, to normalize
the situation in the area in question. The Israeli Law
on the Golan Heights does not in the slightest manner
diminish the rights of the local population, including,
of course, their property rights and their right to education and religious worship according to their traditions.
All these are fully safeguarded.

160. Not only were major parts of Syria’s mobile
armoured and artillery divisions often deployed on
the Golan Heights, but the Syrian army actually turned
scores of tanks, heavy mo.rtars and artillery pieces
into permanent gun emplacements,
which further
added to the fire-power of Syria’s army on the Heights.
The Syrian military
concentrations
on the Golan
Heights
and Syria’s logistic and strategic military
infrastructure
there served Syria as a launching pad
for its attack against Israel in June 1967.

167. It is preposterous that a State like Syria should
be permitted to unleash repeated acts of aggression
with the aim of conquering an’d even destroying a
neighbouring country and then, having been repulsed,
should be permitted to come before the Council to
invoke international
law in a selective and distorted
manner and to find fault with legislation which seeks,
in the absence of peace or even of negotiations aimed
at reaching peace, to normalize the situation in the
area in question.

I6 I. It will be only appropriate to recall in this connection
that Syria bore a heavy responsibility
for
Precipitating
the events that led directly to the sixday war of June 1967.

168. This Syrian attitude violates not only the basic
notions of equity but also Article 2, paragraph 2, of the
Charter which states:

162.
After the six-day war, Syria refused to accept,
and to date has refused to accept, Council resolution

“All Members, in order to ensure to all of them
the rights and benefits resulting from membership,
15

determination-words
that have never been used by
the Israeli representative
in this chamber: the establishme.nt of a Palestinian State and the return of the
Palestinian refugees of 1948 and the displaced persons
of 1967. He ignored that part, because the Camp David
accords deny the Palestinians the right to self-determination, the iight to return to their homes and the right
to establish a State in their homeland. That is selectivity. That is distortion of the law of nations.

shall fulfil in good faith ‘the obligations assumed by
them in accordance with the present Charter.‘+
169. In conclusion, I should like to express the hope
that any further consideration by the Council of
this matter will focus constructively on the attainment
of peace through negotiations between the States
directly concerned and on the prevention of the threat
or use of force. In this connexion, I shouId like to
repeat here again that for its part the Government
of
Israel stands ready, now as always, to negotiate
unconditionally
with Syria, as with its other neighbours, for a lasting peace in accordance with Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

175. The aggression--’ ’ the Syrian aggression against
Israel of 5 June” -is described by Dayan himself, who
said the following a year after the June 1967 war:
“Our fathers reached the frontiers that we recognized in the partition plan of 1947”-that
they
recognized, not the United Nations.

170. Let the representative of Syria address himself
at last to this call rather than engage in his deliberate
distortions of this history of the Arab-Israeli
conflict,
including the history of Syria’s ongoing aggression
against my country. I made this call three times before
the Council last month. The representative
of Syria
has remained conspicuously silent on it. I therefore
reiterate before the CounciI my call to Syria to ‘start
negotiations with Israel, in compliance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). And let me express
the hope that this time the representative
of Syria
will not dodge this issue, which is the real issue before us.
171, The PRESIDENT

(inferp~rrliorz

sian): I shall now call on representatives

“Our generation reached the 1949 frontiers, but
the six-day generation”-the
six-day-war generation-”
was able to reach Suez, Jordan and the
Golan Heights in Syria. This is not the end, for after
the present cease-fire lines there will be new lines;
but they will be extended beyond the Jordan River,
maybe to Lebanon and perhaps central Syria as
well.”
176. Mr. Mordecai
Bentov, member of the Israeli
Cabinet during the 1967 war, was quoted by Al Hmnislztnccr on 14 April 1971 as having said:

from Ruswho wish to

speak in exercise of their right of reply.

“The entire story of the danger of extermination
was invented in every detail and exaggerated CI
posteriori
to justify the annexation of new Arab
territory.”

172. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
I find myself in a very strange situation: the Israeli
representative is trying to write my statement for me.

177. If Syria was the aggressor, why did Israel not
bring its case to the Security Council? Israel never
dared to face the Council because Israel was being
systematically
condemned
by the Council before
1967 for its acts of aggression against the demilitarized
zone guaranteed by the Security Council. They had
annexed the demilitarized
zone against the will of the
United Nations,
despite the Council’s decision to
prevent them from doing that.

173. The Definition of Aggression, work on which
was started in 1933 owing to threats directed at the
Soviet Union, was negotiated for 33 years. Syria
had the honour of being a member of the Committee
that drafted resolution 3314 (XXIX),
which contains
that definition. That resolution also was seen as an act
of aggression by those who defy the principle of self+
determination,
a principle which has never been
mentioned in any Israeli statement. That is selectivity: that is true selectivity. That is falsification.
Therefore, I request, through you, Mr. President,
the Secretariat to distribute the Definition
of Aggression as an official document of the Security Council,
so that no one can say that Syria has selectively chosen
the articles that suit its purposes, For that resolution
applies to every act of Israel since 1948. That is my
first point. No one can dictate to Syria how to write
its statements, because we know the pertinent provisions relating to this situation-that
is, annexation
of territory by force; and occupation is the use of force.

178. Do we not have the right to have an army on
the Golan Heights to defend ourselves? Do we not e
have the right to prevent Israel from committing acts
of aggression in the Golan Heights? This is all in the
reports of the United Nations.
179. I do not want to take up the Council’s time, but
I have to quote an American source-a very scholarly
source-because
whatever I said in my statement
before was a rebuttal of this claim which Israel is still
trying to sell to the world and which no one believes,
I quoted resolutions adopted by the Council unanimously-with
the vote of the United States. The representative of Israel said that Syria was the aggressorhe is condemned here and Syria is the aggressor. I do
not understand this logic, I really do not.

174. I do not think that the Israeli representative
was
listening while I was speaking. I explained to everyone
present here what is Syria’s vision: a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace based on the principle of self16

180. This scholarly study states:
“Although
the Golan Heights represents an
important part of the over-all Arab-Israeli conflict,
too little effort has been made to ascertain the facts
of this much-misunderstood
issue and to analyse
Israeli arguments for retaining the Heights which
have been so widely and uncritically
accepted in
the West over the years. The Israelis allege that:
(1) before the 1967 war Syrian guns on the Heights
frequently
shelled ‘without
provocation’
Israeli
farm settlements in the Hula plains below; and (2)
these Heights were vital to Israel’s national security,”
It goes on to state:
“How valid are these contentions and do they
give Israel the right to retain the Heights?

“UNTSO
repeatedly reported
serious problems in the demilitarized
for the following reasons:

** ‘Briefly stripped, so far as possible, of technicalities, the question at issue may be put thus:
The Israelis claimed sovereignty
over the . . .
zone. They then proceeded,
as opportunity
offered, to encroach on the specific restrictions,
and so eventually to free themselves, on various
pretexts, from all of them . . . The Israelis in fact
exercised
almost complete
controt over the
major portion of the [demilitarized]
zone through
their frontier police , . . This was directly contrary to article V of the General Armistice Agreement and the “authoritative
interpretation”
of
it [by Ralph Bunche].’
“(2) ‘The progressive extension of Israeli cultivation towards the East’ at the expense of the
Palestine Arab farmers and cultivators in the zone
precipitated
Palestinian
‘opposition
to what they
considered as encroachment
on their land’. United
Nations officials frequently warned Israel that her
armed encroachments not only were illegal but also
would provoke incidents;
but Israel disregarded
these warnings. It was these iJlega1 and provocative
armed encroachments
that led to the great majority of incidents-first
with the Palestinian farmers
and then, on occasion, with Syrian gunners on the
Golan Heights when they tried to help the vastly
out-gunned Palestinian farmers who were forcibly
pushed off their lands. As General van Horn concluded in his book:

“The most reliable and authoritative
sources of
information
about the incidents which took place
in the Golan Heights and Syrian-Israeli Demilitarized
Zone areas prior to the 1967 war came from the
many reports made to the United Nations by the
United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization
(UNTSO) and the United Nations Chairmen of the
Syrian-Israeli Mixed Armistice Commission(MAC)”
-which
Israel has boycotted since 1951. “All
UNTSO officials and MAC Chairmen,
and the
United Nations observers involved, who were responsible not only for discouraging incidents, but
also for investigating
and reporting to the United
Nations on the incidents which took place, came
from pro-Israeli Western countries and were handpicked by pro-Israeli
Governments.
None came
from any pro-Arab States. As a result, the Arabs had
greater reason to be concerned about their impartiality than the Israelis. Moreover,
two former
UNTSO Chiefs-of-Staff, Lt. Gen. E. L. Burns of
Canada and Maj. Gen. Carl von Horn from Sweden
provided further detailed, first-hand, and authoritative accounts of incidents between Israel and
Syria in their books, Between A& and Israeli and
Soldiering for Perwe”I am sure that the Israeli representative
these two books, I am absolutely sure.

no right to fortify and send military personnel and
equipment into the zone. In summarizing
the situation, General Burns wrote:

” ‘[Israeli
encroachments
were], of course,
part of a premeditated
Israeli policy to edge east
through the demilitarized
zone towards the old
Palestine border [with Syria] and to get all the
Arabs out of the way by fair means or foul (with
the help of “border police” in “armoured
vehicles”). In fact, the Israelis never observed the
rules of the Armistice Agreement, which allowed
only limited numbers of locally recruited civilian
police in the demilitarized
zone. Instead, a patrol
from the border police of the State of Israel would
arrive, usually in an armoured
vehicle . . . It
was hardly surprising the Arab farmers should
feel . . . threatened.’
”

has not read

that the most
zone developed

J81. I could continue this quotation until nine o’clock.
However, I said everything in my statement, if it is read
carefully-but
of course it will not be read by the
Israelis.

“(I)
Major differences arose over the legal
status of the zone. Israel claimed sovereignty over
all of it; seized the greater part of it; set up fortifications in it; and sent heavily armed frontier potice
and some heavy military equipment to it. Not only
Syria, but the United Nations and the United States
(including Ralph Bunche, who helped write the
Syrian-Israeli General Armistice Agreement) denied
Israel’s claim to sovereignty and held that she had

182. The point is the following. I ask the Israelis,
through you, Mr. President: Has Israel rescinded that
Jaw which annexes the Golan? The Council demanded
that Israel rescind this annexation. Has Israel done so
or not? Why does the Israeli rejection appear in three
official documents? Why should we hear on the radio
and on television that Israel will not cede the Golan
17

--

190. perhaps 1 am ,,ot well versed in the internitBt
matters of Zionism, and I hope I am not being ~~cc.ltx~rik
of misquoting because the Israeli l-eprescntiiti~t~ WIShca
to do soa 1 would remind him of Mordecai EIOod* lt’
quoted by the .~ttn&ty Titncs. He is or he ~1s rvith thr
Israeli army, As quoted in the .~~/tltl(l?’ ritll(‘-v On Ifi Jt’f>
1976, he said the fo]]OWing:

back to Syria even with a peace tre*atY? These are
questions that I am putting to the Israeli rePresentaLives, through you, Mr. President.
j83. Mr, BLUM (Israel): I will not go on until
10 ,o’clock; I will try to be very brief indeed.
184, The representative of Syria has asked that the
Definition of Aggression adopted by the General
Assemb]y
[re.yolution 3314 (J’XWj antzex] be circ”Iated as an official document of the SeCUritY Council.
1 have no objection to that. I have been under the
impression-a
false impression, apparently-that
resolutions of the General Assembly are official
documents of the United Nations, but I may be wrong
on that, and, as I have said, I have no objection to the
Definition being disseminated also as a document of the
Security Council.

“Sixteen years of planning had gone into thtrhc
initial 18 minutes, We lived for the plan: ivc slept ‘bn
the plan; and we ate the plan corlStant]y.
*“c pcrz
fected it.”
That was the Israeli aggression of 5 JUW 1%7-

185. The representative of Syria complained that
he could not follow my logic. I find that most regrettable, I would have preferred that he did. The Middle
East would have been a better place to live in.

191. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The st;ttefWnt of the rWrc*
sentative of Syria is most useful, for it bus at long lit\1
clarified for all of us that Syria rejects Security C’~lftlcil resolution 338 (1973). He has explained
that the
Golan Heights Law is the reason for that rc;jecti~~n.
One wonders what prevented Syria from ne#lti~~tiW
with us under resolution 338 (1973) between 197.7 rind
1981, So much for resolution 338 (1973).

186. But the problem concerns not only divergencies
with regard to logic. Statements of “fact” have been
most inaccurate. I am not going to detain the Council
at length on this.

192. Resolution 242 (1967) was conspicuously
:l]~!nt
from the statement of the representative
of Syria,
We must therefore conclude that Syria continues tcl
reject that resolution.

187, But to give just one example, it has been stated
that Mr. Mordecai Bentov was a member of the Israeli
Cabinet in 1967. Mr. Mordecai Bentov was not a
member of the Israeli Cabinet in 1967. I mention this
simply so that members of the Council can judge for
themselves how much weight should be given to other
statements of “fact” made by the representative of
Syria. I would suggest that they treat them with some
caution, cm pm0 so/is,

193. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I have no intention of
derailing the discussion that has been taking plxc;
my main purpose is to focus on the fund;lmentnf
qt~ustion that the representative of Syria hat; posed hcf;clrr
the Council. He has asked directly whether Israel ha\.
as demanded by the Security Council, rescinded it%
decision to apply its laws, jurisdiction
rind everything
else to the Golan Heights. That question has not hoen
answered.

188. There is, though, one problem that has remained
pending-not
surprisingly. And that is the fact that
the representative of Syria has chosen once again to
ignore my appeal to him-not made through YOU,
Mr. President: I have no inhibitions about appealing
to him directly-to sit down with us and negotiate
Peace in accordance with Council resolutions 242
( 1967) and 338 (1973). He has studiously avoided any
reference to those resolutions. I believe that this
evasion speaks for itself.

194. NOW, to give a factual background: I am all tcllr
familiar with the period between 1948 and 1957 ii\
regards the seasonal border incidents that ~currccl
as a result of Israel’s violation of the demilit:lrizcd
zone and its licence in cultivating the land theru. ‘I3ut
that is beside the point. We are now focusing c>n fhc
annexation of the Golan Heights.
1%. 1 have a few figures here that are more tcllinft
than any semantic arguments. The representative
of
Israel has stated that the annexation law in na way
undermines the rights and religious freedoms cjf t]~
inhabitants of the Golan. May I remind him that llcfc>re
the occupation of 1967 the inhabitants
of the &]an
numbered close to 180,000. At present the inhabitants
of the Golan Heights number a tiny 12,000 to 13.~~0.
Now, bY and through this annexation, 200,000 Syrian
citizens--Syrian
citizens that have inhabited
the
Go]an Heights for thousands of years--are doonled to
remain dispersed refugees outside their territory.
in
additiony before the passage of this notorious ]egis]ationy the number Of Settlements established
by Israel
Onthe Golan Heights was 33. That means co]onization.

189. Mr. EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic): It
Seems that the Israeli representative is not willing to
listen. In my statement I mentioned resolution 338
( l973); I said that Israel had violated it. It has violated
the cease-fire accepted under resolution 338 (~973). So
resolution
338 (1973) has one meaning for Israel
-everything
except that of annexation. According to
his lo6icl it can be interpreted as he wishes. reso]ution 3% (1973) could be used to negotiate’ Syria’s
capituiationThat will never happen. Resolution 338
( I g7!) was violated by the latest Israeli act, We said
that In our statement, and we repeat it now.
18

The amount of land confiscated before the annexation
amounted to 680,000 dunams. It was the livelihood of
the 200,000 Syrian citizens of the Golan Heights that,
as I said in my earlier statement, are now squatting
in refugee camps somewhere in Syria.
196. At present there exists an additional
plan.
It is an on-going process. It is a plan to establish
another 18 to 22 new Israeli settlements by the end
of 1985 to absorb 30,000 new Israeli settlers.
197. How can the representative of Israel talk about
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) when his country’s authorities have-in
the Golan Heights, in everexpanding Jerusalem, and in Gaza-torpedoed
the
letter and spirit of those resolutions? They have literally transformed a very substantial part of those
territories into Israeli settlementsa and colonies.
198. We are not playing with figures. If we want to
go to the genesis of this affair, resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) were adopted by the Council to resolve
the consequences of Israel’s aggression of 5 June
1967. They address the core of the entire Middle East
problem, namely, the fate of the Palestinian people.
According to the figures of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, there are at least l&50,000 Palestinian refugees.
As I said, almost 40 per cent of the land of the newly
occupied territories-I
mean the territories occupied
since 1967-has been effectively colonized, and the
process is proceeding relentlessly.

-201. The representative
of Israel has claimed that
Syria-and
I’ assume, for that matter, other Arab
countries-has
adamantly refused to negotiate a peace
settlement.
Need I remind anyone-any
members
of the Council-that
the Arab countries co-operated
very closely with every emissary sent by the United
Nations, beginning with the late Count Folke Bernadotte, who was murdered in the streets of Jerusalem
by Israeli terrorists.
They then co-operated,
more
substantively, through the Palestine Conciliation Commission, which after lengthy and exhaustive negotiations initialed the Lausanne Protocol,4 which would
have resolved the entire conflict more than three
decades ago, thus sparing the Council the numerous
meetings which it has had to hold to deal with this
problem.
202. The Lausanne Protocol was based on United
Nations resolutions, and all the Arab States, including
Syria, Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon-and,
I might
add, Israel-initialed
it. But then, as soon as it was
sent to the late Mr. Ben-Gurion,
he turned it down and
the Israelis turned theirs backs on the peace process.
203. As for the incidents which occurred between
1948 and 1967, I happen to have been the chief representative of Jordan in the Jordanian-Israeli
Mixed
Armistice Commission
and the Council can see from
the record that a relentless effort was made by Israel
to undermine the Armistice
Agreements by constant
attacks against and massacres of the population
of
Arab villages.

199. If we come to the fundamental problem, namely,
what the Palestinians’
rights are, we should never
overlook the decision which brought Israel into existence. I am referring to General Assembly resolution
181 (II), which provided for the establishment of a
Palestinian Arab State-the
boundaries of which are
meticulously
delineated in the files of the United
Nations-alongside
an Israeli state. The Israelis, of
course, paid lip service to that Assembly resolution
because they knew that the Palestinian people, who
constituted two-thirds of the population of Palestine
and owned at least 94 to 95 percent of the total lands
of Palestine, would of course be disenchanted with
the dismemberment
of their country, as any other
country in the world would be disenchanted with the
dismemberment
of its territory,

204. I am sure that many of us remember the brutal
attack against Qibya-and
the hero of this was none
other than General Ariel Sharon-in
which heaven
knows how many men, women and children were
slaughtered in cold blood. I remember the attack on
Naharayim.
I remember numerous others-we
used
to spend 24 hours on end in that no man’s land where
the Armistice Commission
met, in less comfortable
surroundings
than those in which we are meeting
today. The whole thing culminated
in a brutal attack
against the village of As Samu in 1966. This, I am
certain, was a prelude to and an exercise for the planned
1967 war, which Israel was determined
to launch at
the right moment, when it had obtained the green
light-which
it did-from
the United States.
205. As a matter of fact, one of the Israeli newspapers, 5 or 10 days after the 1967 war, said that “We
had set a trap for King Hussein and he fell right into
it”. As a matter of fact, he did not, but we honour
our word as a country and we were bound by a collective security agreement with Egypt and the Syrian
Arab Republic. We would have given our all, regardless of consequences, to honour our word and our
pledge, because if we did not act collectively
then
Israel would simply single out each Arab country and
either occupy it, devastate it or colonize it.

200. What did the Palestinian
people do? They
expressed their disenchantment verbally, and this was
taken by the Israelis as an excuse to implement their
long-prepared plans to conquer by force and through
massacres-I
need hardly remind members of Qibya
and scores of other places. That was the reason why
those Palestinian farmers were forced at bayonet point
to leave their land. This enabled the Israelis to take
over four-fifths of Palestine-an
area far in excess of
anything the General Assembly resolution had recommended should be their share of the territory-and
the
Assembly had recommended that the Security Council
implement this.

206. I turn now to the question of a Geneva conference. It is Israel which says that there are no Pales19

tinian people, that they are phantoms, that they do not
exist. But there are Palestinian people. It so happens
that there are 4 million Palestinians, who have inalienable rights, and Israel is refusing to entertain the idea
that there are Palestinian people. It seems to have
forgotten that Jews and Palestinians lived side by side,
in amity during the British Mandate, except for a few
occasions during which there were disturbances and
clashes, Now if the Palestinian people are deprived of
the right to participate in a Geneva conference or in
any United Nations conference and to exercise their
right to self-determination, their right to return to their
homes and to their homeland-rights
which are universally recognized-how can we achieve peace? As
I said, peace in Mr. Blum’s thinking
seems to be
abject surrender, But we shall never do so even though
we spend a whole millenium in the diaspora. If he
wants to have a meaningful peace, then he must take
into account the dispossessed and the dispersed, the
Palestinian people who have been suffering for almost
34 years-and now, added to that, 200,000 Syrian
citizens who are also suffering as refugees,
‘
207. According to the Camp David accords, there
are 1.2 million Palestinians inside. But what about the
rest? Does not every human being want to go back
to his home, to his house, to his little plot of land?
Is that not what the General Assembly decided in
resolution 194 (III) and has reiterated every year? Is
that not the inalienable right of every human being on
’ this planet, if we are to give meaning and substance
to what is unfortunately abused in the name of human
rights? These are the impediments to peace and nothing
else. All the Arab countries are anxious to achieve a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace, provided it is
just, comprehensive and therefore lasting.

210. I have listened with great admiration
to the
statement of the representative of Jordan, which was
apparently prompted by a spirit of solidarity with his
Syrian colleague- and I hope it is permissible to use
in this chamber. Let me just
the term “solidarity”
say that this sense of gratification at this display of
solidarity was greatly augmented by the fact that, to
the best of my knowledge, some 10 months ago Syria
and Jordan broke off diplomatic relations. Perhaps the
representative
of Jordan could inform us about the
current state of diplomatic
relations between the
two countries. The official Jordanian pretext for that
severance of diplomatic
relations at the time was the
alleged kidnapping by Syrian agents of Jordan’s Charge
d’affaires in Lebanon, ,Hisham Moheissen. Jordan
claimed at the time that he had been abducted by
Syrian agents acting under the orders of Rifa’at Assad,
the brother of Syrian President Hafez Assad.
211. Jordan later called for an overthrow of the
“sectarian
and dictatorial
regime of Hafez Assad
through armed and other means”, as reported by the
Christitrn Science Monitor of 7 March 198 1. Syria, in
turn, accused Jordan of planning to break with the
PLO, and on 16 March Saliman Kaddum, a member
of the Baath national leadership in Damascus, in a
broadcast over Damascus Radio, called for the Jordanian people “to topple down Hussein’s regime”.
Earlier, on 1 February, an editorial in Tishrirz, the
official Syrian army newspaper, declared that “the
overthrowing of the Hashemite monarchy is an urgent
national duty”. In the light of all this, it is all the more
remarkable
and gratifying
that the representative
of Jordan should have displayed a sense of solidarity
with a rkgime that called for the overthrow of his
Hashemite monarch.
212. In conclusion, let me say I think it was clear
from my earlier statement that our call for peace
negotiations
in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) is not confined
to Syria: it applies also to Jordan. And I invite the
representative of the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan
to take note of this.

208, Mr. BLUM (Israel): The representative
of
Jordan, under the guise of the right of reply, gave his
standard speech. I shall try to confine myself to a brief
reply.
209. The representative of Jordan referred to General Assembly resolution 181 (II). What he forgot to tell
the CounciI is that all the States members of the League
of Arab States, including Transjordan, as his country
was called at the time, in 1947 categorically
rejected
resolution 181 (11). Those States formally
reserved
their complete freedom of action and then set out to
destroy that resolution by the illegal use of force from
the moment of its adoption. While that aggression was
successful in destroying resolution 181 (II), it failed
in its other avowed purpose, namely, that of crushing
the State of Israel. The fact that the Arab States failed
in their armed aggression in 1948 and 1949 aimed at
destroying Israel does not, however, legitimize
their
violation of international law, At the same time, that
armed aggression precludes them from invoking in any
form whatsoever the benefits of a General Assembly
resolution which they both rejected and destroyed
by force of arms.

213. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic): I am
amazed that the Zionist entity of Israel should send as
representative
here someone who is not informed.
Syria’s relations with Jordan are normal; they are
friendly relations. The name of the representative of
Jordan is well known. It is in diplomatic books; it
can be found in the library. His name is Houssein
Hammamy.
214. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I am sorry, particularly being a new member of the Council, to be
speaking more than once, but I am doing so now in
the exercise of my right of reply.
.
215. To begin with, I wish to inform the representative of Israel that the name of Jordan before the
creation of Israel was the Hashemite Kingdom of
20

.

Jordan, and not Transjordan.
A treaty was signed
between Jordan and the United Kingdom in 1946,
and the Kingdom became known as the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan-and
not Transjordan. Moreover,
its name is still-and
will continue to be-the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan-and
not the Palestinian State
of Jordan-because
Palestine is Palestine, and Jordan
is Jordan.

entered small portions of territories allocated to the
Palestinian
Arab State on the urgent pleas of the
100,000 citizens of Jerusalem, both new and old, who
were taking sanctuary in the walled city of Jerusalem,
to save them from being massacred, especially after
what had happened in scores of villages.
219. Let us all remember that out of 500 Palestinian
towns and villages, the Israelis, immediately
after
they took over the country,
destroyed 400: they
!*azed them to the ground. It was therefore the duty,
and it was a last-minute decision by the Arab Governments, to send small contingents of their troops. And
what contingents?
I believe the Syrian contingent
was a mere 5,000. The Jordanians had no more than
4,000 or 5,000. They had to mobilize. The Egyptians
had 16,000 to 17,000 all together. Iraq sent a brigade.
All together, they would not have amounted to 25,000,
while the Israelis had 80,000 highly organized and well
equipped troops. This was revealed by a renowned
British journalist,
Mr. Kimshe,
in March of 1948.
There was no secret about it. This is the reason why
the Palestinians are still deprived of their inalienable
rights.

216. Now, coming to General Assembly resolution
I81 (II), I have stated that the people of Palestine,
like all other peoples in the world, had indicated their
disenchantment
with the dismemberment
of their
country. And they constituted two-thirds of the population. As a matter of fact, the United Nations Special
Committee on Palestine had recommended two resolutions, one of which provided for a federal state,
and not partition. It is tremendously difficult for any
citizen who has been living in a country for ages to
see his country partitioned. But did we in any way,
even forcibly, prevent the Security Council, which was
assigned the responsibility of implementing
that resolution, from implementing
it? Even if we had wanted
to, we were totally disarmed under the British Mandate-and
I am sure that my colleague Sir Anthony
Parsons would corroborate
my statement on this
score; whereas we discovered three days after the
adoption of that resolution 181 (II) that there was an
army consisting of 80,000 troops, in addition to the
splinter terrorist groups such as the Irgun Zwai Leumi,
the Stern and others, fully armed and equipped,
against totally unarmed civilians. And the Israelis
immediately
started attacking Arab towns and villages, even while the British were still in Palestine.
It was not the Palestinian people who were the impediment to the establishment
of the Palestine Arab
State in accordance with resolution 181 (II): it was the
Israeli pre-emptive plans to torpedo the implementation of that resolution while paying lip-service to it
on the basis of their forecast that the Arabs themselves-the
Palestinians
particularly-would
reject
it as a matter of principle.

220. But then, even assuming that the Palestinians
were disenchanted with the dismemberment
of their
country, did they or did they not accept the Lausanne
Protocol, which was based on that very decision? And
every Arab delegation
had Palestinian
representatives within it, including some of the leadership, such
as the late Mr. Ahmed Shukhairy,
Mr. Farid Assad
and other representatives
who were witness to that
Lausanne Protocol on the basis of resolution 181 (II).
And yet we are told that we have always been against
achieving a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace.
221. Not a single refugee has been allowed to return
to his home. The Israelis have been claiming that we
deprived them of the possibility of visiting the Wailing
Wall. I know that when I served on that Armistice
Commission-and
even a few years before that-a
special committee
was formed under which all the
Israelis, all the Jews, would have been allowed to
visit the Wailing Wall, Mount Scopus, Hebrew University and Hadassah Hospital in exchange for restoring our natural water resource of Ras el Ayn in the
plains of Palestine; restoring electricity,
which happened to be located in West Jerusalem, then occupied
by the Israelis; and opening the Jerusalem-Bethlehem
road. And yet, Mr. Eitan, when appealed to by the
Conciliation
Commission
on Palestine to make a
special arrangement
for Jerusalem,
replied to the
Commission
by saying: “Well, it is too early now to
come to an agreement on this problem. Let us give
more time to the General Assembly to discuss the
issue”,
It was not us: we made a solemn declaration
that the Holy Places would be accessible to adherents
of all religious faiths, but the Israelis deliberately
refused to make a similar solemn declaration because
they did not want, and they still do not want, a single
Palestinian
Jerusalemite
to return to his home-a

217. It is therefore incorrect to state that we tried
to destroy Israel. We had no arms with which to
destroy Israel: there were no Arab armies. As a matter
of fact, the Jordanian army was stationed in the most
strategic areas throughout the breadth and length of
Palestine.
It was the Jordanian army which was
guarding the broadcasting station in which I was
working near Mir Sherem. It was the Jordanian army
which was in West Jerusalem-which,
incidentally,
is two-thirds Arab-built and Arab-owned, even though
the Israelis took it over. It was in El Alamein military
camp-one
of the biggest-on
the road to Bethlehem.
It was in Haifa; it was everywhere.
218. Yet, out of deference to the United Nations
resolution on partition, the Jordanian army promptly
-and to the last man-withdrew
from the territory of
Palestine, across the River Jordan, and not a single
soldier remained by 15 May. The Jordanian army re21

home built with his sweat and his savings-in
Jerusalem.

West

222. I hope that the members of the I’ouncil
take cognizance of what I have just stateci.

will

223. The PRESIDENT
(interprcfrrlion
.fiorn !&ISsion): The representative of Israel has asked to speak.
Before calling on him, I should like to ask him whether
he insists on speaking now, bearing in mind the lateness of the hour, or whether he could speak at out
next meeting.
22$. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President,
speak for less than two minutes.

I intend to

225. The PRESIDENT
(interpretutiorz
from
sim): I call on the representative of Israel.

Rrrs-

---that is, April 1949--“the
changed to Jordan.”

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

name

was

227. Now, I have ‘Teen startled all along by the
constant attempt of the representative
of Jordan to
reject the characterization
of his country as the Palestinian Arab State. He tries constantly to de-Palestinize his country. But it is not only a matter of puzzlement for me. I am afraid an element of l>se-tnc!jpsti
is also involved, for the representative
of Jordan,
which is the Palestinian
Arab State, seems to be
repudiating his own King. As recently as a fortnight
ago in an interview with the Lebanese weekly or/Nrrhnr el-ArtrAi Wcrl-Duali, King Hussein reiterated
that: “The truth of the matter is that Palestine is Jordan
and Jordan is Palestine.”
That was reported in a news
dispatch of the Arab Gulf News Agency of 28 December 1981-that is to say, last week.

226. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I really hesitate to take issue
with the representative of Jordan with regard to the
proper name of his country. I have before me The
Middle Enst rind North Afiiccr 1981-1982 and I should
like to quote a few lines from the entry on Jordan,
on page 494:
“In September 1948 an Arab Government
was
formed at Gaza under Egyptian tutelage and this
was answered from the Trans-Jordanian side by the
proclamation in December in Jericho of Abdullah
as King of all Palestine. In the following April”

country’s

NOTES

L Carnegie
Conventions

Endowment
cud

for International

Peace,

of I899

1907

Dcclnmtions

Oxford University Press, 1915).
.’ United Nations, 7’,~oty Scrips,
4 See

Qffkirrl
HOC Politic~I

Records
of ihc
Commiftw,

Ad
annexes A and B.

vol.
Gmc~~~l
Annex,

md

The

Hqur

(New York,

75, No. 973, p. 287.
A.vs~n~hly,
Fourth
Sassion,

vol. II, document A/927,

8X-60989-April

1989-2.050
