S/2020/994

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 October 2020
Original: English

Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2499 (2019), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2020 and request ed me to report
on its implementation every four months. The present report provides an update on
major developments in the Central African Republic since my previous report of
16 June 2020 (S/2020/545), as well as recommendations on the extension of the
mandate of MINUSCA.

II. Political situation
Political developments
2.
The political environment was dominated by preparations for the general
elections, the first round of which is scheduled for 27 December, and was increasingly
characterized by tension and mistrust amid a slippage in the electoral calendar. During
a national address on the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary of the independence of
the Central African Republic, on 13 August, the President, Faustin -Archange
Touadera, called for national unity and reaffirmed his commitment to holding timely,
credible, inclusive and peaceful elections. He praised the Government and health-care
personnel for their efforts in responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, despite the opposition’s continued criticism of the Government’s
shortcomings in addressing the pandemic.
3.
In June, the Constitutional Court rejected the Government’s proposed
amendment to the Constitution to extend the tenures of the incumbent President and
legislators in the event of an instance of force majeure that would delay the timely
holding of elections, noting that any slippage in the constitutional timelines should
derive from broad national consultations and consensus. Certain political parties and
civil society have since been requesting the Government to convene a national
dialogue on the electoral calendar. In September, President Touadera convened a
series of meetings on the electoral process with opposition parties, former Heads of
State and the forces vives, comprising political parties, civil society and religious and
other leaders. The Coalition de l’opposition démocratique 2020 declined to attend a

20-12863 (E)

141020

*2012863*

S/2020/994

meeting held on 17 September, accusing President Touad era of imposing rushed and
poorly prepared elections.
4.
As at 1 October, 15 political leaders, including three women, had announced
their intention to contest the presidency. Recent announcements included President
Touadera of Mouvement des coeurs unis, former President François Bozizé of Kwa
Na Kwa, former Head of State Catherine Samba-Panza as an independent, former
Prime Minister Anicet Georges Dologuélé of Union pour le renouveau centrafricain,
Alexandre Ferdinand Nguendet of Rassemblement pour la République, Éloi
Anguimaté of the Convention nationale, Augustin Agou of the Parti de la renaissance
et du développement durable and former Prime Minister Mahamat Kamoun of the Be
Africa Ti é Kwè party. Some of the opposition candidates voiced strong criticism of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
promising to adopt a strong posture towards armed groups.
5.
The National Assembly adopted six bills during its second special session, held
from 25 June to 9 July, including a revised national budget accounting for expenditure
related to the COVID-19, the revised treaty of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the statute on the National Electoral Authority. During
a third special session, held from 18 to 23 September, the Assembly passed into law
a revised electoral code, with exceptional, derogatory provisions, accounting for
delays in electoral operations while maintaining constitutional timelines. Despite the
recommendations from the consultative framework and advocacy from the United
Nations and other partners, the Government did not include in its draft bill provisions
that would allow Central African refugees in neighbouring countries to participate in
the polls as they had during the 2015–2016 electoral cycle. A significant number of
parliamentarians from the opposition boycotted the vote.
6.
My Special Representative for the Central African Republic and Head of
MINUSCA, Mankeur Ndiaye, engaged national stakeholders and international
partners in line with the good offices and political facilitation mandate of MINUSCA
to encourage constructive and inclusive political dialogue. To complement those
efforts, in July the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, Smaïl Chergui,
engaged with Prime Minister Firmin Ngrébada on the political and p eace processes.
On 24 September, Messrs. Chergui and Lacroix, together with the Chairperson of the
ECCAS Commission, Gilberto Da Piedade Veríssimo, issued a joint call for national
stakeholders to engage in political dialogue with a view to achieving conse nsus and
creating conditions conducive to the holding of peaceful, credible and inclusive
elections within constitutional timelines.
7.
On the margins of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, I convened
a high-level meeting on the Central African Republic with President Touadera, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, and the
Chairperson of the ECCAS Commission, during which international partners
expressed their support for advancing the political process, including the organization
of the elections.
Electoral preparations
8.
Voter registration operations were launched by the National Electoral Authority
on 30 June, with a target of 2.5 million voters registered, as compared with 1.9 million
registered during the previous electoral cycle. As at 1 October, voter registration had
been completed in Bangui and in all prefectures except Nana-Mambéré and OuhamPendé, with a total of 1,768,634 Central African citizens registered, including 822,415
women (46.5 per cent).

2/20

20-12863

S/2020/994

9.
Delays in the registration process were attributed to insecurity and obstruction
by the anti-balaka, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, Front populaire pour la
renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) and Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique (UPC)
armed groups in the Haute-Kotto, Ouaka and Ouham-Pendé Prefectures. The National
Electoral Authority also experienced several challenges, including technical,
operational and logistical issues, which had a negative impact on its operations. These
included the limited capacity of the Authority, difficulties in accessing certain remote
locations, technical issues with registration tablets and problems with timely payment
of registration agents.
10. On 7 August, President Touadera promulgated a statute on the composition and
organization of the National Electoral Authority, the mandate of whose members was
due to expire on 24 December. A selection commission comprising representatives
from political parties, public administration and civil society was established to
appoint the 11 new members for a seven-year term. Four current members of the
Authority will remain in their positions until the conclusion of the electoral process,
alongside the new members, as envisioned in the new statute of the Authority.
11. The political opposition and other stakeholders criticized the National Electoral
Authority over its perceived lack of transparency and ineffectiveness, denouncing
ineffective communication with the population about the registration process. Despite
efforts by the Authority to enhance its operations, opposition parties and other
national actors continued to raise concerns.
12. President Touadera signed a decree on 4 September reviving a consultative
framework, bringing together representatives from public admin istration, political
parties and civil society to discuss issues related to the electoral process. That forum
complements the strategic committee chaired by the Prime Minister that monitors
electoral operations. The consultative framework held meetings on 10 and
16 September, during which participants discussed progress and challenges in the
electoral process and proposed possible solutions.
13. MINUSCA, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) undertook initiatives to encourage women to participate as voters and
candidates in the electoral process. Eleven women’s situation rooms are being
established in Bangui and the prefectures to strengthen the role of women in
monitoring the elections.
14. On 2 October, the Prime Minister signed the integrated security plan for the
elections. The Government plans to contribute $1.25 million of the plan ’s $4.1 million
budget. The plan covers the roles of national security actors, as well as MINUSCA
military and police components.
15. As at 1 October, the basket fund managed by UNDP of $41.8 million to support
the presidential, legislative and local elections through 2022 faced an overall gap of
$19.5 million, including $5.7 million for the upcoming presidential and legislative
elections.
16. Disinformation campaigns in the media targeted MINUSCA, including its
leadership, in connection with its electoral assistance and good offices mandate. The
Mission strengthened its efforts to sharpen strategic communication and to prevent,
monitor and respond to hate speech and incitement to violence as and when required.
Peace process
17. President Touadera promulgated four laws adopted by the National Assembly in
line with the Government’s commitments under the Political Agreement. The
legislation provides for the status of political parties and the opposition and a pension
20-12863

3/20

S/2020/994

regime for former elected presidents. The President also promulgated the first of a
two-part decentralization law establishing part of the legal framework for local
elections planned for late 2021. Local elections were last held in 1988.
18. The implementation and monitoring mechanisms of the Political Agreement
functioned with COVID-19-related precautionary measures. To facilitate
communication and coordination between national and local mechanisms, MINUSCA
supported videoconference meetings between the Ministry of Territorial
Administration and Decentralization and prefects. The agendas of these meet ings
have expanded to cover COVID-19 response and electoral operations.
19. In May, national defence and security forces and administrative authorities
deployed to the Bamingui-Bangoran Prefecture for the first time since 2013. The
prefects of Nana-Grébizi and Ouaka launched security committees in Ippy and Mbrès
on 9 and 17 August, respectively.
20. On 16 June, the executive monitoring committee of the Political Agreement held
a session to discuss violence in Ndélé, Bamingui-Bangoran Prefecture; it was agreed
to prioritize transitional justice in resolving the conflict between the Gula and Runga
ethnic groups. National efforts were complemented by local mediation initiatives.
21. During its 24 July session, the executive monitoring committee focused on
violence in the west involving Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, which had
suspended its participation in the Political Agreement follow -up mechanisms on
5 June. Members condemned the ongoing violations by Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation, alliances between armed groups, the use of landmines and the
obstruction of humanitarian assistance.
22. Limited progress was made in establishing the joint security units provided for
under the Political Agreement. As at 1 October, a total of 216 members of the unit s
had been deployed from Bouar to Paoua, while approximately 346 remained in Bouar.
They had not yet started their operations, however. Four members of Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation left the joint security unit camps with their weapons in
Paoua and Bouar on 14 July and 14 September, respectively. On 18 August, the
strategic committee of the joint security units identified Birao, Bria, Ndélé and Kaga
Bandoro as locations for future deployments.
23. On 30 July, the Prime Minister met in Bangui with UPC leader Ali Darassa.
According to the Government’s meeting record, which the UPC leader signed, Ali
Darassa committed to respecting the redeployment of State authority, engaging in
disarmament and demobilization operations and allowing the free movement o f
electoral agents, in exchange for being allowed to re-establish himself in Bambari
with a direct line of communication with the Prime Minister. In a communiqué dated
1 August, Ali Darassa disputed that account, indicating that he had signed the meeting
record under duress.
24. On 21 August, the African Union led a delegation including representatives from
the Government, ECCAS and MINUSCA to meet with Mahamat Al -Khatim, leader
of the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC), in Kaga Bandoro to
encourage the armed group to take further concrete action to implement the Political
Agreement.
25. On 2 September, some signatory armed groups issued a joint communiqué
denouncing shortcomings in the implementation of the Political Agreement. They
requested that the Chairperson of ECCAS, President Ali Bongo Ondimba of Gabon,
organize an arbitration by the Heads of State of the region as provided for in article 34
of the Agreement.

4/20

20-12863

S/2020/994

26. On 8 August, the interreligious platform held a national day of prayer, fas ting
and forgiveness. Cardinal Dieudonné Nzapalainga and Imam Oumar Kobine Layama,
the leaders of the platform, travelled to Bossangoa, Ouham Prefecture, on 2 and
3 September to encourage reconciliation and social cohesion between Christian and
Muslim communities.
Local dialogue and reconciliation
27. Local stakeholders continued efforts related to community dialogue and
peaceful dispute resolution, with MINUSCA support. Between 18 June and
23 August, several community dialogues were held in the north-east focusing on
ending violence in Ndélé, restoring peace and freedom of movement, and facilitating
reconciliation between ethnic groups. On 27 August, the Gula and Runga factions of
FPRC signed a non-aggression pact in Ndélé that will be monitored by the pr efectural
security committee and MINUSCA. The situation in the area has since remained
stable.
28. Notwithstanding the positive progress in Ndélé, the divide between the Gula,
Runga and Sara factions of FPRC in Haute-Kotto and Bamingui-Bangoran
Prefectures continued to deepen, resulting in communal tensions. The FPRC Gula
faction and armed Gula elements affiliated with the Rassemblement patriotique pour
le renouveau de la Centrafrique (RPRC) and the Parti pour le rassemblement de la
nation centrafricaine (PRNC) disagreed over leadership in Haute-Kotto Prefecture,
undermining social cohesion between communities and heightening fears of attacks.
29. On 29 July, the prefect of Bamingui-Bangoran organized a meeting between
Gula and Runga leaders, who agreed to involve armed elements in the reconciliation
process. On 14 August, following clashes on 23 July that resulted in civilian
displacement and property damage in Ouadda, local implementation and technical
committees successfully mediated between Gula and Sara combatants. The situation
remains fragile, however.

III. Security situation
30. As at 1 October, there were 644 recorded violations of the Political Agreement,
an increase from the 504 recorded during the previous reporting period. Civilians
were the targets of 342 violations, followed by illeg al military activities (125),
restrictions of movement (114) and obstruction of the deployment of State
institutions, humanitarian organizations or the United Nations (63). FPRC perpetrated
most of the reported violations (179), followed by Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation (144), UPC (91), MPC (87), anti-balaka elements (73), RPRC (34), the
national armed forces (27), Révolution et justice-Sayo Branch (6), Parti pour le
rassemblement de la nation centrafricaine (1) and Mouvement des libérateurs
centrafricains pour la justice (1).
31. In the west, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation maintained its aggressive
posture against State authority and MINUSCA, perpetrating a series of attacks in
Nana-Mambéré and Ouham-Pendé Prefectures. On 15 June, MINUSCA launched a
military operation to reduce the threat posed by Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
to civilians and encourage the group’s compliance with the Political Agreement.
32. Three national army soldiers were killed during combat with Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation on 21 June in Besson, Nana-Mambéré Prefecture. On
7 July, a MINUSCA vehicle was damaged in Gedzé, Nana-Mambéré Prefecture, by
an anti-tank mine suspected to have been laid by Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation.
This has been the first reported use of landmines in the Central African Republic. One

20-12863

5/20

S/2020/994

peacekeeper was killed and three others injured on 13 July during an operation against
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation. The group ’s leader, Bi Sidi Souleymane (also
known as Sidiki), issued several communiqués denying the involvement of the group
in these acts and calling for dialogue with the Government to de -escalate tensions.
33. On 17 June, Sidiki signed a memorandum of understanding w ith Ali Darassa of
UPC to formalize the armed groups’ alliance to coordinate security and transhumance
in their respective areas of operations.
34. Following pressure from the national armed forces and MINUSCA, by late July,
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation had retreated from its strongholds in Besson and
Niem, Nana-Mambéré Prefecture, as well as in Koui, Ouham-Pendé Prefecture,
towards the Cameroonian border, while continuing illegal activities.
35. On 9 July, MPC leader Mahamat Al-Khatim announced the establishment of a
“Markounda coalition”, comprising the Mokom anti-balaka wing, FPRC and
Révolution et justice-Sayo Branch. The stated objective was to bring peace and
security to Ouham Prefecture while facilitating the extension of State authority. On
20 September, Ali Darassa of UPC signed an agreement with Mahamat Al-Khatim to
establish a permanent framework of consultation.
36. Armed groups competed for control of mining sites near Markounda and Kouki
in Ouham Prefecture. UPC reinforced its presence in late July, creating tensions with
MPC. Several MPC combatants, along with their leader, left their Kaga Bandoro
stronghold in early August to install new leaders and control mining sites in the west.
37. In the east, the movements of UPC intensified, posing a threat to civilians on
the Mboki and Bambouti axes and around Zemio. On 10 August, UPC elements
blocked access to voting centres in Zemio, demanding money from Central African
refugees who had crossed the border from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
register. On 13 August, UPC killed a trader, triggering the suspension by local traders
of all movements and supplies of basic goods from South Sudan. On the same day,
reported UPC combatants kidnapped a medical team providing measles vaccination s
in Mboki, Haut-Mbomou Prefecture; the team was released unharmed on 17 August.
38. In Bria, anti-balaka elements targeted the PK3 camp for internally displaced
persons. On 13 July, FPRC obstructed the recruitment of internal security forces and,
on 16 July, unidentified elements burned their auxiliary checkpoint at PK3. In
Yalinga, FPRC elements obstructed the activities of electoral agents on 3 August,
jeopardizing the voter registration process. They abducted three National Electoral
Authority staff on 27 August, who were released the following day.
39. In Ouaka Prefecture, a series of clashes between anti-balaka elements and the
national armed forces was reported in August, near Grimari. MINUSCA and the
national armed forces subsequently reinforced their patrols to protect civilians and
reduce the threats posed by local anti-balaka elements.
40. In Bangui, crime increased in the PK5 neighbourhood. MINUSCA facilitated
dialogue between the Government and former members of self-defence groups that
had been dismantled in December 2019. On 30 August, a new police station was
established in PK5, with support from MINUSCA.

IV. Regional engagement
41. During its ninth extraordinary session, held on 3 and 4 June in Libreville, the
ECCAS Council of Ministers discussed the report of the Central African Early
Warning Mechanism on the political and security situation in the Central African

6/20

20-12863

S/2020/994

Republic. The Council of Ministers decided to submit the revised report to the current
Chairperson of ECCAS for consideration.
42. In June, President Denis Sassou Nguesso of Congo met with former President
Bozizé and former President of the National Assembly Karim Meckassoua in
Brazzaville as part of efforts to advance political dialogue in the Central African
Republic.

V. Humanitarian situation
43. Intercommunal tensions, armed group clashes and attacks against civilians and
humanitarian workers continued to have an impact on the humanitarian situation.
More than half of the population, or 2.6 million people, required humanitarian
assistance. Some 2.4 million people suffer from acute food insecurity, including
750,000 in the emergency phase.
44. As at 1 October, approximately 659,000 Central Africans were internally
displaced and an additional 623,909 were living as refugees in neighbouring
countries.
45. Humanitarian activities remained acutely underfunded. As at 1 October, the
2020 humanitarian response plan was 50.8 per cent funded, with a gap of
$272.4 million out of the required $553 million, including $153 million for the
COVID-19 response.
46. COVID-19 exacerbated existing vulnerabilities and the humanitarian crisis in
the country. National authorities undertook mitigation measures to limit the spread of
the disease and decentralize their response, with su pport from the World Health
Organization (WHO) and other partners. As at 1 October, the Government had
confirmed 4,850 cases of COVID-19, including 1,915 recoveries and 62 deaths.
MINUSCA initiated 162 activities throughout the country to train 3,844 socia l
mobilizers, including 956 women, whose job is to raise awar eness regarding
COVID-19. MINUSCA also worked with the African Women Leaders Network to
enhance the participation of women in COVID-19 prevention and response efforts.
47. Violations perpetrated by Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation since May in
Mambéré-Kadéï, Nana-Mambéré and Ouham-Pendé Prefectures resulted in the
displacement of approximately 15,000 people and impeded humanitarian access. The
onset of the rainy season also constrained access by road to some areas. In
coordination with the Government, humanitarian actors took measures in Bangui and
areas along the Ubangi river prone to flooding during the rainy season.
48. Following a reported deterioration in human indicators in several locat ions in
Ouaka, Haute-Kotto and Haut-Mbomou Prefectures, the deployment of humanitarian
air assets in August facilitated the delivery of multisectoral assistance in these areas.
49. The Central African Republic continued to be one of the most dangerous plac es
in the world for humanitarian workers. There have been 267 attacks against
humanitarians in 2020, resulting in 2 deaths and 20 injuries, a decrease in comparison
with the 388 incidents during the same period in the previous year. The most
dangerous areas are Ndélé, followed by Bangui, Batangafo and Kaga-Bandoro. Health
personnel were attacked and abducted, and health facilities pillaged, by armed groups
on the Mbrès axis in June and in Mboki in August.

20-12863

7/20

S/2020/994

VI. Protection of civilians
50. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team, in coordination with
humanitarian organizations, continued to strengthen national capacity to protect
civilians by identifying risks, challenges and solutions to address threats against
civilians. The deployment of international surge teams to locations without a
permanent presence of international staff remained impracticable owing to
COVID-19 restrictions, although community liaison assistants remained active in
these areas. Protection coordination mechanisms and predeployment training were
conducted virtually.
51. MINUSCA maintained a robust posture to deter threats against civilians.
Measures to mitigate harm were integrated into planning to prevent the risk of
civilians being adversely affected by operations against armed g roups. Following the
reported use of landmines by Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation in July, United
Nations entities enhanced information-sharing and developed mine awareness
training modules.
52. MINUSCA strengthened contingency plans for field office s to ensure that
physical security and humanitarian risks were anticipated, including in the event of
large-scale civilian displacement near its premises. Specific threats were analysed,
including possible violence resulting from the electoral process and transhumance.

VII. Extension of State authority and the rule of law
Extension of State authority
53. As at 1 October, 111 out of 174 territorial authorities were operational, including
15 of 16 prefects, 62 of 71 sub-prefects, 15 of 16 prefectural secretaries-general and
31 of 71 sub-prefectural secretaries. Local authorities increased their role in
COVID-19 preventive measures, electoral preparations and conflict resolution,
including of transhumance-related conflict, with support from MINUSCA.
54. MINUSCA supported the Government in implementing its restoration of the
State authority strategy adopted in September 2017, including by providing
predeployment training and capacity-building for 45 sub-prefectural secretaries and
15 prefects.
Security sector reform
55. The military justice system was formally launched on 17 July with the swearing
in of personnel for the Bangui military jurisdictions, including eight assessors and
alternates, four registrars and one clerk. MINUS CA continued advocacy efforts to
strengthen security sector oversight mechanisms, resulting in disciplinary action
against six soldiers for serious misconduct. MINUSCA applied the human rights due
diligence policy in all its support for non-United Nations forces.
National armed and internal security forces
56. As at 1 October, the national forces had a total strength of 8,651 (including 660
women); 2,095 soldiers were deployed in 25 locations, an increase of 171 since my
previous report. The recruitment of 2,600 defence forces has been ongoing since July.
Logistical, financial and command and control challenges continued to compromise
deployments. During the reporting period, the leadership of the national defence
forces undertook disciplinary action in six major incidents of misconduct, leading to
three dismissals from the armed forces.

8/20

20-12863

S/2020/994

57. As at 1 October, 1,464 police officers (344 women) and 2,164 gendarmes (228
women) were deployed to all prefectures except Basse-Kotto, including 8 police
officers and 20 gendarmes deployed in June to Ndélé, 30 police officers deployed in
July to Bambari and 3 police officers and 4 gendarmes deployed in September to
Bangassou. In July, the European Union Advisory Mission in the Central African
Republic began providing strategic advice to the internal security forces as a
complement to MINUSCA support. In August, a junior non-commissioned officer in
the gendarmerie was demoted for serious misconduct.
58. On 13 July, national authorities launched the recruitment of 1,000 in ternal
security forces, with support from MINUSCA. On 28 August and 1 September, 1,350
police and gendarmes, including 395 women, graduated. They were deployed on
15 September in units charged with the management of public security and public
order. A national committee is working on the integration of ex-combatants through
the ongoing recruitment process.
59. The Mine Action Service (UNMAS) promoted weapons and ammunition
management best practices through the installation of six specialized storage facilit ies
for the defence forces. Thirty-seven defence and internal security forces were trained
in weapons and ammunition management, including self-sustained explosive
ordnance disposal. UNMAS provided risk awareness sessions on mines, improvised
explosive devices and explosive remnants of war to United Nations and humanitarian
actors to support the coordination of and response to the new explosive ordnance
threat.
Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
60. From 22 June to 25 September, the Government, with support from MINUSCA,
conducted disarmament and demobilization operations in Bria, Kaga-Bandoro and
Ndélé for 773 combatants from Séléka rénovée pour la paix et la justice, MPC, RPRC
and Mouvement des libérateurs centrafricains pour la justice, including 40 women,
during which 579 weapons of war, 16,134 rounds of ammunition and 174 explosives
were collected. National authorities conducted a series of preparatory field missions
to Birao, Bria and Kaga Bandoro to secure the agreement and cooperation of armed
groups and obtain lists of eligible combatants prior to launching operations.
61. MINUSCA, in collaboration with WHO, expanded its community violence
reduction initiatives to support prefectural health authorities in Bambari , Bangassou,
Bangui, Bossangoa, Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro in their response to COVID -19.
Justice and the rule of law
62. On 9 July, President Touadera appointed 21 judges, including 4 women, the first
expansion of the judicial workforce in four years. Five national magistrates were
sworn in to the Special Criminal Court on 23 July, completing the complement of
national judges. The Court increased the number of its investigations into serious
human rights violations cases from 8 to 10. MINUSCA provided technical support to
national judicial institutions investigating serious crimes perpetrated in vi olation of
the Political Agreement, including cases related to violence in Nana -Mambéré
Prefecture in July. Under its urgent temporary measures mandate, MINUS CA arrested
and handed over to national authorities nine persons suspected of having committed
crimes in seven cases between 1 June and 1 October.
63. On 23 June, 149 newly recruited civilian correctional personnel, including
17 women, were deployed to six prisons countrywide, with mentoring and training
support from MINUSCA. On 2 October, 151 prison officer candidates who had been
medically screened on 18 September began training, with support from MINUSCA

20-12863

9/20

S/2020/994

and UNDP. The Mission also provided support for prison infrastructure projects in
Bangui, Sibut and Mbaiki.
64. MINUSCA and UNDP assisted the Ministry of Justice in implementing
COVID-19 mitigation measures at prisons. As at 1 October, there were no active cases
of COVID-19 in Central African prisons. To that date, there had been six confirmed
cases, including one death, at Ngaragba prison.

VIII. Human rights and the fight against impunity
65. Between 1 June and 1 October, MINUSCA documented 156 incidents of human
rights violations. The majority were related to attacks on civilians perpetrated by
armed groups, which affected at least 271 victims ( 138 men, 42 women, 23 boys, 16
girls, 1 unidentified minor, 37 unidentified adults, and 14 groups of collective
victims), resulting in 19 conflict-related civilian deaths. This represents a decrease in
recorded human rights violations compared with the sam e period in 2019, when 304
reported violations affecting 494 victims occurred, although COVID -19 restrictions
had an impact on the ability of MINUSCA to conduct investigations. Signatory armed
groups continued to perpetrate most of the violations and abuse s; they were involved
in 134 such incidents, affecting 229 victims. State agents, primarily members of the
national armed forces, were involved in 14 violations, affecting 18 victims.
Transitional justice
66. On 30 July, President Touadera, Prime Minister Ngrébada and the Minister of
Humanitarian Action and National Reconciliation co-signed two decrees setting in
motion the establishment of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation. The decrees pertain to the appointment of the 11 me mbers of the
selection commission, as well as the functioning of the selection commission and its
technical secretariat. MINUSCA, UNDP and the Peacebuilding F und are providing
financial and technical assistance to the selection commission. On 6 September, the
selection commission launched a call for applications to recruit commissioners.
Conflict-related sexual violence
67. From 1 June to 1 October, MINUSCA documented 60 incidents of conflictrelated sexual violence affecting 84 victims (45 women and 39 g irls), including 55
rapes or attempted rapes, 1 of which resulted in death, 4 forced marriages and 1 case
of sexual slavery. While representing a decrease from the previous reporting period,
there was reduced monitoring as a result of COVID-19 restrictions. There was a
temporary reduction of services offered to victims of sexual violence in some
locations as some organizations withdrew personnel owing to the pandemic. Many
survivors expressed concern about seeking treatment at hospitals owing to
COVID-19.
68. Conflict-related sexual violence was particularly prevalent in the Nana-Grébizi
and Ouham-Pendé Prefectures, with the majority of recorded incidents allegedly
perpetrated by Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation and MPC. In July, eight women
abducted from Kounkaya, Ouham-Pendé Prefecture, were repeatedly raped while
being held hostage for a week.
69. MINUSCA worked with the national network for the protection of victims and
witnesses of sexual violence to monitor the situation in Kaga Bandoro and assess the
risk of reprisals against victims by individuals who had been accused or convicted of
rape and released in May to prevent the spread of COVID -19 in prisons. The Mission

10/20

20-12863

S/2020/994

trained 98 elements of the defence forces on human rights and conflict -related sexual
violence in Obo and Paoua.
Children and armed conflict
70. On 15 June, President Touadera promulgated the child protection code, which
criminalizes the recruitment and use of children by armed forces and groups and
considers associated children as victims. The enforcement of the code’s provisions
will enhance the protection of children in accordance with international standards.
71. There was a decrease in the reported number of children separated from armed
groups compared with the previous reporting period; however, this can be attributed
to the COVID-19-related restrictions, which resulted in challenges in undertaking
verification, as well as a decrease in reintegration partners. Thirteen children (2 girls
and 11 boys) were separated from MPC, and 22 children (3 girls and 19 boys) were
verified as associated with FPRC and await entry into a reintegration programme.
Nine children escaped from the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
72. MINUSCA, with the support of local authorities and peace committees in th e
Haut-Mbomou Prefecture, initiated a dialogue with an LRA splinter group on the
release of abducted children and the prevention of grave child right s violations.
73. The pandemic resulted in increased risks of child recruitment and use, and
sexual violence, including as a result of school closures. MINUSCA raised awareness
among 11,032 community members, including 6,688 children and 2,215 women, on
these risks and protection against COVID-19.

IX. Socioeconomic situation
74. COVID-19 continued to have adverse socioeconomic effects despite the
progressive lifting of preventative measures. Central Africa Economic Outlook 2020,
issued by the African Development Bank Group in July, projected an annual loss of
3.7 percentage points in economic growth and a d eterioration in the budget balance
by 3.7 per cent of gross domestic product. This could depress public investment
required to sustain growth. The partial closure of the borders with Cameroon and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo contributed to a 46 per cent increase in prices for
imported goods, including basic food items. As most basic goods are imported and
many people rely on informal sectors for their livelihoods, a protracted impact on the
economy is projected.
75. Some $2.44 billion has been disbursed in accordance with the national
reconciliation and recovery plan, representing a 62 per cent implementation rate,
including in projects to improve the health, road, energy and sanitation infrastructure
in several locations, including Bambari, Bangassou, Bangui, Berberati, Bria and
Paoua. There is a gap of $151.1 million out of the $159.6 million required for the
United Nations COVID-19 socioeconomic response and recovery plan.

X. United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
Military component
76. As at 1 October, the strength of the MINUSCA military component stood at
11,525 (4.8 per cent women), out of an authorized strength of 11,650 personnel,
including 310 staff officers (47 women) and 151 military observers (42 women). It
comprised 12 infantry battalions; 1 high-readiness battalion; 1 battle group; 1 special
20-12863

11/20

S/2020/994

forces company; 1 quick reaction force company; and enabling units, specifically
1 military police company, 3 multi-purpose engineering companies, 1 reduced
engineering company, 1 airfield construction engineering company, 1 heavy transport
company, 3 level II hospitals and 1 level I hospital, plus a forward surgery module, 3
helicopter units and 2 uncrewed aerial vehicles. A quick reaction unit was deployed
to Kaga Bandoro in September and an armed helicopter unit, including a special
forces platoon, is scheduled to be deployed in Bangui in December.
Police component
77. As at 1 October, the MINUSCA police component stood at 2,033 per sonnel
(12.6 per cent women), out of an authorized strength of 2,080, including 332
individual police officers (104 women) and 1,701 personnel (152 women) in 11
formed police units and 1 protection support unit. The protection support unit, along
with six formed police units, are in Bangui under the joint task force. Five formed
police units are deployed in Bambari, Berberati, Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro. Part
of the Kaga Bandoro unit is deployed in Batangafo. On 27 June, parts of the formed
police units from Bangui and Bambari, which had been temporarily deployed to
Ndélé, returned to their duty stations.
Civilian personnel
78. As at 1 October, 1,478 civilian personnel (26 per cent of whom were women),
including 250 United Nations Volunteers and 105 government-provided correctional
personnel, served with MINUSCA, representing 90 per cent of 1,622 authorized
positions.
Status-of-forces agreement
79. On 2 and 3 September, three MINUSCA personnel were arrested by gendarmes
in Bangui, following an issue involving the import of explosive materials required for
the work of UNMAS which had been in the custody of the gendarmerie since August.
They were released on 4 September, following intervention by MINUSCA leadership.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
80. As at 1 October, 171 security incidents involving United Nations personnel had
been recorded. Ten personnel died, including one during a hostile attack and eight
from various illnesses. Fourteen personnel were injured, including six in hosti le
attacks, one in a fire, five in road traffic accidents and three in a work accident.
Movements of MINUSCA personnel were restricted countrywide owing to security
risks and COVID-19 prevention measures.
81. As at 1 October, 463 cases of COVID-19 among Mission personnel had been
confirmed, with 378 recoveries, 73 active cases, 9 repatriations and 3 deaths. The
United Nations country team registered 45 confirmed cases with 42 recoveries.
82. As part of the Mission’s COVID-19 response, wearing masks, handwashing and
the use of hand sanitizers, as well as social distancing, are mandatory for all
personnel. The Mission’s Medical Section continues to undertake contact tracing and
immediate isolation of both confirmed and suspected cases, as well as quarantine
measures for all close contacts. Force medical officers have implemented an improved
follow-up mechanism for military patients, with frequent visits to the isolation
facilities to follow up on all confirmed cases.
83. National authorities, with MINUSCA support, opened one new investigation
into attacks against peacekeepers, bringing to 18 the number of ongoing
investigations.
12/20

20-12863

S/2020/994

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
84. Between 1 June and 30 September, eight allegations of sexual exploitat ion and
abuse were reported against military personnel. A total of 17 sexual exploitation and
abuse allegations have been recorded in 2020, a majority of which relate to incidents
allegedly committed in prior years. No other allegations of serious miscondu ct were
recorded.
85. Training on my zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and other
serious misconduct continued to be delivered remotely owing to the pandemic.
Military and police representatives conducted joint camp assessments within t he
framework of the Mission’s comprehensive misconduct risk management.
86. In partnership with communities and target groups such as sex workers ’
associations, MINUSCA carried out outreach activities and supported the community based complaint network. MINUSCA used local radio stations, telephone service
providers and advertising spots to disseminate messaging on protection from and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse. All newly identified victims were referred
for needs assessment and assistance, while previously recorded victims continued to
be assisted.
Support considerations
87. MINUSCA continued to reduce its environmental footprint. The 49 wastewater
treatment plants are fully operational. Composting of solid waste and remediation of
the Kolongo landfill project continued, coupled with waste segregation. Waste
segregation and composting were extended to the Bangassou, Bossangoa and Bria
field offices. Owing to COVID-19-related movement restrictions, MINUSCA was
unable to install new meters to monitor its water usage or power consumption.
Action for peacekeeping and performance optimization
88. MINUSCA prioritized its efforts to advance a political solution to the conflict,
primarily through the good offices and political engagement of my Spec ial
Representative, which facilitated political dialogue among national stakeholders and
enhanced coordination and joint action among international partners. United Nations
partnership with other international stakeholders, including the African Union,
ECCAS and the European Union, was strengthened, including through joint
engagement and messaging, resulting in unified support for the political process.
MINUSCA also continued its efforts to enhance the effective participation of women
in the political process, including in the elections.
89. The suspension of internal flights in March owing to the pandemic hindered the
completion of performance evaluations for contingents, although training activities
continued. Evaluations resumed in June for Bangui-based contingents.
90. Since June, 11 formed police units and the protection support unit have been
re-evaluated. Performance improvement plans for each unit addressed identified
shortfalls of equipment and self-sustainment, ammunition and perimeter security. All
units were assessed to perform satisfactory overall, although one unit was rated below
satisfactory in sustainment. Progress on improvement measures is monitored
quarterly.
91. MINUSCA increasingly used the analysis and findings from the Comprehensive
Performance Assessment System to support decision-making and strategy
formulation. The Mission also developed tools to support COVID-19-related planning
and analysis, including a dashboard tracking the virus and a timeline tracking events
and Mission interventions, including quick-impact projects.

20-12863

13/20

S/2020/994

XI. Financial considerations
92. The General Assembly, by its resolution 74/284 of 30 June 2020, appropriated
the amount of $937.7 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021. As at 1 October, unpaid assessed contributions to the
special account for MINUSCA amounted to $194.6 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at th at date amounted to
$2,757.1 million. Reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment, as
well as troop and formed police personnel, has been made for the period up to
31 March 2020 and 30 June 2020, respectively, in accordance with the quarterly
payment schedule.

XII. Observations and recommendations
93. In December, the people of the Central African Republic will go to the polls to
choose who will lead their country and represent them in the National Assembly for
the next five years. The success of these elections, and the peaceful and democratic
continuation or transfer of power, will be a critical milestone. It is an opportunity to
consolidate the democratic gains and constitutional order established in 2015 –2016
through elections ending the political transition and setting a new path, firmly away
from the successive crises of the past. Throughout, the Central African people have
demonstrated persistent resilience; they deserve their leaders’ absolute resolve in
pursuing peace.
94. National stakeholders, particularly political leaders, should seize this
opportunity to consolidate the country’s democratic foundations for lasting peace. I
call on them to constructively engage in political dialogue on the electoral process
and to refrain from any action, including hate speech and incitement to violence, that
could undermine efforts to create a conducive environment for successful elections
within the constitutional timelines. I welcome in this regard the revival of the
consultative framework, which provides an essential platform for national
stakeholders to discuss and overcome challenges through dialogue and consensus.
National authorities should therefore make every effort to ensure that it functions
effectively.
95. The consolidation of constitutional order requires that all citizens be able to
enjoy their rights. I therefore deeply regret that the recent amendments of the electoral
code did not extend the franchise to over 250,000 Central African citizens of voting
age who are living as refugees in neighbouring countries, despite continual advocacy
and concerted political engagement with Central African authorities. The United
Nations will continue engaging with Central African authorities, and partners,
including neighbouring countries, to promote the participation of refugees in the
electoral process, while supporting their voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable
return and reintegration. This would be crucial in efforts to advance peace and
reconciliation, and address structural violence in the Central African Republic.
96. The inclusiveness of the electoral process has to also extend to the full and
meaningful participation of women, including as candidates. I welcome the fact that
nearly half of registered voters are women. Every effort has to be made to ensure that
conditions are conducive to their peaceful participation in the polls. I encourage all
parties and coalitions to take bold measures to champion the representation of women
in elective positions and to seek to exceed the constitutionally mandated 30 per cent
minimum of female candidates.
97. The availability of resources is crucial for sustaining the electoral process. I
welcome the generous support already provided for the basket fund managed by
14/20

20-12863

S/2020/994

UNDP, and complementary electoral assistance projects by partners. Nevertheless,
the gap remains significant. The basket fund is facing a possibly crippling liquidity
challenge that could impede time-sensitive electoral operations. I appeal to the
international community to urgently contribute financially to prevent any delays in
the holding of elections.
98. I remain convinced that the Political Agreement is the only viable path to peace
and stability in the Central African Republic. It is in the interest of all Central
Africans, and their neighbours, to ensure that the peace process is successful. I call
on all candidates in the upcoming elections to effectively commit to continuing to
advance the peace process and implement the Political Agreement, as part of their
political platforms. It is also crucial for all signatories to redouble their efforts to
implement the Agreement in good faith and resolve differences peacefully.
99. I note with the regret the increased violations of the Political Agreement by
signatories over the past four months. This has tragic consequences for the population
and national stability. In March, I called for a global ceasefire amid the COVID -19
pandemic. That appeal was heard by some armed group leaders in the Central African
Republic. I appeal to all armed group leaders to heed that call, and to adhere to their
commitments under the Political Agreement for the benefit of the communities they
profess to protect.
100. I remain deeply concerned by the resurgence of violence in the north -west.
Three national soldiers and a peacekeeper were killed while engaged in operations to
protect civilians. Far too much civilian death, destruction and displacement has
occurred. I strongly condemn these heinous acts and recall that attacks against United
Nations peacekeepers may amount to a war crime. The escalation by non-State armed
actors, which included the use of landmines, is unacceptable and counterproductive
to addressing any legitimate grievances. There is no justification for the use of
indiscriminate weapons, which must immediately stop and be investigated to hold
perpetrators accountable.
101. The relative stability prevailing in the north-east is positive, particularly the
continued respect for the weapons-free zone established in Birao earlier this year. I
welcome the proactive efforts of the Government, working closely with MINUSCA,
to promote local peace initiatives and the deployment of State authorities.
102. At the same time, far more remains to be done to reconcile communities so that
they can live together in peace. I call on all armed group leaders to cease expansionist
activities and to explore opportunities for engaging constructively in ongoing
processes with significant potential to positively shape the future of the country,
including political reforms that will result in expanded political space, as well as the
2021 local elections. It has been more than 30 years since communities last had the
opportunity to choose their local officials, so these elections have significant potential
for advancing efforts to address grievances and promote democratic representation
and local governance.
103. COVID-19 has deepened inequalities, further devastating the health, lives and
livelihoods of the most vulnerable, including women and children. It has also
deepened the humanitarian crisis. I greatly appreciate the work of humanitarian
actors, who are providing communities with life-saving assistance and basic services
in a challenging and dangerous environment. I strongly condemn the upsurge in
attacks against humanitarian workers that put critical life-saving operations at risk.
These operations also remain seriously underfunded, including for the COVID -19
response. I appeal to donors to urgently contribute to fill the $272.4 million gap in
the humanitarian response plan.

20-12863

15/20

S/2020/994

104. Sustaining peace in the Central African Republic will require that its people
finally realize tangible dividends of peace. I call upon those eventually chosen by
citizens to lead the country to prioritize, in consultation with local actors,
development efforts aimed at building communities and harnessing the potential of
the people to meet their basic needs, to realize their personal aspirations and to
participate meaningfully in building their State and society. I call on development
partners in the international community to explore options for scaling up their efforts,
including to support the building of critical infrastructure that will improve people ’s
lives. Historically marginalized segments of society, including women and children,
require particular attention, as do areas of the country that remain isolated and
vulnerable.
105. I am encouraged by progress in extending State authority through the
deployment of civilian and security personnel, which is an essential step towards the
Government assuming its responsibilities towards its citizens. I welcome ongoing
efforts by national authorities to strengthen the territorial administration countrywide
and to recruit, train and deploy defence and security forces that will also play a role
in the integrated security plan for the elections. These elections will be an important
test of Central African institutions, and its defence and security forces in particular,
and a step towards gradually assuming full responsibility for the protection of
civilians. This will, however, require serious, sustained commitment from national
authorities, with support from partners.
106. National institutions, including the judicial system, should be strengthened to
ensure that they are professional, accountable and inclusive of all segments of society.
This is particularly essential for security institutions, which have to urgently improve
their command and control, logistics, oversight and vetting, with support from
partners, and ensure that they are promptly held accountable for any violations,
particularly abuses of civilians, including members of minority communities. I also
urge partners to work closely together to ensure that support is well coordinated in
order to increase synergies and lessen the risk of major strategic gaps. MINUSCA
will continue its multifaceted support for the defence and internal security forces,
territorial administration and the judicial and correctional institutions, as mandated.
107. The launch of national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
operations in the north-east is an encouraging step. I welcome the receptivity of some
signatory armed group leaders to mediation and reconciliation efforts, and call on
them to undertake the immediate and unconditional separation of childr en from their
ranks. I applaud the innovative approach of MINUSCA and development actors to
jointly design a project that includes complementary economic dividends. This
approach should be expanded to other areas of the country.
108. While there has been some progress with the special mixed security units, I am
concerned that major strategic gaps have yet to be addressed. All stakeholders have
to prioritize agreeing on a common vision and approach regarding the appropriate
sequencing between the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and
the operationalization of these units, and for their future. I further urge all signatory
parties, with the support of partners, to accelerate the establishment of these units and
ensure appropriate oversight mechanisms. At the same time, it is necessary to
redouble efforts to create sustainable solutions for former combatants, including
opportunities for long-term socioeconomic reintegration or integration into national
security services.
109. Peace cannot be sustained without addressing the continued, rampant impunity
for human rights and other violations, including sexual violence, which is affecting
women and girls. I therefore welcome efforts to strengthen and professionalize the
police, justice and correctional institutions, including the Special Criminal Court, and
16/20

20-12863

S/2020/994

to prioritize the experiences and needs of victims. I am encouraged by progress made
towards establishing the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation, which could be among the most significant opportunities for national
dialogue and healing since the 2015 Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation. I urge
all stakeholders to engage actively and constructively in its establishment and
operationalization.
110. Regional partners, including neighbouring countries, have an essential role to
play in the pursuit of peace and stability in the Central African Republic, beyond their
role as facilitators of the Political Agreement. The stability of the country and the
region are inextricably intertwined. I encourage proactive efforts aimed at regularly
convening bilateral commissions with neighbouring countries and reviving and
reinforcing the tripartite force with Chadian and Sudanese forces, with a view to
strengthening border control and cross-border cooperation. The reform of ECCAS
also offers new opportunities for regional engagement and cooperation, including
with respect to the Central African Republic.
111. The good offices and political engagement of my Special Representative, in
concert with partners and balanced with a robust security posture in the
implementation of the Mission mandate, particularly to protect civilians and to
facilitate conditions conducive to the holding of peaceful elections, have brought
results and will continue. They are a demonstration of the benefits of ensuring that
political work remains at the heart of peacekeeping. It is therefore concerning that
MINUSCA still faces operational gaps, which have become more urgent to bridge in
the light of the pandemic and the imminence of elections. I welcome recent pledges
from troop-contributing countries of aviation and quick reaction capabilities, and
appeal for their expedited deployment, as well as of other capabilities to support
operations and protect civilians and peacekeepers.
112. While important progress has been made in advancing peace and stability in the
Central African Republic, challenges remain. Central Africans will need to redouble
efforts in order to prevent any reversal of the hard-won gains and to continue to
advance towards a better future. The role of MINUSCA in supporting those efforts
remains essential. I therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the
mandate of MINUSCA for one year, until 15 November 2021, at its current military
and police strength, while maintaining the Mission’s mandate, including for electoral
assistance.
113. In conclusion, I wish to express my deep appreciation to my Special
Representative for the Central African Republic and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur
Ndiaye, for his leadership and the proactive performance of his good offices to
advance peace in the Central African Republic. I am grateful for the dedication of
United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel to performing the Mission ’s
mandate in an already challenging context, since compounded by the pandemic. I also
thank troop- and police-contributing countries, donor countries, regional and other
organizations, non-governmental organizations and all other partners for their
invaluable support. Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to the guarantors of the
Political Agreement, the African Union and ECCAS for their steadfast pursuit of
peace for the people of the Central African Republic.

20-12863

17/20

S/2020/994

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic: military and police
strength as at 1 October 2020
Military component
Experts
on mission

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Individual
police officers

Argentina

–

1

–

1

–

–

Bangladesh

11

18

1 279

1 308

–

–

Benin

3

4

–

7

–

21

Bhutan

2

2

–

4

–

–

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

2

–

5

–

–

Brazil

3

5

–

8

–

1

Burkina Faso

–

5

–

5

–

31

Burundi

5

6

741

752

–

–

Cambodia

4

6

204

214

–

–

Cameroon

3

7

748

758

310

30

China

–

2

–

2

–

–

Colombia

2

–

–

2

–

–

Congo

2

10

–

12

138

1

Côte d’Ivoire

–

4

–

4

–

19

Czechia

3

–

–

3

–

–

Egypt

8

23

988

1 019

135

5

France

–

10

–

10

–

2

Gabon

–

–

447

447

–

–

Gambia

4

4

–

8

–

6

Ghana

4

6

–

10

–

7

Guatemala

2

2

–

4

–

–

Guinea

–

–

–

–

–

14

Indonesia

10

9

220

239

140

1

Jordan

3

5

–

8

–

24

Kenya

5

6

–

11

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

–

1

Mali

–

–

–

–

–

17

Mauritania

4

3

449

456

279

–

Mexico

–

–

–

–

–

–

Morocco

2

20

750

772

–

–

Nepal

5

13

719

737

–

–

Niger

1

2

–

3

–

32

Nigeria

–

3

–

3

–

1

Pakistan

11

27

1 211

1 249

–

–

Paraguay

2

1

–

3

–

–

Peru

6

8

203

217

–

–

Philippines

2

1

–

3

–

–

Country

18/20

Police component

20-12863

S/2020/994
Military component
Experts
on mission

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Individual
police officers

Portugal

–

9

179

188

–

9

Republic of Moldova

2

1

–

3

–

–

Romania

–

–

–

–

–

11

Russian Federation

3

10

–

13

–

–

Rwanda

9

19

1 382

1 410

419

24

Senegal

–

5

–

5

280

25

Serbia

2

2

71

75

–

–

Sierra Leone

5

1

–

6

–

–

Spain

–

–

–

–

–

3

Sri Lanka

–

–

110

110

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

–

3

Togo

4

6

–

10

–

26

Tunisia

1

–

–

1

–

18

United Republic of Tanzania

–

5

450

455

–

–

United States of America

–

7

–

7

–

–

Uruguay

–

2

–

2

–

–

Viet Nam

1

5

–

6

–

–

Zambia

7

12

910

929

–

–

Zimbabwe

2

–

–

2

–

–

Total

146

299

11 061

11 506

1 701

332

Country

20-12863

Police component

19/20

S/2020/994

Annex II
Map

20/20

20-12863
