S/2019/373

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 May 2019
Original: English

Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request contained in the
statement by the President of the Security Council of 21 September 2018
(S/PRST/2018/18). It also responds to the Council’s requests for reporting on the
protection of medical care and on conflict and food insecurity, contained in
resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2417 (2018), respectively.
2.
The year 2019 marks the seventieth anniversary of the four Geneva
Conventions, a cornerstone of international humanitarian law. Their adoption in the
aftermath of the Second World War firmly established that those who are not or no
longer taking a direct part in hostilities – the wounded and sick, prisoners of war and
civilians, including civilians living under occupation – must be protected and their
life and dignity upheld without adverse distinction.
3.
2019 also marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265
(1999) and the Security Council’s inclusion of the protection of civilians as an item
in its agenda – a decision motivated, inter alia, by the Council’s “deep concern” at
the erosion of respect for international humanitarian law during armed conflict
(resolution 1265 (1999)). Since then, the protection of civilians has become “one of
the core issues” on the Council’s agenda (S/PRST/2015/23). It has permeated the
situation-specific deliberations and decisions of the Council and resulted in practical
actions intended to strengthen the protection of civilian women, girls, boys and men
affected by armed conflict. It has contributed to building and consolidating a culture
of awareness within the Council and among Member States and the broader
international community of the need to prevent and respond to violations and other
protection concerns.
4.
It is the cause of considerable concern, then, that the state of the protection of
civilians today is tragically similar to that of 20 years ago. In September 2018, the
Security Council expressed “outrage” that civilians continue to account for the vast
majority of casualties in conflict; and at the short- and long-term impact of conflict
on civilians, including forced displacement; the use of starvation as a method of
warfare; unlawful denial of humanitarian access; attacks on humanitarian and medical
personnel, hospitals, and other medical facilities; sexual and gender-based violence;
and intentional damage and unlawful destruction of civilian infrastructure, property
and livelihoods (S/PRST/2018/18) – to which I would add other damage and

19-06775 (E)

090519

*1906775*

S/2019/373

destruction of civilian infrastructure, property and livelihoods which may not
necessarily be intentional or unlawful but the consequences of which are equally
devastating for civilians.
5.
Such acts have been inflicted upon millions of conflict-affected civilians every
day throughout, and prior to, the past 20 years. They will continue for another 20
years, and beyond, without urgent action to grapple with the central challenge of
enhancing and ensuring respect for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, in particular in the conduct of hostilities. The failure of parties to
take constant care to spare civilians in the conduct of military operations and to take
all feasible precautions to avoid, and in any event minimize, civilian casualties
initiates a downward spiral characterized by the death, injury and maiming of
hundreds of civilians in conflicts every month, and by the displacement of thousands
more, forced to flee their homes, communities and livelihoods towards a very
uncertain and tragic fate.
6.
As requested by the Council, the present report, in section II, provides a
summary of achievements and challenges to the United Nations work on protecting
civilians over the past 20 years. Section III reviews the current state of the protection
of civilians and emphasizes the enduring relevance of the protection agenda 20 years
on. Section IV focuses on the central challenge of enhancing respect for the law – the
first of three protection priorities identified in my report of 2017 (S/2017/414) and
discussed in my report of 2018 (S/2018/462) – with a particular focus on the conduct
of hostilities. Section V discusses how the Council and Member States can rise to
meet this challenge and, moreover, strengthen the practical impact of the protection
agenda in the years ahead.

II. Twenty years of protection of civilians: achievements
and challenges1
7.
On 12 February 1999, the Security Council held its first open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, motivated by the brutality of the conflict in
Sierra Leone, ethnic cleansing in the Balkans and genocide and displacement in the
Great Lakes region. At the end of the debate, the Council adopted a presidential
statement in which it expressed grave concern at the growing civilian toll of armed
conflict (S/PRST/1999/6). It noted that civilians account for the vast majority of
casualties and are increasingly targeted by combatants. It acknowledged the relevance
of the issue to the Council and affirmed the need for the international community to
assist and protect civilians affected by armed conflict.
8.
In the statement the Council also requested the Secretary-General to submit a
report with recommendations for improving the protection of civilians. To date, the
Council has considered 14 such reports. These have covered a broad range of issue s
underlining that protecting civilians is not an exclusively humanitarian task but
requires action in the peacekeeping, human rights, rule of law, political, security,
development and disarmament domains. The reports have underlined that efforts to
strengthen protection cannot substitute for political processes aimed at preventing or
ending conflict and building sustainable peace which, as I have emphasized before,
remain the most effective way to protect civilians. The reports contain more than 200
recommendations, addressing such issues as conduct of hostilities, forced
displacement, sexual violence, humanitarian access, engagement with non -State
__________________
1

2/17

For a detailed account of the achievements and some of challenges of the past 20 years, see also
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Building a Culture of Protection: 20 Years
of Security Council Engagement on the Protection of Civilians (forthcoming).
19-06775

S/2019/373

armed groups, accountability for violations, and the protection role of peacekeeping
missions and regional organizations.

A.

Further developing and consolidating the normative framework
9.
Several of these issues have been reflected in landmark resolutions on the
protection of civilians (1265 (1999), 1296 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006), 1894
(2009), 2175 (2014), 2222 (2015), 2286 (2016) and 2417 (2018)), as well as in an
increasing number of situation-specific resolutions and peacekeeping mandates.
Through those resolutions, the Security Council has been instrumental in further
developing and consolidating the normative framework for the protection of civilians
by reaffirming and reinforcing existing standards and strengthening their
implementation. Over time, the Council’s language on protection of civilians has
become increasingly specific, detailed and prescriptive, and more attuned to and
supportive of international humanitarian and human rights law.
10. Protection issues have also been addressed in the Council’s work on children
and armed conflict and women and peace and security. The adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), the establishment of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the monitoring, reporting and listing mechanism, the work of my Special
Representative, and the development of action plans to end and prevent grave
violations against children, have contributed to important advances in child protection
in conflict. In its resolutions on women and peace and security, beginning with
resolution 1325 (2000), the Council has called upon parties to conflict to respect
international law applicable to the rights and protection of women and girls and to
protect them from gender-based and all other forms of violence in conflict situations.
The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) and the subsequent establishment of the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, pursuant to resolution 1888 (2009), signalled the Council’s commitment
to address sexual violence, which has been strengthened through such initiatives as
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict (resolution
1888 (2009)) and the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements (resolution
1960 (2010)).
11. The proven utility of the monitoring and reporting mechanisms for children and
armed conflict and conflict-related sexual violence, as well as that undertaken by the
human rights components of United Nations peace operations, underlines the
importance of effective and systematic monitoring and reporting on the protection of
civilians more broadly, as also called for by the Council (S/PRST/2018/18). In
particular, and as reflected in my Agenda for Disarmament, Securing Our Common
Future,2 greater attention should be given where relevant and feasible to instituting
the recording of casualties, such as that undertaken by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. This is crucial for supporting evidence-based advocacy with
parties to conflict and identifying factors that contribute to civilian casualties which
can inform adjustments to ongoing and future operations.
12. In addition to the focus on children and sexual violence, the Council has adopted
resolutions in which it expressly condemned and called upon parties to conflict to end
attacks against humanitarian workers, medical and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties, and journalists, and to ensure their protection.
It has addressed the link between conflict and food insecurity, and the impact on
civilians of the illicit transfer, excessive accumulation and misuse of small arms and
light weapons. While such focus on specific issues can lead to more targeted and

__________________
2

19-06775

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.18.IX.6; also available at www.un.org/disarmament/sgagenda/en/.
3/17

S/2019/373

potentially successful outcomes, I urge the Council to maintain a comprehensive
approach to the protection of all civilians and ensure that other pressing and emerging
issues – such as urban warfare and conduct of hostilities – are fully addressed.
13. The Council has adopted 13 presidential statements on the protection of
civilians. In these it has underlined the standing of protection of civilians as “one of
the core issues” on the Council’s agenda (S/PRST/2015/23 and S/PRST/2018/18).
The statements have also provided the vehicle for issuing the Council’s aide-memoire
on the protection of civilians and its regular updates. The aide-memoire identifies key
protection concerns and, on the basis of past practice, actions the Council coul d take
to respond in its resolutions and presidential statements.
14. In January 2009, the Security Council informal expert group on the protection
of civilians, the establishment of which was recommended in 2007 (see S/2007/643)
to mainstream protection into the Council’s actions, was convened for the first time.
It has since met around 100 times and remains an important forum for humanitarian
and other actors to brief Council members with a view to ensuring that protection
concerns are addressed in the Council’s decisions. The Council should continue to
make full use of the informal expert group and, through it, implement the aide memoire and the wealth of good practice developed over the past 20 years.

B.

Implementation
15. Important though it has been to further develop and consolidate the normative
framework, the Security Council’s efforts must translate into tangible improvements
in the protection of civilians on the ground or contribute to efforts to this end by
United Nations and other humanitarian and human rights organizations. The Council
has implemented several actions to this end.
Role of peace operations
16. The inclusion and prioritization of protection of civilians in the mandates of a
number of peace operations, beginning with the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone in 1999, is among the most significant Council actions in this regard. The
prioritization of the protection of civilians in peace operations, and its role as a
yardstick to measure mission performance, are now firmly established and a
significant body of policy and guidance has been developed, including specific
guidelines for uniformed components. The operational approach to protecting
civilians has been clarified and tools and systems developed to make protection in
peacekeeping more effective, such as joint protection teams and community alert
networks. Protection activities have expanded to include, for example, the facilitation
of local peace and ceasefire agreements in conflict areas in the Central African
Republic that are monitored by civilian and uniformed components. In South Sudan,
nearly 200,000 internally displaced persons are sheltered at protection of civilians
sites. The Council’s regular inclusion of the human rights due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces in relevant
peacekeeping mandates has provided important leverage to the efforts of
peacekeeping missions to influence compliance with international humanitar ian,
human rights and refugee law by certain parties to conflict.
17. Looking forward, the nature of conflict and the nature of peacekeeping are
changing and we must continually evolve and adapt. The mandating of certain
peacekeeping missions to participate in or conduct military operations against armed
groups, or to otherwise conduct joint operations with non-United Nations forces in
specific contexts, has generated important challenges for the performance of other
mandated activities, including the protection of civilians. The commitments under

4/17

19-06775

S/2019/373

Action for Peacekeeping provide a foundation to tackle some of those challenges and
further strengthen the protective role of peacekeepers. This requires a collective
endeavour, including Member States and the Secretariat, to adapt to changing
environments by capturing good practices and providing relevant training, with an
emphasis on pre-deployment training by troop- and police-contributing countries.
Member States must also commit themselves to ensuring that peacekeeping missions
are properly resourced, while troop contributors must provide contingents that are up
to the task and include more women. Finally, protection of civilians requires the
commitment of Member States to find consensus around the language and
implications of peacekeeping tasks, including clarity on the expectations of
peacekeepers and recognition of those situations that may be beyond their capacity to
respond.
Protection of specific groups
18. Within the peacekeeping context, the Security Council has taken important steps
to improve protection for specific groups. Women and children were identified in the
first report of the Secretary-General as requiring special protection measures. These
included ensuring that their needs were addressed by peacekeeping missions which,
in turn, deployed women and child protection advisers, and/or gender advisers, in
several missions, mainstreaming these issues across missions and reinforcing the
work of humanitarian agencies in the respective fields.
19. The Council has also sought to enhance protection for refugees and internally
displaced persons by mandating peacekeeping missions to protect camps and sites
from armed attacks and to maintain their civilian and humanitarian character by
supporting the disarmament and separation of combatants. It has also promoted
durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons that are safe, voluntary
and dignified while also mandating peacekeeping missions to support the voluntary
and informed return of refugees and displaced persons through the creation of secure
environments.
Enhancing accountability
20. The Security Council’s efforts to give practical meaning to the protection
agenda are also evident in its efforts to enhance accountability for serious violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law. The Council has, for example,
promoted and encouraged support for accountability at the national level,
emphasizing the responsibility of States to investigate, prosecute and punish
perpetrators of serious violations. It has also taken measures aimed at repatriating and
preventing the deployment of personnel implicated in serious human rights violations
involving sexual exploitation and abuse.
21. The Council has also taken more direct steps. Following its earlier, historical
establishment of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in 1993 and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in 1994, the Council has requested the
establishment of commissions of inquiry, on Darfur in 2004 and the Central African
Republic in 2013, as well as mechanisms to identify to the greatest extent f easible
those involved in the use of chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, in
2015; and, in 2017, an investigative team to collect, preserve and store evidence in
Iraq of serious international crimes committed there by the terrorist group Islam ic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). These efforts constitute important advances
towards accountability for serious crimes under international law.
22. In 2005, on the basis of the findings of the International Commission of Inquiry
on Darfur, the Council took the unprecedented step of referring the situation to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court; this was followed in 2011 by the
19-06775

5/17

S/2019/373

referral of the situation in Libya. To date, no other situations have been referred by
the Council to the Prosecutor.
Targeted measures as a response to violations
23. The Council has increasingly used targeted sanctions - asset freezes and travel
bans – to address issues related to the protection of civilians. In the case of eight
current sanctions regimes, 3 designation criteria for the imposition of sanctions
measures against individuals and entities may include violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law; obstructing humanitarian aid; recruiting or
using children in armed conflict; targeting civilians, including killing and maiming
and sexual and gender-based violence. In addition, seven monitoring groups, teams
and panels that support the work of the sanctions committees include specific
humanitarian or international humanitarian experts who report on protection issues
throughout their mandate. Beyond these measures, the Council has also imposed arms
embargoes in relation to several conflicts to stem the illicit flow of weapons and
ammunition which further undermine peace and stability. It is essential that Member
States take the necessary steps to implement such measures.

III. Enduring relevance of the protection of civilians in an era of
asymmetric and urban warfare
24. There is no doubt that the Security Council’s actions over the past 20 years have
strengthened the framework for the protection of civilians in armed conflict and saved
countless lives. However, a review of the state of the protection of civilians from
1 January to 31 December 2018 demonstrates that civilians continue to account for
the vast majority of casualties, and are targeted and victims of indiscriminate attacks
and other violations and harm by parties to conflict. Twenty years on, the protection
agenda is as relevant and pressing as ever.
25. The reason for this lies in part in the nature of contemporary conflicts. These
are characterized by the proliferation and fragmentation of non-State armed groups,
which has contributed to the increasingly asymmetric nature of conflict. The impact
on civilians has been profoundly negative, as some armed groups have sought to
overcome their military inferiority by using strategies that are contrary to
international law, including attacks against civilians.
26. The impact on civilians is further compounded by the fact that conflict takes
place increasingly in urban centres, which provide non-State armed groups with an
opportunity to further alter the balance of power between themselves and
conventional armed forces. Today, more than 50 million people are affected by
conflict in urban areas.
27. The risks for civilians in such situations increase further as conventional armed
forces respond with methods and means of warfare that result in, or otherwise
contribute to, a widespread pattern of immediate and long-term harm, of which
civilians again bear the brunt and which may, in some cases, breach their obligations
under international humanitarian law. In addition, direct and indirect third -party
support for parties to conflict fuels the violence and protracted nature of m any of
today’s conflicts, while also increasing the risk of their spreading to neighbouring
States.

__________________
3

6/17

With respect to the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya, Mali
Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and Yemen.
19-06775

S/2019/373

A.

The state of the protection of civilians
Widespread civilian deaths and injuries and impact on civilian objects
28. It is both tragic and appalling that, throughout 2018, tens of thousands of
civilians were killed, injured or maimed as a result of direct or indiscriminate attacks
by parties to conflicts affecting Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Libya, Mali, Myanmar, the Niger, Nigeria,
South Sudan, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine, Yemen and elsewhere. In
2018, the United Nations recorded the death and injury of more than 22,800 civilians
in attacks in six of these situations: almost 11,000 civilians in Afghanistan; more than
2,600 in Iraq; 1,300 in Mali; 1,500 in Somalia; 3,700 in South Sudan, including more
than 1,400 women; and 2,700 in Yemen. These figures are almost certainly
underestimates of the full number of civilian deaths and injuries.
29. The toll of deaths and injuries, combined with testimony from victims and
witnesses and the perpetual stream of media and other reports of harm to civilians,
reinforces the long-standing concern that parties are failing, deliberately or otherwise,
to take constant care to spare the civilian population and civilian objects in the
conduct of military operations, as required by international humanitarian law. The
reported ongoing use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic in 2018 was
of grave concern and continues to pose a serious challenge to the global and long standing prohibition of those weapons which cannot be tolerated.
30. There were also widespread reports in 2018 of attacks affecting civilian objects,
which may include houses, schools, hospitals, markets, camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons, places of worship and infrastructure on which civilians
depend for their survival. In the Central African Republic, for example, at leas t 112
civilians were killed and 27 injured in an attack on a camp for internally displaced
persons in Alindao in November. In the Syrian Arab Republic, a United Nations
assessment mission to Raqqah in April 2018 found that nearly 70 per cent of buildings
in the city were destroyed or damaged and that essential services, such as water,
electricity and health care were absent or severely limited.
31. Raqqah is only one example of the acute impact on civilians and civilian objects
of fighting when it takes place in populated areas and involves explosive weapons. I
have repeatedly called on parties to conflict to avoid the use of explosive weapons
with wide-area effects in populated areas, owing to the immediate and cumulative,
complex and long-term harm resulting from such use. In 2018, an estimated 20,384
civilians were killed and injured by explosive weapons in populated areas. 4 In
Afghanistan, for example, the United Nations recorded more than 5,800 civilian
casualties in 2018 resulting from improvised explosive devices, indirect fire and airlaunched weapons. The majority were attributed to the actions of anti-government
elements. However, civilian casualties resulting from the use of air-launched weapons
increased by 61 per cent on the previous year – the highest number in a single year
since the United Nations began documenting civilian casualties in 2009. In Yemen,
more than 17,000 conflict-related incidents were reported in 2018, including the
widespread use of explosive weapons, resulting in deaths and injuries and damage to,
or destruction of, irrigation systems, agricultural sites, schools, hospitals and water
points. Explosive remnants of war posed an ongoing threat to civilians while also
delaying the restoration of services and reconstruction. In the Syrian Arab Republic,
for example, the presence of explosive remnants of war was reported in 1,980
communities across the country. Explosive remnants of war and landmines killed and
injured 119 civilians in Ukraine and 227 children in Yemen in 2018.

__________________
4

19-06775

Figures from Action on Armed Violence, Explosive Violence Monitor 2018 (forthcoming).
7/17

S/2019/373

32. As reported separately, conflict-related sexual violence persists in many armed
conflicts, often as part of a broader strategy. In 2018, it was used to displace
communities in South Sudan, targeting children, the elderly and pregnant women; as
a means of repression, terror and control in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Syrian Arab Republic; and to help finance conflict in Libya and Nigeria,
where sexual slavery and human trafficking raised revenue for the activities of armed
actors. I welcome ongoing efforts to strengthen the response to sexual violence,
including the forthcoming joint Norway-United Nations international pledging
conference in Oslo in May, and encourage Member States to support such initiatives.
I also welcome efforts within the United Nations and by Member States to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse, including putting the people who suffer from this first;
ending impunity for perpetrators; engaging civil society and external partners; and
ensuring better education and transparency.
33. Conflict continued to have a devastating impact on children throughout 2018.
Afghanistan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen accounted for the highest numbers
of children killed and maimed, mainly through airstrikes and ground operations.
Attacks on, and the military use of, schools and hospitals increased in 2018 in such
places as Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Libya, Mali, Myanmar, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Yemen. In Yemen, for example, some 2,000 schools are inoperable
because of the conflict, including 256 that were destroyed by air strikes or shelling
and 1,520 that were damaged. In many cases, attacks on schools had a particularly
negative impact on girls’ access to education.
34. Conflict continued to take its toll on journalists in 2018, and killings, injuries
and threats were reported in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Libya, the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. Such
incidents are of grave concern and seriously impact independent reporting which is
essential for exposing human suffering, restraining belligerents and building pressure
for political solutions and accountability.
Forced displacement
35. Forced displacement remained a defining feature of conflict in 2018, affecting
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and elsewhere.
By mid-2018, some 1.4 million people were newly displaced across international
borders while a further 5.2 million were displaced internally. Overall, according to
available data, 40 million people were estimated to be internally displaced in their
own country as a result of conflict and violence, while the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported a total of 28.5 million
refugees and asylum seekers. The refugee population from the Syrian Arab Republic
remained the largest, reaching 6.5 million by mid-year with a further 6.2 million
people internally displaced. By mid-2018, large populations of internally displaced
persons were reported in Somalia (2.6 million), Yemen (2.1 million), Afghanistan,
Iraq and the Sudan (2 million each), Nigeria (1.9 million), South Sudan (1.8 million)
and Ukraine (1.5 million).
36. Many of those displaced, the majority of whom are women, face significant
protection and assistance concerns while the families and communities hosting them,
in urban and other areas, are under increasing stress. The majority will remain
displaced for years, without durable solutions that require national leadership and a
long-term commitment to address human rights, humanitarian, development,
peacebuilding and disaster-risk challenges. More efforts are urgently needed in this
regard, including consultation and joint planning with the internally displaced and

8/17

19-06775

S/2019/373

affected communities themselves, as well as the active involvement of local
authorities.
37. In 2018 the General Assembly affirmed the global compact on refugees,
marking an important step towards more equitable and predictable burden -sharing in
the response to refugees, including those displaced by conflict. Member States are
encouraged to implement it fully. At the same time, the anniversaries in 2019 of the
African Union conventions on refugees and on internally displaced persons are
important opportunities to galvanize solutions to displacement in Africa. The ongoing
implementation of the Plan of Action launched in April 2018 by the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced persons, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and UNHCR, to mark the twentieth anniversary
of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, has brought a number of
displacement-affected States, United Nations and other actors together to exchange
good practice and strengthen the response to internal displacement.
Constraints on humanitarian access
38. Widespread and persistent constraints on humanitarian access jeopardized
humanitarian operations in several conflicts in 2018. Besides active hostilities and
logistical challenges, bureaucratic impediments and attacks against humanitarian
personnel remained the most severe constraints. The former were reported in several
conflict situations, including those in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq,
Libya, Myanmar, the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Somalia, South Sudan, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. In the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
for example, Israeli-imposed restrictions affecting Gaza entered their twelfth year and
additional movement restrictions were introduced, contributing to the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. In Myanmar, humanitarian access in
Kachin and Shan States reached its lowest point in three years: access was denied to
active conflict and contested areas and areas hosting displaced and other vulnerable
groups. In Rakhine State, significant constraints on access continued, especially in
the three northern townships of Rathedaung, Buthidaung and Maungdaw. While many
travel authorizations in the central part of Rakhine were approved, reports continued
of additional access requirements being imposed by local police and camp authorities.
39. In these and other situations, immediate steps must be taken to facilitate safe,
timely and unimpeded humanitarian access to populations in need as well as their
access to assistance. Good practice exists in this area which could be replicated, such
as exempting or otherwise expediting visa processing and customs clearance for
humanitarian personnel, goods and equipment. Third States have also sought to
ensure that parties to conflict facilitate humanitarian access as required by the law. At
the same time, we need to see greater condemnation and action in respect of cases
where consent for humanitarian operations is denied or arbitrarily withheld.
40. Violence against, or the detention or abduction of humanitarian workers, in
particular national staff, continued to impede humanitarian operations in Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Somalia,
South Sudan and elsewhere. In Afghanistan, for example, 30 humanitarian workers
were killed in 2018 and 53 were injured in attacks and 88 abducted. Somalia saw
130 violent incidents affecting humanitarian workers, including 10 fatalities; while in
South Sudan there were 760 security incidents in which 15 humanitarian workers
were killed in 2018 and 576 were relocated for security reasons, disrupting the
provision of assistance for prolonged periods. In the Central African Republic,
396 security incidents affecting humanitarian workers were recorded in 2018 – an
increase of 20 per cent compared to 2017. There were also reports of looti ng of
humanitarian assets in these and other situations. De-confliction arrangements, in
which humanitarian organizations share the timing and location of assistance
19-06775

9/17

S/2019/373

activities with parties to conflict, can help to protect humanitarian workers and ensure
that military operations do not interfere with the delivery of assistance. However,
such arrangements do not absolve parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians, including humanitarian workers. Ultimately,
attacks against humanitarian workers are unacceptable and may constitute war
crimes; such attacks should be investigated and their perpetrators prosecuted.
41. Steps are needed also to limit the impact of counter-terrorism measures on
humanitarian action, which have included the criminalization of certain activities
necessary for the conduct of humanitarian operations. Aside from their direct impact
on humanitarian operations, such measures cause uncertainty and anxiety among
humanitarian organizations and their staff with regard to the threat of prosecution or
other sanctions for carrying out their work. In resolution 73/174, the General
Assembly urged all States to ensure that counter-terrorism legislation and measures
do not impede humanitarian and medical activities or engagement with all relevant
actors as foreseen by international humanitarian law. I welcome current efforts,
including by the Security Council, to incorporate safeguards for humanitarian
activities as foreseen by international humanitarian law in counter-terrorism
measures.
Attacks against and other interference with medical care
42. In 2018 there was further violence against and other interference with medical
care in conflict. Incidents included direct attacks against medical workers and
facilities; the removal of medical supplies from humanitarian convoys and
warehouses; and the use of medical facilities for military purposes. The World Health
Organization recorded 705 attacks against medical facilities and workers in 2018,
resulting in 451 deaths and 860 injuries in just eight conflicts: Afghanistan, Iraq,
Libya, Mali, Nigeria, the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Yemen. Explosive weapons were used in 38 per cent of those attacks. The longterm impact, in terms of loss of access to medical care, can be devastating for the
civilian population more broadly.
43. In Libya, for example, attacks on medical facilities were documented in Tripoli,
Benghazi, Darnah and Sabha. In the Occupied Palestinian Territory, medical workers
were among those killed and injured as Israel Defense Forces used lethal force to
suppress demonstrations that began at the end of March. In the Syrian Arab Republic,
139 attacks on medical facilities were recorded in 2018, resulting in 101 deaths and
189 injuries. In Afghanistan, there were 90 attacks on medical facilities, killing
17 health-care workers. Seven facilities were destroyed in aerial attacks. An estimated
4.1 million people have been directly or indirectly denied medical services as a result
of these incidents. I am also concerned at the continued criminalization, in the Syrian
Arab Republic and elsewhere, of the provision of medical care to wounded and sick
civilians and fighters despite the protection afforded by international humanitarian
law.
44. I welcome the efforts of Member States and other actors to implement resolution
2286 (2016) and my predecessor’s recommendations and the continued attention to
the issue, such as the Arria-formula meeting held in December 2018. The launch in
2018 by Geneva Call of the deed of commitment on protecting health care in conflict
provides non-State armed groups with an important opportunity to commit themselves
to respecting the relevant rules and publicly account for their implementation.
However, I would again stress the need for broader and focused efforts to ensure
compliance with the law as it relates to the protection of health care; to strengthen
data collection; to exchange good practice in implementing resolution 2286 (2016),
including in capitals and regional forums; and to ensure that protection of health care
is included in military doctrine and training and in capacity-building of partner forces.
10/17

19-06775

S/2019/373

Missing persons
45. Alarming numbers of persons remain missing in armed conflicts. For example,
more than 10,000 cases of missing persons have been opened by the International
Committee of the Red Cross in relation to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
while it has received 13,000 requests from families in Nigeria for support in finding
missing relatives. It is incumbent on parties to conflict to respect and ensure respect
for international humanitarian law as it relates to missing persons: to prevent enforced
disappearance; to take all feasible measures to account for those reported missing;
and to uphold the right of their families to receive information on their fate and
whereabouts.

B.

Protection of civilians and global issues
46. There are a number of areas where the protection of civilians intersects with
issues of global importance, including hunger, the treatment of persons with
disabilities and the environment. These all require more focused attention and action
from the Security Council and Member States.
Conflict and hunger
47. Conflict continued to constitute the main driver of hunger. According to the
2018 Global Report on Food Crises, 60 per cent of the people affected by food crises
were living in conflict-affected countries. Late in 2018, 56 million people were
reported to be in urgent need of food and livelihood assistance as a result of protracted
conflict in just eight conflict contexts: Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Lake Chad Basin, Somalia, South Sudan, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. The use of starvation of the civilian population as
a method of warfare in several contexts is of grave concern and must cease
immediately.
48. In May 2018, the Security Council, in its resolution 2417 (2018), recognized the
intrinsic link between hunger and conflict and the role of international humanitarian
law in preventing and addressing hunger in armed conflict, and reiterated the
prohibition on the use of starvation of the civilian population as a method of warfare.
The resolution provides the international community with tools for early warning and
response to situations of famine and starvation. Member States should ensure greater
scrutiny of instances in which relief supplies and access are impeded and higher levels
of food insecurity result. All parties to a conflict must ensure the protection of
infrastructure critical to the functioning of food systems and markets and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. Through the means of reporting established by the
resolution, I will continue to provide the Council with information on situations where
these circumstances may exist and that require action by the international community.
Persons with disabilities
49. Armed conflict has a disproportionate impact on persons with disabilities.
According to one recent survey of Syrian refugees, almost 23 per cent of respondents
had a disability and 61 per cent of households reported at least one member with a
disability. 5 Conflict heightens the risks for persons with disabilities because of
destruction and other changes to the physical environment, stress and disruption of
essential services. People with disabilities may be unable to flee attacks and are left
abandoned and unprotected. Women and girls with disabilities are particularly at risk
of violence, exploitation and abuse. In addition, conflict inevitably causes temporary

__________________
5

19-06775

Humanity and Inclusion, Removing Barriers: The Path towards Inclusive Access (2018).
11/17

S/2019/373

or permanent impairments, in particular from the use of explosive weapons. I
welcome the Council’s recognition of the issue in resolutions 2217 (2015) and 2406
(2018). Attention should now focus on a more comprehensive thematic approach
across all relevant situations that takes into account the role of conflict in both
aggravating existing disabilities and causing new ones, and the need to ensure
effective protection and assistance for persons with disabilities.
The environmental impact of conflict
50. Increased attention is being paid globally and in specific contexts, such as Iraq,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine and Yemen, to the negative environmental impact
of conflict and the consequences for human health, in particular for pregnant women,
children and older persons. For example, the destruction of industrial facilities can
result in pollutants contaminating the air, soil and groundwater. These may give rise
to serious health problems for civilians and reduce access to resources vital for their
survival. The effects may also extend beyond the area and duration of hostilities. In
Iraq, for example, a fire started by ISIL at the Mishraq power plant in October 2016
created a toxic plume that caused more than 1,000 people to be hospitalized with
severe respiratory problems. ISIL also ignited oil wells in Qayyarah that burned for
several months, posing acute and chronic health risks to local communities. Concerns
also exist regarding the possible health risks of the millions of tons of rubble and
other debris generated by urban conflict. International humanitarian law contains both
general and specific rules relating to the protection of the natural environment in
situations of armed conflict which should be implemented accordingly. Furthermore,
in December 2017, the United Nations Environment Assembly adopted a resolution
(UNEP/EA.3/Res.1) outlining important steps to address conflict-caused pollution
that warrant Member State support.

IV. Enhancing respect for the law in the conduct of hostilities
and accountability for its violation
51. Among the features common to the situations discussed above is the variable
degree of respect by the parties concerned for international humanitarian and human
rights law, in particular in the conduct of hostilities. As noted earlier, it is the failure
of parties to take constant care to spare the civilian population and civilian objects in
the conduct of military operations and to take all feasible precautions to avoid, and in
any event minimize, civilian casualties that initiates a downward spiral of civilian
death, injury and displacement. Also common to these situations is the absence of
accountability for violations of the law which allows violations to thrive. Enhancing
and ensuring respect for the law and accountability for its violation are two of the
greatest challenges we face in strengthening the protection of civilians.

A.

Enhancing respect for the law in the conduct of hostilities
52. In some cases, respect for the law in the conduct of hostilities is questionable at
best. Whether in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen or elsewhere, the allegations
and evidence of breaches of obligations under international law continue to mount,
detailed in the media and in United Nations reports and those of non -governmental
organizations, commissions of inquiry, groups and panels of experts and other bodies.
They include serious, credible and documented allegations and evidence of
disproportionate and other types of indiscriminate attacks, and of parties failing –
deliberately or otherwise – to take all feasible precautions in attack and against the
effects of attack. The absence of transparency from the parties concerned in terms of

12/17

19-06775

S/2019/373

established procedures or actions taken to ensure respect for the law and the
protection of civilians, and to investigate and prosecute alleged serious violations,
only reinforces the perception of almost total disregard for the law. It is cases such as
these that underscore the urgent need for more effective and robust approaches to
ensuring accountability for serious violations (see paras. 61–62 below).
53. In other cases, parties to conflict assert respect for the law and may implement
targeting procedures and other good practices to try to minimize the impact of attacks
on civilians, some of which were mentioned in my previous report. Since then, senior
government officials in Nigeria have committed to adopting the draft national policy
on the protection of civilians and civilian harm mitigation. In Ukraine, the Joint
Forces Operations Command formally established a civilian casualties mitigation
team, which was launched in January 2019. The United States Congress built on its
2018 National Defense Authorization Act with new provisions on protection of
civilians in its 2019 Act. These include the appointment of a senior-level Department
of Defense official to develop, coordinate and oversee compliance with the
Department’s policy on civilian casualties; improvements in the annual report on
civilian causalities; and a legal and policy review of missions by the United States
military with partner forces. The Department of Defense has appointed a senior
official and initiated a process to develop a comprehensive policy on civilian
casualties.
54. The efforts of these Member States are welcome. However, the assertions of
compliance and the effectiveness of the targeting and other good practices i nstituted
by some parties to conflict are called into question by increasing numbers of civilian
casualties, and allegations thereof, and damage to and destruction of civilian objects
resulting from their operations.
55. During intergovernmental and other meetings in 2017 and 2018 on the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas, some Member States referred to steps they
take, through the targeting process in particular, to try to minimize civilian casualties
and damage to civilian objects. Such transparency is welcome but concerns remain.
For example, there are concerns that parties conducting aerial attacks do not always
possess reliable intelligence on which to base targeting decisions. There are examples
of attacks resulting in civilian casualties and damage to civilian objects that are later
found to be based on inaccurate or misleading intelligence. 6 It is not clear what
disciplinary or other remedial steps are taken in such situations, including steps to
learn from and avoid their repetition.
56. A critical component of the targeting process for protecting civilians is collateral
damage estimation. However, there are concerns, for example, as to the extent to
which collateral damage estimation takes into account damage to or destruction of
civilian objects resulting from earlier attacks. There are also concerns over the
adequacy of existing collateral damage estimation methodology in cases of dynamic
(as opposed to deliberate or pre-planned) targeting, where there is less time to gather
intelligence, conduct pattern of life analyses, and so on. Post-attack, there are
concerns that battle damage assessments, if carried out, do not necessarily go beyond
assessing the effect of the attack on the target to also consider the impact on civilians
and civilian objects; or do not involve interviewing victims or witnesses but rely on
aerial assessments of harm. Such assessments have failed to identify civilian
casualties that are later found during ground-led investigations. 7 These may be
__________________

See, for example, Christopher D. Kolenda et al., The Strategic Costs of Civilian Harm: Applying
Lessons from Afghanistan to Current and Future Conflicts (Open Society Foundations, June
2016), pp. 21–22.
7
See Emily Knowles and Abigail Watson, Remote Warfare: Lessons Learned from Contemporary
Theatres (Remote Warfare Programme, Oxford Research Group, June 2018), p. 17.
6

19-06775

13/17

S/2019/373

undertaken in response to allegations of harm by local actors, the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations. Finally, few armed forces today employ civilian
casualty tracking despite its proven utility in Afghanistan and Somalia for allowing
parties to understand the impact of their operations on civilians and take corrective
measures. Ultimately, while it is essential that such procedures and practices exist,
they must be implemented effectively and their use standardized by all Member State
militaries and in all theatres of operation.
57. In relation to this, I welcome ongoing State-led efforts to address the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. These include the talks on explosive weapons
in populated areas convened by Germany in June and September 2018; and the joint
statement made in the First Committee of the General Assembly on 25 October, in
which 50 Member States committed themselves to addressing the humanitarian harm
caused by the use of explosive weapons by means of a political declaration. In
December 2018, 23 States attending the Latin America and Caribbean regional
conference on protecting civilians from the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas, convened by Chile, adopted the Santiago Communiqué, in which
representatives acknowledged the need to avoid the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas and supported the development of a political
declaration. I have repeatedly expressed support for a declaration that would, inter
alia, commit endorsing States to avoid the use of explosive weapons with wide-area
effects in populated areas and develop operational policies based on a presumption
against such use. I welcome the decision of Austria to host an international conference
in October 2019 to raise awareness of the problem of explosive weapons in populated
areas. I would encourage Member States to participate constructively in this and
initiate a process to draft a declaration.
58. Possibilities to enhance respect for the law also arise in the context of arms
exports and with regard to the behaviour of partner forces, in addition to other spheres
of opportunity and influence. Regarding the former, Member States must refrain from
exporting conventional arms and ammunition where they are likely to be used to
commit or facilitate serious violations of international humanitarian or human rights
law. Rigorous due diligence measures should underpin this restraint, including the
undertaking of risk assessments before authorizing arms exports and periodic review
thereafter. I strongly encourage all States to become parties to the Arms Trade Treaty
and similar regional instruments without delay.
59. In my previous report I noted the importance of ensuring respect for the law by
State and non-State partner forces. In June 2018, recognizing the increasing
significance of partnered arrangements, Group of Seven States committed themselves
to use their support to State and non-State parties to conflict to encourage effective
implementation of international humanitarian law. This includes assisting partners to
incorporate the law into their doctrine, training and rules of engagement, and to ensure
that the necessary procedures exist to address their own violations of the law. The
commitments expressed in the communiqué are welcome. I would invite G-7 States
to share information on their implementation.
60. Opportunities to enhance and ensure respect for the law also arise in the context
of coalition operations, such as the international counter-ISIL coalition in Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen and the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. In my previous report I referred to the
compliance framework developed to prevent and address possible violations of
international law by that Joint Force – an important good practice in this area. A recent
study provides further useful analysis and recommendations on the protection of

14/17

19-06775

S/2019/373

civilians in coalition operations and warrants consideration. 8 Its recommendations
include ensuring commitments by the high-level civilian and military leadership of
such operations to civilian harm mitigation, and establishing a centralized mechanism
for tracking and assessing reports of civilian harm.

B.

Ensuring accountability
61. Instrumental to enhancing respect for the law is ensuring accountability for its
violation, both of individuals and parties to conflict. Yet efforts to ensure
accountability remain overall insufficient. There are some examples of prosecutions
and investigations at the national level, such as the prosecution and sentencing in
2018 of South Sudanese soldiers in relation to the attack on the Terrain Hotel in Juba
in 2016. There were also further arrests, in Germany and France, of alleged
perpetrators of war crimes in the Syrian Arab Republic. At the regional level, the
establishment of hybrid courts, such as the Special Criminal Court in the Central
African Republic, which held its inaugural session in October 2018, has been a
welcome development, as was the establishment of and resort to international
mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court, the continuing use of
commissions of inquiry, and the establishment of non-judicial accountability
mechanisms to collect, preserve and store evidence of acts that may amount to serious
crimes under international law, as in relation to the Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq and,
more recently, Myanmar.
62. Such developments are important but fall far short of what is required when, as
stated previously, allegations of serious violations massively outweigh their
investigation and prosecution. Closing this gap means addressing problems of
political will and capacity and resources at the national level, and pursuing and
reinforcing initiatives at the regional and global level. Allegations of serious crimes
under international law require investigation and prosecution wherever and whenever
they occur. Accountability must be systematic and universal. It must also respond to
the need for reparations for violations of the law.

V. Building on the past to transform the future
63. It is beyond doubt that, 20 years on, the protection of civilians agenda remains
as relevant as ever and the role of the Security Council in its promotion and
implementation is fundamental. The challenge for the Council is to build on the
significant progress achieved to date and further strengthen and transform the
protection of civilians in contemporary conflicts. This requires an approach from the
Council that:
(a) Is systematic, comprehensive and consistent (within and across situations)
in how protection concerns are addressed, including in the mandates of United
Nations peace operations;
(b) Acknowledges the challenges of urban warfare, including the use of
explosive weapons, for the protection of civilians and calls for specific protective
measures;
(c) Continues to promote the protection of specific groups, such as women
and children, refugees, internally displaced persons, and persons with disabilities;

__________________
8

19-06775

Center for Civilians in Conflict, The Sum of All Parts: Reducing Civilian Harm in Multinational
Coalition Operations (January 2019).
15/17

S/2019/373

(d) Promotes an environment that is conducive to humanitarian access by, for
example, condemning the arbitrary withholding of consent for relief operations,
calling for the safe, rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian assistance, the
temporary suspension of hostilities to enable relief actions, and the establishment of
de-confliction arrangements;
(e) Systematically urges all parties to conflict, including non-State armed
groups, to comply with international humanitarian law to safeguard humanitarian
activities for persons affected by conflict and recognizes the import ance of
engagement with such groups, in line with humanitarian principles, to promote
respect for the law, without fear of criminal or other sanction;
(f) Is proactive in seeking accountability where progress at the national level
is unreasonably slow or non-existent, including referring situations involving war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide to the International Criminal Court and
ensuring Member State cooperation with the Court;
(g) Supports the effective implementation of targeted measures, imposed as a
response to violations of the law.
64. While the Security Council has an instrumental role in strengthening the
protection of civilians, we must also recognize that enhancing and ensuring
compliance with the law, and accountability for its violation, is most needed and will
most likely be achieved by pursuing national-level initiatives. More specifically, we
need urgent and concrete progress in the implementation of the three actions
recommended in my previous report:
Action 1. Develop national policy frameworks on the protection of civilians
65. To ensure the effective implementation of international humanitarian and human
rights law, Member States should develop a national policy framework that builds
upon good practice and establishes clear institutional authorities and responsibilities
for the protection of civilians and civilian objects in the conduct of hostilities.
Action 2. Enhance compliance by non-State armed groups
66. Enhancing respect for the law requires changing the behaviour and improving
the practices of non-State armed groups. Key to this is principled and sustained
engagement by humanitarian and other relevant actors that is, moreover, strategic and
based on a thorough analysis of the group(s) concerned. Such engagement for purely
humanitarian purposes is in line with international humanitarian law and confers no
sense of legitimacy on the groups concerned. Rather, it reflects the reality that
engagement with such groups is a sine qua non for negotiating humanitarian access,
carrying out humanitarian activities and seeking compliance with the law.
Action 3. Promote compliance through advocacy and accountability
67. Attention is urgently required to ensure broader accountability for serious
violations of the law. That includes much greater political and financial investment in
national processes in conflict-affected States and in other Member States too. We need
sharing of experiences and good practice, the provision of technical assistance to
develop necessary legislation and establish war crimes units and the like.
Simultaneously, we need more concerted advocacy in support of the protection of
civilians. Member States should use all possible means to ensure respect for the law
by parties to conflict, including political dialogue, public statements and targeted
measures, and providing or supporting training and capacity-building.

16/17

19-06775

S/2019/373

Moving forward through sustained dialogue and action
68. As we reflect on 20 years of the protection of civilians, it is important that the
Security Council and Member States more broadly reflect on how to build on the
progress to date and move the protection of civilians agenda forward in the years to
come. That includes following up on the actions and other measures referred to in this
and future reports on the protection of civilians. There is a need for ongoing and
sustained Member State engagement and dialogue that goes beyond the consideration
of the present report at the open debate in May. We must keep the conversation
going – for Member States, United Nations actors and civil society to come together
and discuss the actions and identify concrete steps for their implementation. For while
the current state of the protection of civilians remains bleak, there is considerable
scope for concrete improvements in the promotion and implementation of the law for
the benefit of all those confronting, now and in the future, the horror, pain and
indignity of conflict.

19-06775

17/17
