S/PV.7479

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7479th meeting

Tuesday, 30 June 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mrs. Alingue
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Fernández-Arias Minuesa
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-20255 (E)
*1520255*

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Malaysia.
In convening today’s wrap-up session, Malaysia
is seeking to introduce some new elements that could
inject added value into our exchanges — namely,
reflections on the Council’s work over a slightly longer
time frame, both looking back and looking ahead. That
said, I intend first to highlight certain key aspects of
Malaysia’s presidency of the Council this month.
During its presidency, Malaysia has sought to
focus on three key issues: peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and children and armed conflict. In pursuing these
priorities, Malaysia is grateful for the strong and
constructive support and cooperation extended by all
Council members throughout the month.
With regard to peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the
principal idea was to initiate preliminary discussions
by the Council, taking into account its expected role
in following up on the ongoing review processes of
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture and
resolution 1325 (2000).
On children and armed conflict, taking into
account the alarming upward trend in the employment
of abduction as a tactic in violent conflicts, especially
by terrorist groups and their affiliates, Malaysia has
sought to further strengthen international protection
norms for children in armed conflict, in particular by
including abduction as an additional trigger for listing
in the Secretary-General’s annual reports on children
and armed conflict. As Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, we are grateful for
the overwhelming support demonstrated by Council
members and United Nations Member States during the
open debate held on 18 June (see S/PV.7466) and for
resolution 2225 (2015).
By way of statistics, the Council has held a total of
26 meetings, out of which 22 were public. Additionally,
three Arria Formula meetings have been held in June
2/21

30/06/2015

concerning the situations in Darfur, Syria and — just
this morning — on climate change and its implications
for international peace and security, reflecting, in
our view, healthy use of other meeting formats by
Council members. With regard to outcomes in June, the
Council has adopted a total of 22 products, including 6
resolutions and 2 presidential statements, and issued 15
press statements. It is disconcerting that a large number
of the press statements have been in relation to terrorist
attacks.
Today marks six months since Malaysia joined the
Council. In our view, the Council’s work in 2015 has
thus far been largely positive. For example, a number
of important norm-setting initiatives on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict — including journalists,
women, girls and children — were adopted between
January and June. However, over the same period the
Council has also seen a deterioration in a number of
situations, most notably in Burundi, the Sudan, South
Sudan, Syria, Ukraine and Yemen. At the same time,
the Council has also proven its dynamism in rising to
new challenges, as demonstrated by its engagement on
the issue of migrants at sea, both in the Mediterranean
and in South-East Asian waters.
As stated earlier, the challenge to international
peace and security posed by the twin scourges of
terrorism and violent extremism has continued to loom
large on the Council’s agenda. Malaysia believes that,
over the past six months, the Council has demonstrated
a strengthened resolve to tackle and address these
scourges, and particularly the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters, including through follow-up decisions
and initiatives. In that connection, we welcome the
initiative of Lithuania and Spain to organize the
extraordinary meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), scheduled to be held
in Madrid next month.
Just last Friday, the United Nations commemorated
its seventieth anniversary. Since its inception, the
United Nations and the Security Council have been at
the forefront in maintaining international order, peace
and stability. There have been numerous successes
in that regard. However, there also remain a number
of seemingly intractable challenges that continue to
impinge on the credibility of the Council and the United
Nations as a whole.
The top of that list must include Palestine, which
has been in conflict and crisis for almost as long as
the United Nations has been in existence. On this, we
15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

believe, the Council has been ineffective for far too long.
We reiterate that it is neither tenable nor acceptable for
Palestine to remain in the status quo. The systematic
decimation and subjugation of an entire people are an
affront to everything which the United Nations and the
Council stand for. It is time for all parties to recommit to
peaceful negotiations, including on final status issues,
and for the Council to step up to its responsibility in
facilitating a peaceful political resolution to the longstanding conflict.
Against the backdrop of raging conflicts in the
Middle East, including in Syria, Yemen and, to a
lesser extent, Iraq, as well as the conflicts in Africa,
particularly in Mali and Libya — exacerbated by the
activities of groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front, Boko Haram and
Al-Qaida, among others — Malaysia believes that there
is an increasing need for the Council to take a more
strategic approach, including by looking at the future
implications of such conflicts at the regional and global
levels. Without being prescriptive, the following issues
lie ahead, on which, in our view, the Council should
have initial conversations or discussion.
First are the implications for regional and
subregional security and stability, for example in the
Middle East, in view of the significant stresses on the
countries of the region forced to cope with refugees and
displaced persons fleeing the conflict in Syria. Similarly,
the possible future implications of the various conflicts
in Africa include the security implications of massive
movements of those fleeing such conflicts, including
through North Africa. While noting that the United
Nations does have regional-level conflict-prevention
capacities — for example, through the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia — no
comparable capacity exists for the Middle East, which
could arguably benefit from such a mechanism.
As highlighted during the recent meeting of
the Council’s Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, the possibility
of election-related violence flaring up and rapidly
deteriorating into possible threats to international peace
and security must also be on our radar, as must the need
to work with the General Assembly in moving forward
on the issue of selecting the next Secretary-General. In
that regard, we note the proposals that have been put
forward on this issue, and look forward to discussing

S/PV.7479

them further with Council members and interested
partners and stakeholders,
In concluding, Malaysia reaffirms its support for
meetings such as this, which provide the necessary
space for continuing a regular collective assessment of
the Council’s performance, as well as the opportunity
for us to cast an eye on the challenges and opportunities
that lie on the horizon in our collective endeavour of
maintaining international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, and your team for your hard work
this month, and for your invitation to hold this wrapup session, which is a very welcome initiative. As your
statistics made clear, it has been a productive month in
terms of products, but it has also been a challenging one
when we consider the increased threats to peace and
security around the world.
I look forward in particular to hearing the
reflections of other recently elected members of the
Council, but as I am personally a new arrival, I thought
that I would take this opportunity to offer my thoughts
on the work of the Council on the basis of my first two
months here. I want to share my impressions on three
issues: working methods, the importance of Council
unity, and the challenges ahead.
On working methods, in my first couple of months
here I have been struck by how formal our interactions
can be, whatever the format, including in Arria Formula
meetings, in so-called informal consultations and even
in so-called informal interative dialogues. In all these
forums, I want to ask everyone what we can do to be
more responsive and more interactive with each other
and with those briefing us.
This month, for instance, we met a very broad range
of leaders, activists and specialists working in Somalia,
Syria, the Sudan. We welcomed the Force Commanders
to the Council. All of these individuals bring insights
that are invaluable for our work. But the formality of
our interactions with them can sometimes limit our
ability to draw effectively on their experience.
And I think particularly when we are meeting in
private, we need to break away from the predictable
pattern of reading prepared statements out loud, and

15-202553/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

instead, properly engage with each other and briefers.
Maybe even — shock horror — on a first-name basis that
reflects our familiar and daily interactions. We should
ask questions; we should interject. A dialogue should
be an exchange, not a broadcast of views. If we do all
agree on a point, then why does everyone need to say it?
Why do not we just say that we agree with someone else
and move on? Otherwise we end up reading out talking
points that have already been made by other people. I
know that others around the Council, and beyond, share
this view, and both the peace operations review and the
Office of Internal Oversight Services recommend that
we have more open and honest conversations. So to do
so, I believe we need to begin by looking again at our
working methods and making them more engaging and
interactive.
For my second reflection, I have been struck by
how the Council can make real progress when there
is unity. And we have seen such unity on counterterrorism and on the fight against Ebola. We are also
seeing it on some of the hardest issues we face, such as
Yemen and Libya. But as events in Ukraine and Syria
have demonstrated, when the Council is divided, our
response falters and people suffer. As we look ahead to
the next six months, we need to redouble our efforts to
find common cause on those issues too.
And there are areas where we can agree, even on
the most divisive issues like Syria. Through the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) we were able to agree
that a transitional governing body is needed — one that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people. A strong,
stable, inclusive Government in Syria is the only way to
counter the threat posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant; the Al-Assad regime has neither the legitimacy
nor the ability to do so. And the moderate opposition
cannot do so alone. So whatever our national starting
point in that conflict, we must all come together to help
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in his efforts to bring
about a political settlement, which is the only way to
find an end to that awful conflict. So if we can make an
extra effort to seek out common ground, if we can adopt
some slightly more engaging working practices, maybe
we will have a little bit more success in addressing the
challenges ahead.
And that is my final reflection. It is on the scale
of the challenges which the Council and the United
Nations, as a whole, will face in the coming months.
The President set out a long list — Middle East,
migration, conflicts in Africa — and one could add

4/21

30/06/2015

climate change, conflict prevention, achieving the
sustainable development goals. It is clear that we have a
lot to do. But in addition to all of those, I want to focus
on two further issues of particular importance to the
United Kingdom: the selection of the next SecretaryGeneral and the review of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security.
As I announced on my first day in April, the
United Kingdom wants to see a more transparent,
structured and inclusive selection process for the
next Secretary-General. That means encouraging the
broadest selection of credible candidates — men and
particularly women — and setting a clear timeline for
appointment. And it is the Council that must take the
lead in this process, as it is the Council that has been
mandated in the Charter of the United Nations to make
the recommendation to the General Assembly.
I think we need to accelerate our work on that, but
also think about how we can broaden out and give all
States Members of the United Nations and civil society
an opportunity to assess the candidates’ credentials.
If all qualifications are equal, the United Kingdom
believes that it is high time for a woman to lead the
United Nations. Twenty years on from the Beijing
Declaration, it is time for the United Nations to show
leadership and embody the practices it encourages all
of its Members to follow.
Which brings me also to women, peace and security.
There has been too little implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in the 15 years since it was adopted. The
United Kingdom sees the high-level review on women,
peace and security in October as a chance to begin a new
phase for this agenda; one focused on implementation
and results for women affected by conflict. We want
to see women at peace talks and real protection for the
most vulnerable. Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi will
be leading the Council when we consider the issue in
October, and I look forward to working closely with
him and the Spanish mission, and with all Council
members, to further the agenda.
Finally, let me close by welcoming that the Council
is holding this meeting in public. It is a pity that it is
the first wrap-up meeting since the French presidency
in March. These open sessions are important. And like
the working practices I have described, they can bring
greater transparency and greater engagement into our
discussions and our decisions.

15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I agree with my colleague.
But I will add to his words. I wish to express, first of
all, my delegation’s appreciation to you personally,
Mr. President, and to the Malaysian team for your
efficient conduct of the Council presidency during
the month. My delegation appreciates the diligent
manner in which the presidency has acted in reacting to
emergencies and efficiently conducting consultations.
We also thank the presidency for the very timely open
debate on children and armed conflict (see S/PV.7466),
and for shepherding the adoption of resolution 2225
(2015), focusing on the recruitment and abduction of
children.
Looking back at the agenda of the Council in June,
I wish to share some thoughts on the working methods
and key developments in the Council’s discharge of its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.
The Council has been consistently opening more doors.
Hardly has there been a day in June when the Council
has not met in public. Only a few of the briefings by the
Secretariat were in consultations, while the majority
were delivered in the Chamber.
We are happy to note and to encourage the progress
made in the delivering of briefings by the Secretariat.
Such briefings should not duplicate the contents of
the reports of the Secretary-General. As the Council
is always pressed for time in consultations, we expect
briefers to be succinct and to focus on critical issues.
I believe that during this month, the Council wrote a
letter to the Secretariat in that regard.
Speaking of format, it was unfortunate that at the
joint briefing of the three subsidiary bodies dealing
with counter-terrorism on 16 June (see S/PV.7463),
the Council deviated from its existing practice, as
non-Council members were not granted the right to
participate in the discussions pursuant to rule 37. Such
meetings provide a rare opportunity for the broader
membership to share ideas and concerns with the
Council regarding the global threats of terrorism and
non-proliferation and ways to address them in working
together with the subsidiary bodies.
We are also concerned that, due to the protracted
process of the selection of a new Ombudsperson to the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime, a gap may occur between
the terms of the incumbent and the new Ombudsperson.
Such a scenario would be not only contrary to the
Council’s decisions, but would also undermine the
credibility of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. We
expect the Secretariat to take all necessary steps to

S/PV.7479

ensure a smooth and orderly transition beyond 13 July,
including the further extension of Ms. Prost’s contract,
if necessary.
This month the Council held a very useful briefing
with United Nations Force Commanders (see S/PV.7464).
I thank Malaysia for organizing that. Further efforts
should be made to allow Force Commanders to engage
more frequently in such interactive dialogue, while
Council members should focus on questions rather than
on statements, because on that particular occasion this
month, 70 per cent of the time was taken up by Council
members, while we listened to the briefers only 30 per
cent of the time. In the months ahead we look forward
to further discussions on the review of peacekeeping
operations.
I wish also to commend the work of the Security
Council Affairs Division (SCAD) for the prompt,
professional and high quality service that it has
provided to Council members consistently, against
the background of jam-packed and tight monthly
programmes of work. The monthly statistics on
Security Council activities hardly capture the full scope
of the work. Numerous interactive dialogue and Arria
Formula meetings — there was mention of three such
meetings this month — and many more substantive
other matters compete with consultations and briefings.
May I suggest to SCAD that the monthly statistics as
of now should reflect also the number of interactive
dialogue meetings held and substantive other matters
addressed in consultations.
Many situations on the ground call for consistent
attention from the international community. I would
like to focus on only three of those that were addressed
by the Council this month: Burundi, Syria and Ukraine.
The Arria Formula meeting on barrel bombs once
again reminded us about the plight of thousands of
civilians in Syria under constant attack by their own
Government without a glimmer of hope in sight. While
only a political solution of the crisis can occur in Syria,
the cruel, senseless and indiscriminate bombing of
civilians must stop immediately. The Council can and
must act.
The situation in Burundi has preoccupied the
Council in June. The first round of elections was held
yesterday against the advice of the African Union, the
East African Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the United Nations to
postpone them. Some 10,000 Burundians voted over

15-202555/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the weekend with their feet as they fled the country.
The Council has to remain vigilant in order prevent the
worst happening in the country.
As we follow the steady erosion of the ceasefire
regime by the actions of the regular Russian troops and
illegal armed groups in the Donbas very closely and
with great concern, we are worried that Russia wants to
strip itself of responsibility, and that it is not facilitating
the work of the Trilateral Contact Group and its working
groups. In June, the Council held an urgency meeting
(S/PV.7457) to react to major breaches of the Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015) in Marinka and
Krasnogorivka by the Russia-backed militants. We
have to remain vigilant as militants have now amassed
substantial troops, tanks and heavy weapons on the
contact line. The situation there is very, very fragile.
The United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights has consistently
flagged, for a number of months in a row, reports of
sophisticated heavy weaponry and fighters being
supplied from the Russian Federation. We look forward
to hearing Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights Ivan Šimonović address the Council on the
human rights situation in occupied Crimea and certain
parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. A genuine
and inclusive political dialogue will remain impossible
while the fighting continues and the terms of the truce
are neglected. The Minsk agreements establish a clear
sequence of necessary actions.
Finally, we welcome the letter sent to you,
Mr. President, on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, containing proposals related
to the forthcoming appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral. We believe that the group’s call to initiate the
discussions at the Council regarding those proposals is
timely and should be taken in consideration.
Let me conclude by wishing best success to the
ambassador of New Zealand for the country’s upcoming
presidency in the month of July. New Zealand may
count on our support.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, we would
like to congratulate the delegation of Malaysia on its
presidency of the Security Council during the month
of June, and to thank it for convening this meeting. We
must acknowledge the heavy work load in the Council’s
agenda, which sometimes puts unbearable pressure
on small delegations, as is the case of our own. The
situation does not pertain specifically to the Malaysian

6/21

30/06/2015

presidency. In fact, the heavy workload is a structural
feature of Security Council work matters. Additionally,
the Council is faced by increasing conflict situations
around the world which are imposing very heavy work
schedules upon it.
In terms of work for the month of June, African
and the Middle East issues were central in the Security
Council discussions and deliberations. On the African
issues, we had the occasion to hold a dialogue with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Region, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily.
Mr. Bathily was candid in pointing out the very worrying
situation in the region, and above all, the activities of
the Lord’s Resistance Army, its criminal deeds and the
actions being taken for its demise. Mr. Bathily portayed
the situation prevailing in the Central African Republic
as a ray of hope with the completion of the Bangui
Forum, which the country’s broad political spectrum
joined for the first time in many years. According to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the efforts of regional and international mediators have
been instrumental in laying the ground for the gradual
solution of the crisis, with a fundamental benchmark in
the holding of elections in October 2015.
Still in the Central African region, the situation
in Burundi has become a source of great concern to
the Security Council. The holding of elections and its
consequences in and around Burundi, as well as the
stance adopted by regional stakeholders, has had a
great impact in the proceedings of the Security Council
during the month, with divisions surfacing among
Council members on how to best to assist Burundi.
However, great concerns remain, and the situation in
Burundi will surely be at the centre of the Council’s
agenda for the next month, we hope, and not for the
worst reasons.
Tangible progress seems to be occurring in Côte
d’Ivoire and Mali. It is our expectation that both
countries are on the right track towards lasting peace.
Darfur remains very problematic, with little or no
progress at all towards the establishment of a more
peaceful environment. In Côte d’Ivoire, a volatile
situation seems to be emerging, and the Security
Council adopted resolution 2226 (2015) extending the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire mandate in
preparation for the Mission’s drawdown if, as we hope,
the elections to be held in October are successful and
the security situation has stabilized. The resolution
transmits some sense of optimism that things in Côte

15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

d’Ivoire might work out and the country may enter a
phase of sustained peace and stability.
Concerning Mali, the Council took stock of
recent developments with the signing of the peace
agreement by all parties. The resolution adopted by the
Council, extending the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, entrusts the Mission with fundamental tasks, inter
alia, to deploy efforts to ensure the implementation of
the peace agreement, the monitoring of the ceasefire
and support for the return of the State authority to the
north of the country. Now it is high time to mobilize all
efforts in order to make things succeed in Mali.
Darfur was a most complex and divisive issue during
the work of the month. The adoption of a resolution
extending the mandate of the United Nations-African
Union Mission in Darfur was quite an achievement
in such a divisive atmosphere, especially taking into
account the exit strategy established for the Mission, as
strongly requested by the Sudanese authorities and its
linkage to a set of benchmarks to be met. Most likely,
Darfur will remain a fixed item in the Council’s work
for some time despite the bold desire to end the mission
in Darfur.
The Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa, chaired by Angola, held
a meeting during the month of June related to the
electorial processes in various African countries
during the biennium. The meeting included the Special
Representatives in West and Central Africa, who
attended via video teleconference and briefed members
on country-specific situations related to electoral
processes and conflict situations that might arise from
them due to the non-compliance of many political
actors with the constitutional rules and the election
results. Even so, they are considered by international
observation teams to be just and fair. The Permanent
Observer of the African Union, who also took part in
the meeting, outlined the African Union position on
the prevention of post-election-related conflicts, and
noted the responsibility of every individual State to
respect the African Union electoral framework and its
constitutional order.
The Council gave extensive consideration to the
situation in the Middle East, with particular emphasis on
the conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Palestine. However,
contrary to the moderate optimism that we assigned to
certain evolving situations in Africa, no solutions to
these conflicts are in sight. On the contrary, the Middle

S/PV.7479

East conflicts seem to lead to an abyss. The growing
terrorist threat in the region constitutes an extremely
dangerous development, with evil contours that only a
wise collective effort can contain and eradicate. The
Security Council, if it acted in a united manner and
really focused in the search for solutions to the most
intractable conflicts, could represent this collective
effort and embody the wisdom necessary to put an
end to bloodshed and to the immense human suffering
imposed upon the peoples of the region.
Some of the debates and briefings held during
the month were important moment in the Council’s
work. The debate on children and armed conflict,
and the briefings on peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and on subsidiary bodies, were relevant contributions
to deepening the thematic agenda of the Security
Council. In particular, the debate on children and
armed conflict (see S/PV.7466), a central theme of
the Malaysian presidency, was a remarkable success
with the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which
added abduction to the framework of international
law and as a criterion for listing parties in the annex
of the Secretary-General’s annual reports on children
and armed conflict. In addition, the debate added a
dimension to the Working Group’s efforts to keep the
issue at the forefront of the Security Council’s agenda.
The briefings on peacekeeping and peacebuilding were
important contributions to the debate on the review
of peacekeeping and on peacebuilding architecture to
which we must add a review of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security.
We have received a letter from the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group regarding
the selection and appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral in 2016. As Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, we will try to work with Member States
to find ways for the practical implementation of the
proposals contained in the ACT letter.
Finally, we would like to refer to the semi-annual
briefings by the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and related committees at a time when the
fight against terrorism has become a real international
emergency. Conscious of the danger that terrorism
represents, the issue enjoys the unanimous support
of Council members, and the meeting reflected that
reality (see S/PV.7463).
International criminal justice was part of the
monthly agenda with debates on the International

15-202557/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and for the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court briefed the Council on
the issue of Darfur and the case of President Al-Bashir
of the Sudan. Also noted was the need to review
Council referrals to the Court since the present system
undermines the Tribunal’s prestige and authority and
creates unsolvable problems with stakeholders as
distinct as the African Union and the International
Criminal Court.
Mr. Fernández-Arias Minuesa (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Malaysian presidency on leadership this month. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this wrap-up session, which we feel is very appropriate
because it also allows us to summarize the Council’s
work during the first half of 2015. For the delegation
of Spain, these six months have been the first of our
two-year term in the Council — the fifth time we have
participated as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. Spain highly appreciates the convening of
such meetings for various reasons, which we would like
to highlight.
First, as elected members of the Security Council,
we understand that we must faithfully comply with our
commitment to transparency and collaboration with all
States Members of the Organization — a commitment
we undertook during our campaign for election. Those
elected to the Council, like all members in general, have
a responsibility to exercise transparency. We reiterate
our readiness to work with the entire membership
and with civil society organizations with a view to
ensuring that the Security Council continues to grow in
efficiency and transparency.
Secondly, wrap-up sessions like today’s can be very
useful in improving the Council’s working methods.
Naturally, the effective work of the Council is not just
a prior condition for providing an agile response to
crises. Efficacy, efficiency and transparency are central
elements in reforming the Council’s working methods,
which is of particular importance to my country. That
is why Spain has been working with Angola, Chair of
the Ad Hoc Group on Working Methods, to organize an
open debate on working methods during the Spanish
presidency of the Council in October.
I would like to relate my thoughts on our experience
in the first six months on the Council this year, which
also leads me to a few considerations on working
methods.
8/21

30/06/2015

One concern is the way in which the penholder
system works. Undoubtedly, the quality of the work
of the penholders is excellent and allows the Security
Council’s work to enjoy the necessary continuity
and follow-up. However, from the point of view
transparency, we believe that there could perhaps
be room for improvement. This is an especially
important point because unless the information we
receive is timely and specific, it is not always possible
to participate thoughtfully in the drafting of Council
documents, be they resolutions, press releases or
presidential statements. That being the case, it may
be paradoxical that elected members, serving just
two-year terms, have had less time in training than
permanent members to participate in negotiations on
various resolutions. That is why we feel it would be
worthwhile to introduce a system of co-penholders in
which one permanent member would always work with
one elected non-permanent member.
We also feel that at times there is a lack of proportion
between the time taken to explain positions and the
time spent actually taking decisions. I know that time
is at a premium, but I believe that we need to strike a
better balance in the way we manage our time, because
it may seem that the time given to debate a matter can
extend for hours at the expense of the time we need
to take operative decisions, which we often must take
within minutes. On more than one occasion, we have
experienced hours of discussion and just 10 minutes on
the content of a press release.
I also believe that the lack of interaction between
Council members and the rest of the membership of
the Organization in the open debates is of particular
concern. The open debates lose a lot of their meaning
in that way because their purpose to provide an
opportunity for genuine interaction between members
and non-members of the Council on issues that are
central to peace and security at any given point in time.
I would now like to mention two matters raised by
previous speakers. The selection of the next SecretaryGeneral is one of the most important aspects that we
will be dealing with in upcoming months. Transparency
must be a central principle, pursuant to Article 97 of the
Charter of the United Nations. I take this opportunity
to encourage greater transparency and inclusiveness in
the selection process for the next Secretary-General.
Among possible measures is the establishment of a list
of candidates and the presentation of candidacies in
sufficient time to allow for interaction with Member

15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

States. We also feel that it is essential to bear in mind
the need for gender balance in the selection of the next
Secretary-General.
Among other matters, we will soon need to
consider a revision of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, an issue on which Spain plans
to organize a high-level open debate during its Council
presidency. The review of resolution 1325 (2000) will
be a major priority for us in our two-year term on the
Council. I take this opportunity to call for high-level
participation in that future debate, to be organized
and held in October. I hope that it will add value
commensurate with the important goals of that agenda,
as the Ambassador of the United Kingdom said just
now, while avoiding an excess of rhetoric and a lack of
practical implementation.
As noted at the Arria Formula meeting that Spain
organized at the end of May with the members of
the three panels preparing reports on the peace and
security reviews, the review of resolution 1325 (2000)
should overlap with the reviews of the peacebuilding
architecture and peacekeeping operations, and
complement both. We need to take a detailed look at the
report of the Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
My delegation welcomes the inclusion of a separate
section on women and peace and security in the report,
where some of the contributions that Spain made in our
national capacity would be included.
In conclusion, my delegation appreciates the close
and frank cooperation that we have enjoyed with all
the members of the Council throughout these months,
as well as with the Secretariat and the wonderful
interpretation team. We hope to further deepen that
cooperation and help to improve the efficiency and
transparency of the work of the Council in the year and
a half that remains. Finally, I would wish all the best
to New Zealand during their presidency of the Council
next month.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, and the Malaysian delegation for
your leadership this month.
Much of our time this month has been spent
addressing security challenges in Africa, and much of
that on Burundi. Yesterday, Burundi recklessly moved
forward with elections, despite the African Union (AU),
the Secretary-General and others urging delay. The
risk of mass violence in Burundi remains acute. The
elections yesterday were conducted in an environment

S/PV.7479

that was not free, fair or transparent. Those were simply
not credible elections.
In the face of real risks of instability and grave
violence, instead of allowing space for the opposition
to speak, demonstrate and organize, the Government
of Burundi has done the reverse, ratcheting up
restrictions, locking up opponents, shutting down radio
stations, arming youth militias and intimidating those
who disagree. They do this as President Nkurunziza
continues to seek a third term in office, directly violating
commitments undertaken in the Arusha Accords.
The Government of Burundi must restore
independent media outlets, release political detainees,
condemn violence, ensure credible presidential
elections and allow space for political opposition and
civil society to function without fear of retribution.
We strongly support efforts by the United Nations, the
AU, the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to broker a
peaceful resolution to this crisis, and we urge the
Government to engage in a genuine dialogue with all
parties.
The situation in Darfur, of which the Council has
been seized for over 10 years, demands our attention
and our action. As we struggle to overcome political
divisions, the situation in Darfur continues to seriously
deteriorate, as the Council recognized in its resolution
adopted yesterday, extending the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) for another year. Millions of
displaced people still cannot return to their homes.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and AU Highlevel Implementation Panel political processes have
stalled. The Government of the Sudan has not indicated
that it intends to reinvigorate those processes or stop
its unrelenting aerial bombardments and attacks in
Darfur, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. Meanwhile,
the Government continues to systematically restrict
UNAMID’s freedom of movement and access to the
extent that a peacekeeper needlessly died last month
after the Government shamefully refused to grant a
flight clearance for medical evacuation. The Council’s
attention is needed now more than ever, and so too is
UNAMID.
Turning to our discussions on South Sudan, I want
to recall UNICEF Director Anthony Lake’s 17 June
statement on the violations being committed against
children in South Sudan, with survivors reporting that
boys have been castrated and left to bleed to death

15-202559/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

30/06/2015

and girls as young as eight years old gang raped and
murdered. Children have been tied together, their throats
slit. Just today, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan has released a report that people in Upper Nile
state have been burned alive. I want to read an excerpt
from the report that came out today from our mission
in South Sudan that states that a survivor from Koch
county narrated to the human rights division how she
was dragged out of her tukul and gang raped alongside
her neighbour by Government soldiers in front of her
3-year-old child. The soldiers then taunted them that
they would appreciate what men from Mayom county
were made of. In another instance, a witness from
Rubkona county narrated that she saw Government
forces gang-raping a lactating mother after tossing her
baby aside, while in another case, two witnesses from
Nhialdiu narrated how a 17-year-old girl was gangraped by armed militia who shot her dead. In at least
nine separate incidents, women and girls were burnt in
tukuls after being gang-raped, particularly in the Boaw
village of Koch county.

greater willingness to compromise than they have done
to date.

These reports are a chilling window into the
violence against and acute suffering of South Sudan’s
most vulnerable citizens every day that the parties fail
to demonstrate the courage to resolve this conflict,
and these most recent reports, in our judgement, merit
urgent consideration by the Council. We will work
with the incoming presidency to convene the Council
in the coming days on them. This crisis is man-made,
and those responsible for it must put the well-being of
the South Sudanese people ahead of their own narrow
political interest. To date, they have refused to do so,
and that must change.

This month, we also continued the important
tradition of hearing from Force Commanders on the
front lines of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I would like to emphasize again our appreciation for
their service and our gratitude to all troop contributors
who are bravely serving in peacekeeping missions
around the world. The meeting two weeks ago (see
S/PV.7462) allowed us to discuss several essential
aspects of modern peacekeeping, the imperative of
appropriate training, the importance of expanding the
pool of troop-contributing countries and the kinds
of contributions they make, and the critical question
of how the system handles exceptions to the rules of
engagement. For the peacekeepers putting their lives
on the line for the benefit of humanity, we have a
responsibility to get the system right.

In Yemen, we strongly support the efforts of
Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed to begin
a preliminary dialogue with the Yemeni Government
and the Houthi/Saleh-affiliated delegation in Geneva.
Geneva could serve as the beginning of a long
and — we hope — useful dialogue process. We must
not let momentum falter. To this end, all Council
members must use their influence with the parties to
press them to engage constructively with the United
Nations as it builds on the six principles put forward
in Geneva. These constitute a promising basis for the
United Nations future engagement. A peaceful political
transition consistent with the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative, the National Dialogue Conference outcomes
and relevant Security Council resolutions is the only
way out of the current crisis. All parties must show

10/21

We remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation and fully support the United Nations call for a
new humanitarian pause. For a new pause to be possible,
all sides must be prepared to concretely implement the
pause and be bound by its terms. Resuming commercial
imports is a humanitarian concern of the utmost
importance.
Yesterday, we met to discuss the grave crisis in
Syria. We said it before, and it bears repeating, that no
solution to the Syrian conflict can be imposed by force.
An inclusive political settlement towards a peaceful
transition is the only way to end the conflict, which
has killed more than 220,000 people, injured more than
1 million, driven almost 4 million out of the country
as refugees, internally displaced 7.6 million people and
left 12.2 million others in need of humanitarian aid,
including 5.6 million children. We should not allow this
to continue.

On a related note, President Obama will host a
peacekeeping summit during the General Assembly’s
high-level week, as many members know. Our goal
for the summit will be to step up cooperation among
the United Nations, troop-contributing countries and
financial supporters of peacekeeping to ensure that the
United Nations can draw on the right resources to help
our peacekeeping operations succeed — that is, to make
them more responsive, better at protecting civilians and
more able to fulfil the mandates that we as Member
States call on them and need them to fulfil.

15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Speaking of fulfilling mandates, I would like to
thank the Malaysian delegation for its successful and
steady leadership of the Security Council in June. Our
colleagues from New Zealand can rely on our support
for what promises to be a busy July.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by expressing our appreciation, Mr. President,
for the way in which you have conducted the work of
the Council during the month of June, during which
there were several events of note and the adoption
of several important resolutions and decisions. My
congratulations also go to the team assisting you, who
have contributed to the success of the Council’s work
this month.
I take this opportunity to welcome the Malaysian
initiative of holding an open debate on the protection
of children in conflict situations (see S/PV.7466),
given the scarcely credible increase in the number
of crimes and violations against children in armed
conflicts, in particular in the Middle East and Africa.
In that regard, I note the rise in the number of civilian
victims, particularly children, resulting from arbitrary
bombardments in Syria, and the Syrian regime’s use of
barrel bombs, especially in populated areas and against
hospitals, schools and basic infrastructure. We also
reaffirm the need for the parties to the Syrian conflict
to cease their violations of international law and to
comply with the resolutions of the Security Council.
The Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, needs international support to
reach a solution on Syria that complies with the First
Geneva Convention.
The information provided regarding peacekeeping
operations has clarified what such operations have
been doing in recent years to address the threat posed
by non-State groups and their effects. It has also been
established that there is a correlation between armed
conflict, organized crime and terrorism. Jordan
reaffirms that it will continue to contribute effectively
to peacekeeping operations in support of the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole to achieve objectives of such operations.
I would also like to express our appreciation for the
briefing on post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.7472),
which gave us an overview of progress in that area.
It was established that the United Nations working
procedures related to peacebuilding must be improved
and modernized, and that peacekeeping operations
need adequate financial and human resources. In that

S/PV.7479

regard, we welcome the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Lastly, I congratulate the delegation of
New Zealand on its forthcoming presidency and wish it
every success next month.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me too
begin by congratulating the representative of Malaysia
on his presidency and his hard-working team on their
effectiveness this month. My team was so keen that I
should offer my personal reflections that they declined
to give me formal remarks for this debate, so I am going
to see how I go. I want to offer some reflections on the
substance of what we have achieved this month and also
on the way in which we achieved it, or failed to achieve
it.
We have had some very good debates and a very
good outcome in relation to children and armed conflict
(see S/PV.7466), and I want to commend Malaysia for
making a very substantial contribution to international
lawmaking in that area. I thought that the discussion
on peacebuilding was also very interesting and, once
again, exposed some of the areas into which we must
be prepared to go if we are to make best use of the
peacebuilding machinery beyond the Council.
We also had good results in relation to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (see S/PV.7468) and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (see S/PV.7478), even though there
were some rather deep-seated differences among
delegations regarding whether those mandates needed
to be adjusted. I welcome the fact that we managed to
overcome those differences and adopt the mandates as
a united Council. I hope, as I said yesterday, that the
new mandate of UNAMID will, in particular, provide
an opportunity for a better relationship between the
Government of the Sudan and the Council.
If we look beyond the formal outcomes that we
achieved this month, however, to consider the problems
of the world, we must acknowledge that we have not
done all that well. In Syria, Yemen and Libya, we have
real problems. There are peace talks fitfully under way
in Libya and perhaps under way in Yemen, and nothing
at all in Syria. We have real problems in Burundi, where
the difficulty of genuinely engaging in prevention is
being demonstrated. If the other party does not want
to talk, it is very difficult to be an engaged participant.
That is a real difficulty, and we have just heard some
graphically horrible statistics about what is happening
in South Sudan. Those situations reflect very badly on

15-2025511/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

all of us, not only the members of the Council but the
international community as a whole.
There are some problems for which, I think, the
Council can properly take responsibility, but we must
also admit that there are limits to what it can do. Its
members have few arrows in their quiver, particularly
if other countries are not prepared to put their troops on
the line or authorize more aggressive use of force. Even
if they were prepared to do so, we know how difficult
such outcomes are to achieve. I do not, therefore, mean
to say that the problems are all the Council’s; they are
not. Particularly in the case of Syria, however, we have
a real problem, because the Council is divided, and
similar divisions are in evidence in relation to Yemen.
Because of such divisions, we cannot really talk to each
other and instead seek to score points, which is not
helpful.
Some comments have already been made on the way
in which we go about our business, and I want to fully
endorse what the Ambassador of the United Kingdom
said about the need to engage more informally with
each other. After all, our consultations are intended to
be informal, and yet we have managed to build up a
cadre of practice that is so self-denying that it is hard
to believe at times what one can and cannot talk about,
and the way in which one can talk about it.
I also agree with the delegation of Spain that we
need to think about penholding and the ways in which
resolutions are negotiated. One option might be the
co-penholder proposal, but I would at least ask the
permanent members to imagine the impression given
to the non-permanent members when a draft resolution
is submitted by one of the permanent members to the
other permanent members first, and only then to the
non-permanent members, when it is to be put to a vote
in a day or two. That is not exactly the most useful form
of engagement.
I also think that we as Ambassadors have a
responsibility to engage more in the products that are
negotiated and adopted by this Council. While we of
course recognize the great work done by experts and
political coordinators, we are ultimately responsible for
such products. Yet how often do we really talk about
them? How often to we actually have a conversation as
ambassadors about what we are doing? I believe that we
need to do that, to reach out and suggest that we bring
a given matter to the room and talk about it as a group.

12/21

30/06/2015

Those are sneak previews of what I would like to
explore next month when I am President. I do not know
how I will get on, but I do hope that you will help me.
Mrs. Alingue (Chad) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
leadership of the Council during your presidency, and
the whole of the team that has supported you. I would
also thank you for organizing this monthly meeting
to assess the Security Council’s work in accordance
with note S/2010/507 of the President of Council. We
believe that such meetings remain the only means of
ensuring transparency in relation to non-members and
allowing them to follow our work. The assessment
meetings at the end of each presidency make it possible
to systematically review the Council’s work and give
us an overview of the priorities reflected in the media.
We remain concerned by the lack of consensus
in the Council regarding extremely serious situations
that threaten international peace and security, namely,
those in Syria, Iraq, Ukraine, Yemen and Libya, as well
as other threats, such as terrorism, violent extremism
and the spread and circulation of light weapons, illicit
trafficking and migration issues. We believe that
Council members can do better by listening to each
other and by taking into account each other’s legitimate
concerns in a spirit of consensus.
The adoption of resolution 2220 (2015) on the
strengthening of cooperation to counter the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, adopted
with nine votes in favour and six abstentions, reveals
the power play within the Council and the position of
some member States with regard to the others.
Concerning the political crisis in Burundi,
we underscore the necessity for the international
community to take action to help Burundi overcome
the political crisis it is experiencing. We also note the
primary role of the West African community in settling
the crisis and call for close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, so as to support
regional efforts for an exit from the crisis in the interest
of the Burundian people.
During the month of June, the Security Council
examined ways to make peacekeeping operations
more effective, to protect civilians and to guarantee
the security of mission staff. The need to guarantee
the security of the Blue Helmets themselves was
underscored with concern by force commanders and
by delegations, who talked about, for example, the

15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

planting of mines and improvised explosive devices by
armed groups in Mali. We think that appropriate means
should be made available to United Nations forces to
allow them to protect themselves.
With regard to the restrictions imposed by some
countries on the ways in which their troops can be
used, we think there is a need to have a single chain of
command within military and police contingents and to
uphold the hierarchy of which they are a part, without
giving priority to the orders of national authorities.
With regard to sexual abuse during United Nations
missions, which has been unanimously and strongly
denounced by all delegations, we believe that the
zero-tolerance policy must be made a reality. In that
connection, we endorse the proposal to include more
women staff in peacekeeping operations, including in
high-ranking posts.
With regard to violence against children in armed
conflict, our country agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation, namely, that the Council
should ensure that grave violations perpetrated against
children be considered crimes subject to Security
Council sanctions. We encourage States and financial
partners to shore up actions to reintegrate former child
soldiers and prevent their recruitment into armed forces.
Chad welcomes the fact that it was de-listed from the
list of States with children in their armies. Of course,
we stand ready to share our modest experience in that
area with interested parties.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again my
congratulations to the President and the whole Malaysian
team for the significant work undertaken, the relevance
of the topics addressed and the perseverance they
demonstrated throughout their presidency. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate New Zealand
ahead of time on its assumption of the presidency in
July and wish it every success. The delegation of New
Zealand can count on Chad’s support.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening this wrapup session. June has indeed been a busy month for the
Council with various country situations and thematic
issues on its programme of work. We would like to focus
our comments today on the briefing on peacekeeping
operations (S/PV.7464), the briefing on peacebuilding
(S/PV.7472) and the Security Council press statements
issued during the month.

S/PV.7479

The briefing on peacekeeping operations once
again presented the Council with an opportunity to hear
directly from and interact with force commanders. The
three themes of the briefing, which were operating in
an asymmetric environment, the protection of civilians
and how caveats affect performance, highlight some of
the key contemporary challenges faced by peacekeeping
operations. We are pleased to note that, despite those
challenges, peacekeeping missions continue to play a
vital role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We pay tribute to the men and women serving
in those missions and we offer our deepest condolences
to the loved ones of the peacekeepers who have lost
their lives in the line of duty.
The briefing on peacebuilding underscored the
value of maintaining a close engagement between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Nigeria is of the view that, for peacebuilding to
be effective, sustained attention must be paid
to
institution-building;
security-sector
reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and
the strengthening of the rule of law. Also important are
the promotion of national dialogue and reconciliation.
We must note the interdependence of those thematic
issues. They underline the imperative for sustained
commitment in addressing the multifaceted challenges
of assisting countries transitioning from conflict to
peace.
The Nigerian delegation pays tribute to Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota of Brazil for his achievements
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We
also offer our strong support to the current PBC Chair,
Ambassador Olof Skoog of Sweden, and welcome his
commitment to making the biggest possible difference
in the countries that the Commission is working with.
We are confident that, under his able leadership, the
PBC will continue to play a vital role in promoting
sustainable peace and development in those countries.
The timely issuance of press statements is an
important aspect of the Council’s work. They allow the
Council to respond publicly to significant developments
on matters on its agenda. In June, the Council adopted
a significant number of press statements, mainly
on terrorist attacks, but also on other matters of
importance to peace and security, especially at the
regional level. Nigeria commends Council members for
their flexibility, which has allowed us to reach early
consensus on those statements. It is important that the
voice of the Council be heard in a timely manner when

15-2025513/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the situation so demands. That sends an important
message of unity and common purpose among Council
members.
Finally, Nigeria congratulates you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for the able manner in which you
have presided over the affairs of the Council in the
month of June. We also seize this opportunity to assure
the delegation of New Zealand of our full support as
they prepare to assume the presidency of the Council
in July.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of
Venezuela congratulates you, Mr. President, and your
team on your initiative, efficiency and leadership in
guiding the work of the Security Council during the
month of June. Great contributions have been made
during this past month to the management of the
Council.
Our country welcomes this wrap-up session
because we believe that these sessions make it possible
to identify the progress and challenges before us in
the complex task of strengthening international peace
and security. In the context of the spirit and purpose
of the Charter of the United Nations, we encourage the
Security Council to deepen its working relationship with
the other Members of the Organization in a transparent
and inclusive way with a view to strengthening its
credibility in the eyes of the entire membership of that
forum.
The issue of children in armed conflict has attracted
the Council’s attention, and your presidency resolutely
promoted consideration of that topic. Venezuela
believes the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015) was
extremely important. It requested the Secretary-General
to include, in the annexes to his reports on the issue,
parties that resort to kidnapping children in situations
of armed conflict and it calls on them to cease unlawful
or arbitrary detention, as well as torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
imposed on children during their detention.
In the context of that important debate on 18 June
(see S/PV.7466), in particular with regard to the case of
Palestine, a significant number of countries, including
Venezuela, expressed their concern and rejected the
inconsistency and selectivity shown in the treatment
of the occupying Power, which had committed serious
violations against Palestinian children, in the annexes
to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/409).

14/21

30/06/2015

In the work that was done this past month, we would
like to highlight the importance of the informational
meeting (see S/PV.7464), held on 17 June, with the
force commanders of the peacekeeping operations
in Darfur, Mali and in separation zone in the Golan
Heights. Those exchanges led to agreement on the need
to ensure that peacekeeping troops are provided with
adequate training, equipment and resources, as well
as to ensure that they are determined and willing to
fulfil their mandates, regardless of the circumstances
in which they operate. Such issues will continue to fuel
our discussions in the next few months.
We would also like to mention the informative
meeting held with the current Chair and the former
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassadors
Olof Skoog and Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, on the
Commission’s eighth session (see S/PV.7472). Some of
the most relevant subjects discussed were the importance
of including regional and subregional organizations and
neighbouring countries in the peacebuilding process;
the fundamental role that the Commission plays in
tying together the goals of stability, political legitimacy,
the rule of law and socioeconomic development; and
the need to obtain additional resources for the tasks
involved in peacebuilding. In that regard, we would
like to highlight the challenge of continuing to provide
long-term sustained support to post-conflict countries.
The cost of any effort aimed at strengthening such
countries’ institutional, technical, economic and social
capabilities pales in comparison to the human and
economic costs that relapses into conflict can bring.
Those issues have paved the way for the necessary
informed discussion of the reports of bodies studying
peace operations, peacebuilding and the achievements
of resolution 1325 (2005). Those meetings have served
as a prelude to what will surely be an intense debate on
the future of some of the Council’s fundamental tools
for promoting and maintaining international peace and
security.
During the Security Council’s intensive work over
the past six months, the fight against terrorism has
been high on its agenda, and those efforts have led
to decisions with a global reach aimed at effectively
combating that scourge. Resolution 2199 (2015) and
the presidential statement on foreign terrorist fighters
(S/PRST/2015/11) reinforce the legal and political
multilateral framework needed to prevent, combat
and eliminate international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. The implementation of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on that topic
15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

requires a strong commitment on the part of States to
ending arms transfers and the financing and training of
non-State actors, in accordance with international law.
We also appreciate the activities aimed at strengthening
international cooperation in our shared effort to combat
violent extremism, which have been scheduled for the
coming months.
Beyond that, and regarding conflict situations that
remain unresolved, with negative consequences for
the peoples involved, such as in Palestine and Western
Sahara, among others, we call on the Security Council,
based on its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations, to take a more active role in promoting
peaceful negotiated solutions, with the full cooperation
of the parties concerned, in order to achieve firm and
lasting peace.
Venezuela attaches particular importance to
improving the Security Council’s methods of work,
which is vital if we are to promote transparency and
inclusiveness. In that regard, we believe that the process
of selecting and nominating the next Secretary-General,
which will start in the next few months, should be
guided by those principles, so as to encourage Member
States to propose candidates. The official presentation
of candidacies for the post of Secretary-General
should be done far in enough in advance to ensure
better interaction between the General Assembly and
the Security Council. We appreciate the initiatives
and statements that have been made on the matter by
various groups of States, including the Non-Aligned
Movement, whose position we fully share.
Strengthening the Security Council’s relationship
with troop-contributing countries is a crucial point on
its agenda. We therefore believe it essential that we
fully apply Article 44 of the Charter in order to ensure
that countries that provide contingents can participate
in every aspect and at every stage of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, with the goal of achieving
more effective coordination between the actors involved
in the missions’ institutional dynamics.
We would like to encourage the Council to
intensify its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter, with a view to helping to find solutions to
regional conflicts that have an impact on international
peace and security. Despite the importance of that
objective, we regret that the African Union’s Special
Envoy on the question of Western Sahara, former
President Joaquim Chissano, was not permitted to take

S/PV.7479

part in the discussions on the subject held in April
(see S/PV.7435). The fact that the African Union is a
strategic ally of the United Nations, and particularly
the Security Council, in the promotion of peace and
stability in Africa was not taken into consideration.
That situation affects this body’s working methods,
including its transparency, and in the future such
practices should therefore be avoided.
Turning to another issue, Venezuela believes
that the Security Council should confine its focus to
dealing with matters that affect international peace
and security, in strict accordance with the Charter, and
avoid putting issues that are beyond its purview on its
agenda. That is necessary in order to ensure that the
Council’s attention is not distracted from the issues that
are central to its work.
Finally, we would like to express our support for and
desire to cooperate with the delegation of New Zealand
when it takes over the presidency of the Council for the
month of July, for which we wish it every success.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council’s agenda over the past
month has been extremely busy, Mr. President, and we
would like to thank your delegation for presiding so
capably over its functions.
I would like to focus on various important subjects.
The central event of the Malaysian presidency was
its convening of a meeting on the topic of children
and armed conflict (see S/PV.7466). We share the
concern of others about the terrible plight of millions
of children living amid armed conflict in various
parts of the world. The new trend of violence against
children perpetrated by terrorist organizations and
groups professing ideologies of violent extremism is
particularly worrying.
We also welcomed the meeting on 17 June on
peacekeeping issues (see S/PV.7464) in which the force
commanders of a number of field missions participated.
Such dialogue is especially important in view of the
new challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping
operations today. One of the most dangerous current
trends is the growing number of non-traditional
security risks to peacekeepers created by non-State
actors. It is also essential that we establish constructive
cooperation between United Nations missions and
host Governments, which, by definition, are directly
responsible for the protection of their populations and
the overall situation in their countries.

15-2025515/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The relevance of the questions that came up during
that meeting was confirmed in the Security Council’s
discussion of a number of the topics relating to countries
in Africa that have traditionally been a focus of the
Council’s work. The unanimous adoption of resolution
2228 (2015) reaffirmed the role of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur as a solid basis for a settlement
in the region. The Council again clearly expressed
its support for the head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to act
as a mediator between the Government of the Sudan and
the Darfur rebels on the basis of the Doha Document.
The parties that have influence on the Darfur rebels
must urge them to become involved in the Doha peace
process as soon as possible. The Council also affirmed
the key role of the Joint Working Group consisting of
representatives of the Sudan, the United Nations and
the African Union in developing an exit strategy for
UNAMID’s withdrawal from Darfur. The Council and
the United Nations Secretariat should study the Group’s
recommendations very carefully.
On 20 June in Bamako, the complex process of
producing a comprehensive settlement for Mali was
concluded with the completion of the signing of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It has
opened the way for an end to the armed conflict and to
achieving a broad national consensus.
It is our hope that all of the political forces in Mali
will shoulder their responsibilities in implementing the
provisions of the agreement and continue the peace
process dialogue. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali should play an
important role in that regard, as enshrined in resolution
2227 (2015) adopted yesterday. The international
community should help to strengthen progress; in that
connection, we believe that the threat of sanctions
would be counter-productive.
The situation in Burundi has remained a focus of
the Council’s attention, in which context presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/13 was adopted. Of utmost
importance is an appeal to conduct inclusive internal
Burundian dialogue on the organization of elections,
based on the country’s Constitution. It is our view that
further postponement of the electoral timetable could
give rise to a constitutional vacuum and increased
chaos in Burundi.
We welcome the steps taken by the Government to
bring stability to the country by way of implementing
the decisions of the African Union and the East
16/21

30/06/2015

African Community, including by providing security
guarantees to all political leaders in the electoral period
and measures for the disarming of the population.
Those who have influence on the opponents to the
Government, who have continued to exacerbate the
situation in the hope of sinking the elections, must act
to stop them from continuing and from spurring the
anti-Government forces towards new illegal actions.
In June the Council continued to actively address
the issue of the Middle East and North Africa. The
situation in the region was marked by high volatility
and stabilizing it will be impossible without achieving
a political and diplomatic solution to the regional crises.
Given the new crises and those that have been going on
for several decades, it is unfortunate that there appears
to be no reason for optimism regarding a settlement to
the crisis in the Middle East.
As a result of outside intervention in the conflict
in Syria and actions by the armed opposition, a new
threat has arisen, namely, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). It is taking hold in neighbouring Iraq
and planting roots in Lebanon and other countries of
the region, and beyond. United Nations peacekeepers
now find themselves under threat as a result. We
strongly condemn the incidents that have resulted in the
wounding of United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force peacekeepers. Today, ISIL is strengthening its
foothold in Afghanistan. It is also targeting Central
Asia. In Europe, terrorism has also appeared, as can
been seen from events directly tied to that armed group.
We are convinced that all countries in the region
must now set aside the disagreements that have always
existed and probably will remain on various matters.
Instead, they must focus all efforts on combating
the threat that is shared by all, namely, terrorism.
The Syrian Government has an indisputable right
to decisively combat terrorism in the country, while
upholding relevant international obligations. However,
given the scale of the activities of ISIL, Jabhat al-Nusra
and their enablers, Syrian efforts alone will not suffice.
It is also important not to lose sight of the terrorist
factor in Yemen. There is every reason to believe that
Al-Qaida is spreading its influence there, too. We must
prevent terrorists from filling the political vacuum
and using the possible agreement of the Yemeni sides
to their own ends. We must continue to work with the
Yemeni parties to urgently start a thoughtful dialogue
on ways to halt the conflict and establish effective
and representative bodies of power. We understand
15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the importance of an inclusive Yemeni dialogue and
of Yemenis, themselves, defining their own future
without outside intervention. Once again, we would
like to underscore the need for a speedy declaration
in Yemen of humanitarian truces, given the disastrous
situation there.
With regard to the situation in Ukraine we wish to
state that the meeting of the Contact Group in June, as
well as the of sub-working groups on various matters,
and the Normandy Four meeting on 23 June have
demonstrated that there is no alternative to the Minsk
process, and to a full implementation of the package
of measures. Likewise, there is no alternative to direct
dialogue between Kyiv and Donetsk and Luhansk. I
would like to recall that the Minsk II agreement was
signed by representatives of both Kyiv and Donbas.
Progress in the implementation of the Minsk agreements
is still insufficient. Only six months remain till the end
of 2015.
It is clear now, not only to us but also to the other
members of the Normandy Four, that implementation
of the provisions of the package of measures is being
hampered, first and foremost, by Kyiv. We stated
that, paragraph by paragraph, in the Council meeting
of 5 June (see S/PV.7457). I would like to give the
Council a blatant example. According to media outlets
and statements by the Kyiv Government, active work
is under way to amend the Constitution, in violation
of the package of measures; Donetsk and Luhansk
have been excluded from the process. Furthermore,
at the ministerial meeting in Paris, there was a clear
understanding of the danger of the activities of certain
forces attempting to push the situation towards a
military solution.
We call upon those members of the Council that
are using any opportunity, including today’s meeting,
to repeat propaganda statements, to think about their
responsibility for the situation in Ukraine. It would be
much more productive, instead of blowing hot air, to
bring the necessary pressure to bear on Kyiv for swift
implementation of the Minsk II agreements.
Regarding the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, we do not clearly understand the link
between those matters and the June and July agendas of
the Council, as it would seem that the election of the
new Secretary-General is set for next year. As a matter
of principle, we wish to underscore that we would not
support any attempt to rewrite Article 97 of the Charter

S/PV.7479

of the United Nations. The existing procedure has been
working fine, thus far.
We would like to recall that last time, in 2006, when
the election of the Secretary-General was based on a
run-off, Mr. Ban Ki-moon was elected three months
before the end of Mr. Annan’s term. Regarding the
proposal to optimize procedures with a view to greater
participation in the process on the part of all Member
States, all of those ideas require careful study. We
cannot forget that our primary task is to elect the most
qualified and fitting candidate as Secretary-General.
In conclusion, we would like to wish the New
Zealand delegation every success as it assumes the
presidency of the Council in July.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Malaysian presidency for
its successful leadership of the Council and for this
wrap-up session, which is of imperative importance
to the elected members of the Council in promoting
transparent working methods for the benefit of all
States Members of the United Nations.
Looking back at the past month, we would stress
the importance of the open debate on children and
armed conflict (S/PV.7466) and the support of members
for including kidnapping as an element to trigger the
inclusion of perpetrators in the annexes of the reports
of the Secretary-General. We appreciate the fact that
numerous participants, including Chile, supported
the Lucens Guidelines and the Oslo Declaration on
protecting schools and universities from military use
during armed conflict, in accordance with Council
resolution 2143 (2014).
We would also highlight yesterday’s meeting on
the situation in Darfur (S/PV.7478) and stress that all
referrals to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
whether past or future, must be accompanied by
consistent action on the part of the Council. Putting
an end to impunity requires improved cooperation in
communications with the ICC and its Prosecutor.
We have mourned numerous deaths this past month,
deaths resulting from terrorist attacks. We reiterate that
the fight against terrorism must also include a holistic
approach so as to address the deep-seated causes and
destabilizing factors that serve as a breeding ground
for extremism.
We appreciate the various meeting formats,
including informal interactive dialogues and meetings

15-2025517/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

held under the Arria Formula. The interactive
informal dialogue with the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/PV.7472) enabled us to discuss the complementarity
between that body and the Council and to interact
directly with the countries concerned and Chairs of
the country-specific configurations. We appreciate
the promotion of dialogue between the countries
concerned and the subsidiary bodies. In that regard, the
Chilean Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan
held a formal meeting on 19 June this year with South
Sudan and neighbouring States in order to promote
dialogue aimed at contributing to a greater and better
understanding of the challenges facing States, and also
at achieving a better implementation of the sanctions
established by the Council. Another example is the
meeting of the Ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, where, together
with some countries from that continent, we were able
to play a preventive role, especially with regard to
Burundi.
Finally, we are convinced that the wrap-up sessions
must be continued and held monthly, particularly given
the upcoming priority issues falling under the mandate
of the United Nations system, including the mandate
of the Council, such as the anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) and the process for electing the SecretaryGeneral. In that regard, we hope that the Council will
promote openness and transparency over the next few
months, in harmony with the progress of that item
through the General Assembly.
In conclusion, I extend my best wishes to New
Zealand for their upcoming presidency.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to warmly thank Ambassador Dato Ramlan
Bin Ibrahim and the entire Malaysian team for all the
work accomplished in June. You, Sir, have managed the
agenda of a very busy and productive month in New
York outstandingly. In particular, I will remember
the excellent debate organized on children in armed
conflict, marked by the adoption of the important
resolution 2225 (2015). We also had significant
discussions on peacebuilding, in various formats, both
formal and informal.
I would like first to touch upon two African
questions. The first, that of Mali, is encouraging; the
other, that of Burundi, continues to worry us.

18/21

30/06/2015

June marked a historic step taken forward for Mali
with the signing of the Bamako Peace Agreement by
all concerned parties. The Council took note of that in
the adoption of resolution 2227 (2015). That important
resolution gives the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
a new mandate to support the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in all its aspects, in particular
security: and to support the cantonment, disarmament
and reintegration of former combatants, and the
redeployment of Malian armed forces in the north,
in the framework of the mechanisms contained in the
agreement.
The full and genuine implementation of the
Agreement by its signatories will be key to guaranteeing
peace and solidifying it. The Council made clear that it
will closely follow the implementation of the Agreement
and that those who would oppose its implementation
will have to bear the consequences. Thus, by giving the
Mission the task of supporting the Peace Agreement,
the Security Council recalled the first duty of the Blue
Helmets in Mali: helping Mali move towards a lasting
peace, in support of the Ouagadougou Agreement
during the establishment of MINUSMA and in support
of the Bamako Agreement now.
While Mali has embarked on a positive momentum,
that has not been the case in Burundi, which has entered
a tense period since President Nkurunziza’s declaration
of his candidacy for a third term. In its press release of
13 June, the African Union established a framework for
a new dialogue to settle the political crisis in a longlasting fashion. The press release called, in particular,
for the electoral timetable to be agreed upon by the
parties. It also set a number of conditions to be met
before the holding of elections — such as the reopening
of media outlets, the release of those arrested during
protests and the disarmament of groups of young people
affiliated in particular with political parties.
In several press releases, the international mediation
team and the Secretary-General have indicated that they
felt that conditions have not been met at this stage for
the holding of free, credible, transparent and inclusive
elections. They called for a further postponement of
elections. That request we know was not accepted by
the Government of Burundi, which cited constitutional
constraints.
Unilaterally, the Government held communal and
legislative elections yesterday, in a tense atmosphere.

15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The opposition boycotted them. The strict control
of dissenting neighbourhoods by the police since the
beginning of June has curtailed demonstrations against
a third term. The Government seems determined to hold
presidential elections on 15 July and Pierre Nkurunziza
remains determined to maintain his candidacy. The
situation thus remains volatile and unpredictable. With
the support of the Council, international mediation
is continuing its efforts to find a common ground for
presidential elections. We are launching a heartfelt
appeal to all parties, in particular the Burundian
authorities, to demonstrate a spirit of dialogue and
compromise in the country’s higher interests.
Those two situations remind us how much the
United Nations needs to improve its effectiveness in
both prevention and crisis management. Specifically,
the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
chaired by José Ramos-Horta, delivered its report to
the Secretary-General on 17 June. The report contains
around a hundred recommendations of all kinds:
doctrinal ones dealing with political processes, the
protection of civilians, the use of force, preventive
diplomacy, for example; and recommendations on
the functioning of peacekeeping operations, i.e.
regarding chains of command, the engagement of
troop-contributing countries, equipment, training, as
well as on the internal organization of the Secretariat,
in particular as pertains to strengthening analysis and
planning or mainstreaming logistical support.
The report should now give rise to work on the
part of the Secretary-General, who will propose an
implementation report. That should be coordinated
with Member States. The result will be presented at
the next General Assembly, and the recommendations,
addressed to the Security Council, the Secretariat,
troop-contributing countries and all players in the
peacekeeping arena, will, once approved, be gradually
implemented thereafter. We have high expectations
because through peacekeeping missions and their
ability to adapt to changing conditions, the image of
the United Nations, especially the relevance of the work
of our Organization, are at stake.
I will conclude my statement by briefly touching
on the Middle East. Consultations this month have
once again revealed the need for specific initiatives
for a resumption of the peace process. We cannot just
limit ourselves to calling upon the parties to resume
negotiations. In the light of the tensions and given

S/PV.7479

the prospects of a two-State solution moving further
away, France has proposed an international two-track
approach.
The priority here is to create an international
support group. Minister Fabius called it the “Quartet
plus”, which would include, in addition to the current
members, the permanent members of the Council
and some countries in the region and the European
Union. Next, we will have to work for the adoption
of a resolution with parameters acceptable to all. A
resolution will only be meaningful if it is based on
consensus and would bring players to the negotiating
table again. We will therefore work in New York and in
the capitals to move forward on such an approach.
In Syria, the past weeks have seen the deadliest toll
since the conflict began. The number of indiscriminate
attacks against civilians has reached an all-time high.
The regime has stepped up attacks with barrel bombs. At
the same time, the Daesh and Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorist
groups have continued their onward march and targeted
civilians. Those attacks are intolerable and run counter
to international humanitarian law and Security Council
resolutions. Working with Spain, France has sought to
highlight the suffering of civilians and undertake an
approach to raise international awareness regarding
the gravity of those atrocities. Over the month of July,
we will be working with all delegations in the Council
to create a course of action that will be effective in
combating those indiscriminate attacks.
We have three priorities in Syria: seeking a political
solution, protecting civilians and combating terrorism.
We are convinced that those priorities are linked and
are complementary. As Special Envoy de Mistura
has recalled, ultimately, only a political solution will
guarantee Syrians stability and security. And there can
be no effective response to terrorism if we do not find a
solution that meets the aspirations of the Syrian people,
while sidestepping chaos. That is a very difficult path,
but one that France finds it necessary to promote
tirelessly.
We should not forget that this past month was
darkened by heinous terrorist attacks hitting several
countries, including France and several other members
of the Security Council. Our determination to combat
the scourges of terrorism and radicalism is total. More
than ever, the unity of the Council is necessary to stop
the fanatics.

15-2025519/21

S/PV.7479

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Finally, I would like to thank the Malaysian
presidency and wish every success to New Zealand,
which can count on our full support.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to express its appreciation for Malaysia’s
leadership as Council President for the month of June.
I would like to thank you and your team, Mr. President,
for your effective work. I believe that under the
leadership of the incoming President, New Zealand, our
work will also have positive results.
With regard to the discussions this month, China
has stated its views, but I will now focus on three issues.
First, the situation in the Middle East at present
remains volatile. Peace talks remain the only viable way
to achieve reconciliation between Palestine and Israel.
We urge Israel and Palestine to adhere to their strategic
decision in opting for peace talks. We hope that the
new Government in Israel will take credible steps to
create favourable conditions for the start of peace talks,
which should include stopping the settlement activities,
releasing the Palestinian detainees and the full lifting
of the blockade on Gaza. The Council should, on that
point, assume the necessary responsibilities and take
concrete action to promote peace talks. China supports
all initiatives and efforts that could help the two sides
bridge their differences and resume peace talks as soon
as possible. We hope that the international community
will enhance coordination and rally all efforts for a
restart of peace talks between the two sides and promote
an improvement in the situation there. China is willing
to enhance its cooperation with the international
community and play a greater role in facilitating a
solution.
Secondly, with regard to the question of the Sudan
and Darfur, we appreciate the efforts of the Sudanese
Government to stabilize the situation in Darfur and
promote the political process and the economic and
social development of the region. The international
community should urge all parties in Darfur, especially
the rebel forces, to adhere to the agreed political solution
and to take part in the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, so as to pave the way for
a comprehensive and early solution of the question of
Darfur and the development and rebuilding of Darfur.
China values the work of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in
stabilizing the situation and promoting peace talks and
the protection of civilians. We support an extension of
the UNAMID mandate.
20/21

30/06/2015

China has consistently stated that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned,
and take their opinions fully into consideration. We
should adjust the mandate and scale of peacekeeping
operations in the light of the developments and needs
on the ground. The Council should, in that regard, pay
attention to the request of the Sudanese Government
that the United Nations formulate an exit strategy for
UNAMID. We welcome and support the establishment of
a tripartite working group, composed of the Secretariat,
the Sudanese Government and the African Union, and
hope that all parties will step up consultations and
devise a reasonable proposal for a phased withdrawal
of UNAMID that is acceptable to all.
Thirdly, with regard to United Nations
peacebuilding, China believes that it should be owned,
led and driven by the countries concerned. It should
focus on supporting the countries’ own institutions,
on capacity-building and on addressing the root causes
of the conflicts. On the one hand, the United Nations
should serve as a platform aimed at further promoting
coordination and cooperation in peacebuilding
among the parties in the countries concerned and the
stakeholders in the international community. We should
avoid monopolizing. We must tailor our work plan to
the actual needs of the countries concerned, optimize
the use of resources and improve the effectiveness of
our work. While ensuring the sustained stability and
development of those countries, we should also attend
to short-term returns that would allow people to enjoy
peacebuilding dividends through projects that do not
involve huge investments but bring a quick impact.
China will continue to play a positive and constructive
role in peacebuilding.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like, as
this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council for the
month of June 2015, to express the sincere appreciation
of the delegation of Malaysia to the members of the
Council, especially my colleagues, the Permanent
Representatives, their respective staff and to the
secretariat of the Council for all the support they have
given us.
I believe this has been a useful wrap-up session.
Some of the suggestions on working methods and others
will help us not only to address issues in a much more
candid and constructive manner during the informal
15-20255

30/06/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

consultations but also to invest more time in the best
way forward. There have been many useful reflections
that would improve the work of the Council. I hope
that we can agree on a new set of best practices. If we
continue to embrace old styles and habits in the way we
conduct ourselves, we are run the risk of having to face
yet another groundhog day.
Indeed, it has been a busy month and one in which
we have rallied to a consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it

S/PV.7479

alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat as well as the relevant conference
service staff.
As we end our presidency, I know that I speak on
behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of New
Zealand good luck and a very successful presidency in
the month of July. I wish to ensure New Zealand the full
support of the Malaysian delegation.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

15-2025521/21
