United Nations

A/RES/60/169

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 71 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/509/Add.2 (Part II))]

60/169. Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which proclaims that
all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any
kind, in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Recalling its resolution 59/194 of 20 December 2004, taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/47 of 19 April 2005, 2 and recalling
its resolution 40/144 of 13 December 1985, by which it adopted the Declaration on
the Human Rights of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the Country in which
They Live,
Considering that every State party to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights 3 must ensure to all individuals within its territory and subject to its
jurisdiction the rights recognized in the Covenant, and that every State party to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights3 has undertaken to
guarantee the exercise of all rights enunciated in that Covenant without
discrimination of any kind, including, in particular, on the basis of national origin,
Reaffirming the provisions concerning migrants adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights, 4 the International Conference on Population and
Development, 5 the World Summit for Social Development 6 and the Fourth World
Conference on Women, 7

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
5
See Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
6
See Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
7
See Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2

05-49774

A/RES/60/169

Reaffirming also the provisions on the human rights of migrants contained in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on
8 September 2001, 8 and expressing its satisfaction at the important recommendations
made for the development of international and national strategies for the protection of
migrants and for the design of migration policies that fully respect the human rights of
migrants,
Recalling the renewed commitment made in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration 9 and at the 2005 World Summit 10 to take measures to ensure respect for
and protection of the human rights of migrants, migrant workers and their families,
to eliminate the increasing acts of racism and xenophobia in many societies and to
promote greater harmony, tolerance and respect in all societies,
Taking note of advisory opinion OC-16/99 of 1 October 1999 on the Right to
Information on Consular Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due
Process of Law and advisory opinion OC-18/03 of 17 September 2003 on the
Juridical Condition and Rights of the Undocumented Migrants, issued by the InterAmerican Court of Human Rights,
Taking note also of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of
31 March 2004 in the case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals, 11 and
recalling the obligations of States reaffirmed therein,
Encouraged by the increasing interest of the international community in the
effective and full protection of the human rights of all migrants, and underlining the
need to make further efforts to ensure respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants,
Aware of the increasing number of migrants worldwide, and bearing in mind
the situation of vulnerability in which migrants and their accompanying families can
find themselves when outside their States of origin owing, inter alia, to the
difficulties they encounter because of discrimination in society, differences of
language, custom and culture, as well as the economic and social difficulties and
obstacles to the return of migrants to their States of origin, especially those who are
undocumented or in an irregular migratory situation,
Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the
importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation and dialogue in this
regard, as appropriate, and the need to protect the human rights of migrants,
particularly at a time in which migration flows have increased in the globalized
economy and take place in a context of new security concerns,
Bearing in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration,
including those that refer to the orderly management of migration, should promote
holistic approaches that take into account the causes and consequences of the
phenomenon, as well as the full respect of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of migrants,

_______________
8

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See resolution 55/2.
10
See resolution 60/1.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/59/4), chap. V,
sect. A.23.
9

2

A/RES/60/169

Concerned at the large and growing number of migrants, especially women
and children, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by attempting to cross
international borders without the required travel documents, and underlining the
obligation of States to respect the human rights of those migrants,
Deeply concerned at the manifestations of violence, racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance and inhuman and
degrading treatment against migrants, especially women and children, in different
parts of the world,
Concerned that the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights
on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance has indicated the appearance of new forms of discrimination targeting
migrants, among other groups,
Noting the strong concern expressed by the special rapporteurs, special
representatives, independent experts and chairpersons of working groups of the
special procedures of the Commission on Human Rights and of the advisory
services programme regarding the continued deterioration in the situation and the
denial of the human rights of migrants, in particular current attempts to
institutionalize discrimination against and exclusion of migrants, in the joint
statement made at their eleventh annual meeting, 12
Highlighting the importance of creating conditions that favour greater
harmony, tolerance and respect between migrants and the rest of society in countries
of transit or destination in order to eliminate manifestations of racism and
xenophobia against migrants, including members of their families,
Recognizing the positive and diverse contributions that migrants make to host
societies and societies of origin and the efforts that some host countries and
countries of origin undertake to integrate and reintegrate migrants,
Recognizing also the increasing participation of women in international
migration movements,
Acknowledging the work of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,
Acknowledging also the work done by the International Labour Organization
and the International Organization for Migration in addressing migration issues,
Resolved to ensure respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
all migrants,
1.
Strongly condemns the manifestations and acts of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants and the
stereotypes often applied to them, and urges States to apply the existing laws when
xenophobic or intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants occur,
in order to eradicate impunity for those who commit xenophobic and racist acts, and
calls upon States to implement fully the commitments and recommendations relating
to the promotion and protection of the human rights of migrants contained in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action8 through, inter alia, the adoption of
national plans of action, as recommended by the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance;

_______________
12

E/CN.4/2005/5, annex I, sect. C.

3

A/RES/60/169

2.
Strongly condemns also all forms of racial discrimination and
xenophobia related to access to employment, vocational training, housing,
schooling, health services and social services, as well as services intended for use
by the public;
Welcomes the active role played by governmental and non-governmental
3.
organizations in combating racism and xenophobia and in assisting victims of racist
acts, including migrant victims;
Calls upon all States to consider reviewing and, where necessary,
4.
revising immigration policies with a view to eliminating all discriminatory practices
against migrants and their families and adopting effective action to create conditions
that foster greater harmony, tolerance and respect within societies, and to provide
specialized training for government policymaking, law enforcement, migration and
other concerned officials, including in cooperation with non-governmental
organizations and civil society;
Requests States effectively to promote and protect the human rights and
5.
fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their immigration status,
especially those of women and children, in conformity with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights1 and the international instruments to which they are
party, which may include the International Covenants on Human Rights,3 the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, 13 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 14 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 15 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 16 the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families 17 and other relevant human rights instruments;
Requests all States, international organizations and relevant stakeholders
6.
to take into account in their policies and initiatives on migration issues the global
character of the migratory phenomenon and to give due consideration to
international, regional and bilateral cooperation in this field, with a view to
addressing, in a comprehensive manner, its causes and consequences and granting
priority to the protection of the human rights of migrants;
Welcomes the increasing number of signatures and ratifications or
7.
accessions to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, and calls upon States that have
not done so to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Convention as a
matter of priority;
Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against
8.
Transnational Organized Crime and supplementing protocols thereto, namely, the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air and the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, 18 to implement them fully, and calls upon States that have not done so to
consider ratifying them as a matter of priority;
_______________
13

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
15
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
16
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
17
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
18
Resolution 55/25, annexes I–III.
14

4

A/RES/60/169

9.
Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full respect
for and observance of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963, 19 in
particular with regard to the right of all foreign nationals, regardless of their
immigration status, to communicate with a consular official of the sending State in
the case of arrest, imprisonment, custody or detention, and the obligation of the
receiving State to inform without delay the foreign national of his or her rights
under the Convention;
10. Expresses concern about the legislation and the measures adopted by
some States that restrict the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants;
11. Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that
allow migrants to integrate fully into the host countries, facilitate family
reunification and promote a harmonious, tolerant and respectful environment, and
encourages States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
12. Calls upon States to facilitate family reunification in an expeditious and
effective manner, with due regard to applicable laws, as such reunification has a
positive effect on the integration of migrants;
13. Encourages all States to integrate a gender and age perspective in
developing and implementing international migration policies and programmes in
order to adopt the necessary measures to better protect women and children against
possible dangers and abuse associated with migration and to foster opportunities for
their contribution to their societies of origin and destination;
14. Calls upon States to promote and protect all human rights of migrant
children, given their vulnerability, in particular unaccompanied migrant children,
ensuring that the best interests of the children are a primary consideration,
underlines the importance of reuniting them with their parents, when possible, and
encourages the relevant United Nations bodies, within the framework of their
respective mandates, to pay special attention to the conditions of migrant children in
all States and, where necessary, to put forward recommendations for strengthening
their protection, especially against sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, trafficking, the
threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, including coercion into begging
and drug dealing, in particular by national or transnational organized crime groups;
15. Encourages States of origin to promote and protect the human rights of
those families of migrant workers that remain in the countries of origin, paying
particular attention to children and adolescents whose parents have emigrated, and
encourages international organizations to consider supporting States in this regard;
16. Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and applicable
international legal instruments to which they are party, to enforce labour law
effectively, including by addressing violations of such law, with regard to migrant
workers’ labour relations and working conditions, inter alia, those related to their
remuneration and conditions of health, safety at work and the right to freedom of
association;
17. Encourages all States to remove obstacles that may prevent the safe,
unrestricted and expeditious transfer of earnings, assets and pensions of migrants to
their country of origin or to any other countries, in conformity with applicable
legislation, and to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems that
may impede such transfers;
_______________
19

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

5

A/RES/60/169

18. Calls upon States to observe national legislation and applicable
international legal instruments to which they are party when enacting national
security measures in order to respect the human rights of migrants;
19. Urges all States to adopt effective measures to put an end to the arbitrary
arrest and detention of migrants and to take action to prevent and punish any form
of illegal deprivation of liberty of migrants by individuals or groups;
20. Also urges all States to employ duly authorized and trained government
officials to enforce their immigration laws and border controls and to take
appropriate and effective measures to deter and prevent private persons or groups
from violating criminal and immigration laws relating to border enforcement and
from wrongfully undertaking actions reserved to government officials, including by
prosecuting those violations of the law that may result from such actions;
21. Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation of the
human rights of migrants while in transit, including in ports and airports and at
borders and migration checkpoints, to train public officials who work in those
facilities and in border areas to treat migrants respectfully and in accordance with
the law, and to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law, any act of violation of
the human rights of migrants, inter alia, arbitrary detention, torture and violations of
the right to life, including extrajudicial executions, during their transit from their
country of origin to the country of destination and vice versa, including their transit
through national borders;
22. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to enact domestic legislation
and to take further effective measures to combat and prosecute international
trafficking in and smuggling of migrants, recognizing that these crimes may
endanger the lives of migrants or subject them to harm, servitude or exploitation,
which may include debt bondage, slavery and sexual exploitation or forced labour,
and urges States to strengthen international cooperation to combat such trafficking
and smuggling and to protect the victims of trafficking;
23. Encourages States, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations,
to undertake information campaigns aimed at clarifying opportunities, limitations
and rights in the event of migration, so as to enable everyone, in particular women,
to make informed decisions and to prevent them from becoming victims of
trafficking and utilizing dangerous means of access to countries of transit and
destination that put their lives and physical integrity at risk;
24. Also encourages States to consider participating in international and
regional dialogues on migration that include countries of origin and destination, as
well as countries of transit, and invites them to consider negotiating bilateral and
regional agreements on migrant workers within the framework of applicable human
rights law and designing and implementing programmes with States of other regions
to protect the rights of migrants;
25. Requests Member States, the United Nations system, international
organizations, civil society and all relevant stakeholders, especially the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and her Office, as well as the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the human rights of
migrants, to ensure that the perspective of the human rights of migrants is included
among the priority issues in the ongoing discussions on migration and development
within the United Nations system, including, in particular, at the high-level dialogue
on international migration and development that will be held in 2006, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 58/208 of 23 December 2003;
6

A/RES/60/169

26. Invites States, the United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to observe, on 18 December of each year, International
Migrants Day, proclaimed by the General Assembly, 20 through, inter alia, the
dissemination of information on the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
migrants and on their economic, social and cultural contributions to their host and
home countries, the sharing of experience and the adoption of measures to ensure
their protection, and to promote greater harmony, tolerance and respect between
migrants and the societies in which they live;
27. Welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the human rights of migrants for a period of three
years and the appointment of the new Special Rapporteur, and takes note with
interest of the interim report submitted by him to the General Assembly, 21 including
the proposed methods of work for the fulfilment of his mandate;
28. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur
in the performance of the tasks and duties mandated, to furnish all information
requested and to respond appropriately and expeditiously to his urgent appeals and
to give serious consideration to his requests to visit their countries, and welcomes in
this regard the standing invitations extended by some Member States to all special
procedures, including the Special Rapporteur;
29. Requests all relevant mechanisms to cooperate with the Special
Rapporteur;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Special Rapporteur all the
human and financial assistance necessary for the fulfilment of his mandate;
31. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families on its second session, 22 and
requests the Secretary-General to arrange, within existing resources, two sessions
for the Committee in 2006, in spring and autumn, respectively, each of a duration of
one week;
32. Takes note also of the report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of migrants, 23 and calls upon Member States and all relevant stakeholders to
consider the implementation of the recommendations contained therein;
33. Decides to examine the question further at its sixty-first session under the
item entitled “Human rights questions”.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

_______________
20

See resolution 55/93.
See A/60/357.
22
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 48 (A/60/48).
23
A/60/272.
21

7
