THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:
NEW

12 JUNE 1981

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

agenda (S/Agenda/2280). , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda. . . . , . . . , . . , . . , , . . , , , . . . . . . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge d’affaires of the Permanent Mission
of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509) . . . , . , . . . . . , . , , . , . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

provisional

SlPV.2280

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemet~ts of the Official Recot& of the Secwiry Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiom
am1
Decisiom
of the Security Cmt7cil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

eld in New York on Friday, 12 June 1981, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio

MUfiOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hammadi
(Iraq) and Mr. Blum (Israel) took places at the Council
table and Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria), Mr. Corraa da
Costa fBratil), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr, Al-Sabah
(Kuwait), Mr. Tu&ni (Lebanon), Mr, Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr, Abdalla (the
Sudan), Mr. Kirca (Turkey) and Mr. Kornatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved.for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

agenda (SlAgendal2280)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge
d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/14509)
The meeting wm called

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation *from Spanish):
I should like to inform the Council that I have received
a letter dated 11 June 1981 from the representative of
Tunisia [S/14521], which reads as follows:

to order at 4.40 p.m.

“I have the honour to request the Security
Council to invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in the consideration of the item entitled ‘Complaint by Iraq’,
in accordance with the Council’s usual practice.”

Expression of welcome to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Tunisia
1, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I should like, at the outset of this meeting, to
acknowledge the presence at the Council table of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia, Mr. Bkji Caid
Essebsi, to whom, on behalf of the Council, I extend a
warm welcome.
Adoption

4. The proposal of the representative of Tunisia is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
but if approved by the Council the invitation to
participate in the debate would confer on the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights of
participation as those conferred on a Member State
when invited to participate under rule 37.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

5. Does any member of the Security Council wish to
speak on this proposal?

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Chargi: d’affaires
of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509)

6. Mrs, KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
The United States opposes extending to the PLO the
same rights of participation in the proceedings of the
Security Council as if that organization represented a
State Member of the United Nations. We have
consistently taken the position that, under the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, the only legal
basis on which the Council may grant a hearing to
persons speaking on behalf of non-governmental
entities is rule 39. For 35 years the United States has
supported a generous invocation of rule 39 and would
not object in this case. We are, however, opposed to
special ad hoc departures from orderly procedures. In
particular, the United States does not agree with the
recent practice of the Council which appears selec-

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Brazil, Cuba, India, Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kuwait,
Lebanon, Pakistan, Romania, the Sudan,
Turkey and Yugoslavia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives
to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
1

tively to try to enhance the prestige of those who wish
to speak in the Council through a departure from the
rules of procedure. We consider this special practice
to be without legal foundation and to constitute an
abuse of the rules. For these reasons, the United
States requests that you, Mr, President, put the terms
of the proposed invitation to the vote. The United
States will vote against it.

those used by the Council on every other occasion
since 1975.
12. It has been argued that an invitation phrased in
these terms is contrary to the provisional rules of
procedure under which the Council has operated since
1946. It is true that the exact terms of the invitation, as
stated by you, are not spelt out in the rules. But
neither do we see anything in the terms of the
invitation that is contrary either to the rules or to the
Charter. We note that the particular formula used
specifically states that rule 37, which is applicable to
States Members of the United Nations, does not apply
here-though, indeed, the extent of the participation
granted to the PLO representative would be similar in
practice to that envisaged in rule 37 in the case of
States. We think this is quite legitimate, We believe it
is within the authority of the Council, when it extends
an invitation, to set such terms for participation as it
considers appropriate to the particular case;and in the
present case we believe that the Council is acting
within its powers in issuing an invitation in the terms
which you have just read out.

7. Mr. DORR (Ireland): Sir, since this is the first time
that I have spoken since you assumed the office of
President, I should like to extend my good wishes to
you as President and to say that we are pleased that
your country, and you in particular, will preside over
our debate this month. I should also like to thank and
pay tribute to the skill and good sense of our colleague, the representative of Japan, who presided over
our debates in the month of May.
8. The lrish delegation will vote in favour of the
proposal to invite the representative of the PLO to
participate in the present debate. We are aware that
the terms in which it is proposed that this invitation be
issued have in the past been a matter of controversy.
I should like therefore briefly to explain our vote.

13. In brief, we seeno procedural reason to object to
a formula established in the Council for five years
now, and we are prepared in practice to hear the views
of the PLO representative on the present issue.
Accordingly, after very careful consideration, Ireland
will vote in favour of the present proposal.

9. The position of Ireland on the Middle East
question was stated in the General Assembly on
30 September 1980 by my Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Lenihan.’ He drew attention to two principles
which Ireland considers essential elements in a peace
settlement and which had already been stressed by the
heads of State and Government and the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the nine member States of the
European Community in their declaration at Venice on
13 June 1980[S/14009]. These principles are, first, the
right to existence and security of all the States in the,
region, including Israel; and, secondly, the requirement of justice for all the peoples involved, which
includes the right to self-determination of the Palestinian people within the framework of a peace settlement.

14. Mr. NISIBORI (Japan): The Government of
Japan has repeatedly expressed its considered view
that it is essential for the solution of the Middle East
question that the PLO, representing the Palestinians,
participate in peace talks. In 1975 [1859th meeting]
Japan, as a member of the Security Council, expressed
the position that the PLO, as one of the major parties
to the Middle East question, should be invited when
the Council conducted its deliberations on the Middle
East question, including the question of Palestine.
1 should like at this time to confirm that position,

10. My Foreign Minister continued:

15. In regard to the item before us today-namely,
“Complaint by Iraq”-although it is a problem in the
Middle East, in our view the direct and major parties
are rather limited. Therefore, we believe that rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure is applicable under the present agenda item and we would
support the participation of the PLO in the debate of
the Security Council if this were requested under
rule 39.

“It is only by reconciling these two principles
through negotiation that a comprehensive, just and
durable settlement can be found. Such negotiation
must involve all the parties concerned, including the
PLO”.
This continues to be the position of my country, and it
is against this background that we have approached
the present procedural proposal.

16. The PRESIDEN? (interpretation from Spanish):
As no other member of the Council wishes to speak,
1 take it that the Council is ready to vote on the
proposal of Tunisia.

Il. In considering how to vote on the proposal, we
have also taken particular account of the following
points: first, the PLO has had the status of observer at
the United Nations for the past seven years; secondly,
the Council has frequently in the past invited the PLO
to participate in debates relating to Middle East issues;
and, thirdly, the terms of the proposed invitation as
just read out by you, Mr, President, are precisely

A vote was taken by show of hands.

1n favour: China, German Democratic Republic,
Ireland, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
2

Wasi

lrased
i
rules(
tedsine
ation,
s
Iles,BI
1of th
DrtoIh
ulaUSC
icable
t
lotappl
icipalio
imilar
j
case
0
lelieve
i
extend
ionasi
IdinIh,
s actinl
ieterra
jbject
tt
‘eyear:
beview:
t issue
Irelanc
nent0
:dvie\
IleEasi
tinians,
ieefin~
pressed
partier
dwhen
Middle
lestine,
on,
lamely,
1inthe
parties
le3901
,pplicawould
bateof
under
anishl:

speak,
OII the

public,
Spain,
jublics

Against,’United States of America
Abstaining.’ France, Japan, United
Great Britain and Northern Ireland

Kingdom

19. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs ,of Iraq, Mr. Saadoon Hammadi. I welcome
him and invite him to make his statement,

of

20. Mr. HAMMADI
(Iraq): Mr President, allow me
first to express to you, and through you to the
members of the Council, my gratitude for convening
this meeting and for giving me the opportunity
to
address the Council on the question of the flagrant act
of aggression committed by Israel against Iraq.

The proposal was adopted by 11 votes to 1, with
3 abstentions.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization)
took the place re$e,.vedfor him at the side of the Council chamber.

21. On Sunday, 7 June 1981, at 1837 hours, Baghdad
local time, Israeli warplanes raided the nuclear installations situated near Baghdad, causing many civilian
casualties and much material damage. The Zionist
aggressors announced on the following day their
responsibility for the attack, brazenly claiming the
total destruction of the installations.

17. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Spanish):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
1 have received a letter, dated 11 June, from the
representative of Tunisia [S/14524], which reads as
follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security
Council to invite Mr. Chedli Klibi, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, to participate in
the consideration of the item entitled ‘Complaint by
Iraq’, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure.”
If I hear no objection,
agrees to the request.

22. It is worth recalling that this was not the first
attack of its kind carried out by the Zionist aggressor.
We believe that Zionist warplanes carried out two
raids aimed at the same installations on 27 September
1980.

I shall take it that the Council

23. In order to put the Israeli act of aggression in its
proper perspective, it is necessary to deal with the
motives and objectives of Zionist policies, and particularly those in the nuclear field.

18. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Spanish):
The Council is meeting today in response to the
request contained in a letter dated 8 June from the
Charge d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations, addressed to the President of the
Security Council [S/14509]. I should like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the following
other documents: S/14510, letter dated 8 June from
the representative of Israel to the President of the
Council; S/1451 1, letter dated 9 June from the
representative of Spain to the President of the Council;
S/14512, letter dated 9 June from the representative of
Japan to the President of the Council; S/14513, letter
dated 9 June from the representative of Egypt to the
Secretary-General; S/14514, letter dated 10 June from
the representative of Iraq to the President of the Council; S/14515, letter dated 10 June from the representative of Panama to the President of the Council;
S/14516, letter dated 1 I June from the representative
of the German Democratic Republic to the President
of the Council; S/14517, letter dated 11 June from the
representative of Pakistan to the Secretary-General;
S/14518, letter dated l l June from the representative
of the Philippines to the President of the Council;
S/14520, letter dated 1I June from the representative
of Tunisia to the President of the Council; S/14523,
letter dated 12 June from the representative of India to
the President of the Council; S/14525, letter dated
11Junefrom the representative of the Union of Soviet
Socia1ist Republics to the Secretary-General;
and
S’l4526, letter dated 12 June from the representative
OfViet Nam to the Secretary-General.

24. It is no longer a secret that the founders of the
Zionist entity had contemplated from the very beginning the possession of nuclear weapons as a means
to guarantee the continued exile of the Palestinians,
and continued expansion over Arab territories in order
to realize the Zionist dream of “Greater Israel”.

It was so decided.

25. The Israeli nuclear programme goes back as far
as 1949. The most important experiments conducted
by the Weizmann Institute in the early 1950s boncerned the development of techniques of uranium
extraction from phosphates in the Negev desert, as
well as those relating to the production of heavy water.
In 1952 the Ben Gurion Government established the
Atomic Energy Commission within the framework of
the Defence Ministry, with a separate budget and
special laboratories. The existence of that Commission
was kept secret until 1954. In 1953 a nuclear cooperation agreement was concluded with France
which marked a turning point in the Israeli nuclear
programme. The fact remains, however, that the
United States was the first country to provide Israel
with a nuclear reactor under an agreement concluded
in 1955-namely,
the reactor at Nahal-Soreq, which
had a five-megawatt capacity. The United States
contributed $350,000 towards the cost of that reactor
and provided Israel with a vast library of books,
studies and reports, as well as six kilograms of
enriched uranium-235. Furthermore, 56 Israelis were
trained in American nuclear establishments.
Subsequently, Israel obtained another American reactor
with an eight-megawatt capacity; it was installed at the
3

Technion Institute, In 1957 the decision was taken to
construct the highly secret reactor at Dimona, and in
I958 a reactor at Rishon Lizion with a five-megawatt
capacity was constructed in co-operation with the
United States.

seized in 1974 by the Norwegians with four other
members of Israel’s Mossad, the Israeli secret service,
for the killing of a Moroccan national who was
mistaken for a Palestinian by the Israeli agents at a
small town in Norway.

26. The decade of the 1950s also witnessed the
provision to Israel of nuclear material and technology
by the United States Central Intelligence
Agency
(CIA) and the beginning of co-operation in the nuclear
field with the Federal Republic of Germany. In 1964
the Dimona reactor became operational
with a
24-megawatt capacity and.a possible production of 5 to
7 kilograms of plutonium annually. That quantity is
sufficient for the production of a nuclear bomb with
1.2 times the force of the Hiroshima type.

31, According to an article published in The Times of
London on 14 August 1980, the CIA had mistakenly
released the text of a five-page secret document
in 1974 which stated categorically that Israel was
engaged in a nuclear-weapons programme. Part of the
uranium was described as having been obtained by
“clandestine means” which, although this was not
spelled out, was understood to refer to various raids in
Europe by squads of underground Mossad agents. The
report-all
but two paragraphs of which would have
remained classified, had a bureaucratic slip not led’
to its publication-stated
in a key section:

27. It is to be noted that the Dimona reactor was
obtained from France, and the truth about it was not
disclosed until the CIA revealed in 1960 that what the
Americans were told was a textile fat tory was in fact a
nuclear reactor. The New York Times stated on
20 December 1960 that the Dimona reactor was
“particularly
well suited for producing fissionable
plutonium used in nuclear bombs”. The same newspaper reported in its issue of 18 July 1970 that
American experts who had visited the reactor had
complained in 1969 that there was no guarantee that
work relating to armament was not being undertaken
in Dimona, in view of the restrictive procedures
imposed by Israel on inspection.

“We believe that Israel already has produced
nuclear weapons. Our judgement is based on Israeli
acquisition of large quantities of uranium, partly by
clandestine means, the ambiguous nature of Israeli
efforts in the field of uranium enrichment, and
Israel’s large investment in a costly missile system
destined to accommodate nuclear warheads.”
32. The Tirnes went on to say that recent foreign
reports had suggested that South Africa was now
Israel’s main partner in a secret nuclear-weapons
development programme. The article also referred to a
mysterious blast detected off the coast of South Africa
in September 1979 by an American spy satellite. It also
referred to the manuscript of a book written by two
Israeli journalists entitled None Will Survive Us: The
Story of the Israeli A-Bomb, which contained information to the effect that the blast was the result of a joint
nuclear test by Israel and South Africa. The blast of
September 1979 was followed by another in December
of the same year, and the second event was recorded
by another United States satellite.

28. It is well known that Israel has had a nuclear
capability for a number of years. As far back as 1969,
the Buffalo Evening News carried on its front page on
9 May a Reuters report published in the West German
magazine Der Spiegel stating that Israel had become
the world’s sixth nuclear Power and had six Hiroshima-type bombs of 20 kilotons, produced at Dimona.
29. On 5 December 1974, The New York Times
quoted Israeli President Ephraim Katzir as saying that
Israel “possesses the potential to produce atomic
weapons” and will do so “if we need it”.

33. The Middle East Magazine, in its issue published
in London in April 1981 which contained an investigative report on the Israel-South Africa nuclear link,
states that:

30. At the Conference on a Non-Nuclear
Future,
held at Salzburg in May 1977, Paul Leventhal,
a
former staff nuclear-weapons expert for the Senate
Government Operation Committee
of the United
States, revealed that 200 tons of natural uranium,
enough to build 42 nuclear weapons, which had been
placed on a ship that had disappeared nine years
before, had ended up in Israel. The uranium had been
loaded onto a cargo ship named The Schecrsburg A
which had sailed out of Antwerp bound for Genoa,
where it never arrived. The cargo of The Scheersburg
A was reported to be capable of keeping a Dimonatype reactor operating and producing plutonium for
20 years. Shortly after the Salzburg revelation, Norway’s former chief prosecutor stated that Israeli agent
Dan Aerbel had admitted taking part in the operation
to divert the uranium-laden ship. Aerbel had been

‘&once again the White House said that the flash was
‘probably not’ a nuclear blast and suggested it was a
‘micro-meteor
hit’, although scientists say this is
likely to occur only once in 10 years. Even the CIA
is not prepared to accept this a second time and has
pointed out that, as in the previous incident, South
African warships were positioned secretly at sea just
below the flash point.”
The magazine further quotes Marvin Cetron,
Pentagon’s private weapons analyst, as saying:

the

“Were I in the White House, I would try and give
as many different possible alternatives as could
be technically feasible, hoping to take off the
4

high probability of its being a nuclear explosion,
Obviously, it is a cover-up.”

37. Despite the basic imbalances and discrimination
which are to be found in the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [General Assembly
resolution 2373 (XXII), annex], Iraq was one of its first
adherents. We signed the Treaty on 1 July 1968 and
ratified it on 29 October 1969. In 1972 my country concluded an agreement with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for the application of
safeguards to all our nuclear activities, as required by
the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. On numerous occasions
my Government has expressed its conviction that full
and faithful implementation
of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty would make a major contribution to its twin
objectives-namely,
horizontal and vertical non-proliferation and the promotion of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. We attach special importance to
international co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Besides being a member
of IAEA, Iraq has concluded bilateral co-operation
agreements with a number of countries. With a view to
strengthening and promoting co-operation in scientific
and technical research, the Iraqi Atomic Energy
Commission has, together with other organizations,
sponsored several conferences and seminars, with the
participation of scientists from other countries.

34. Nor was that the first attempted White House
cover-up of its kind. In the mid-1960s the United
States Government
discovered
that more than
200 pounds of highly enriched weapons-grade uranium, enough for at least four atomic bombs, was
missing from the Nuclear Materials and Equipment
Corporation (NUMEC) plant in Apollo, Pennsylvania,
In his well-documented book The Zionist Connection,
Alfred Lilienthal states that:
“The most serious nuclear safeguards case the
U.S. ever faced broke into the open in late February
1978 when the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC) released a 550-page report in response to a
House committee inquiry over previous testimony
given by NRC Executive Director Lee V. Gossick.
In revealing that Gossick had ‘testified incorrectly’,
the report confirmed that the CIA had evidence that
Israel had the atomic bomb by 1968 and that bomb
material in fact had been diverted from the Apollo
plant. Equally important to the report was that CIA
third-ranking official Carl Duckett had informed a
closed meeting of the NRC in 1976 that President
Johnson had been told eight years earlier that Israel
had atomic weapons. The President had told CIA
Director Richard Helms, ‘Don’t tell anyone else, not
even Dean Rusk or Robert McNamara’ (then the
Secretaries of State and Defense respectively).“2
The story was broken by The Washington
issue of 2 March 1978.

38. It can no longer be denied that it is the sovereign
right of every country to seek knowledge and to
pursue the application of science and technology,
including nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, in
the interests of economic and social development. We
firmly believe that the widening gap between the
developed and the developing countries cannot be
narrowed without the full utilization of science and
technology,
including the peaceful application
of
nuclear energy.

Post in its

35. The same Carl Duckett,
who is currently a
consultant to the United States Senate, repeated in an
interview broadcast by ABC Television on the ABC
News Close-up broadcast on 27 April 1981 that there
was a clear consensus in the CIA that indeed NUMEC
material had been diverted and had been used by the
lsraelis in fabricating weapons. He also confirmed that
President Johnson had ordered Director Helms not to
tell anybody else. Duckett further stated:

39. Article IV of the Non-Proliferation
vides as follows:

Treaty pro-

“1, Nothing in this Treaty shall be interpreted as
affecting the inalienable right of all the Parties to the
Treaty to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with articles I and II
of this Treaty.

“The key impression to me was that indeed it was
taken very seriously by the President, and obviously
he was very concerned that we protect that information.”

“2. All the Parties to the Treaty undertake to
facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the
fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials
and scientific and technological information for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Parties to the
Treaty in a position to do so shall also co-operate In
contributing alone or together with other States or
international organizations to the further development of the applications
of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, especially in the territories of
non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty, with
due consideration for the needs of the developing
areas of the world.”

36. Iraq has embarked upon a vast and ambitious
programme of development. In doing so, my Government recognized at an early stage the importance of
science and technology, including the peaceful aPPlication of nuclear energy, for the achievement of social
and economic development.
Working towards that
goal, we have made efforts to expand our nuclearresearch facilities and to widen the scope of the
peaceful uses of atomic energy. We have also recognized that the development
of alternative sources of
energy is becoming increasingly vital and that the
peaceful use of atomic energy will be one of the most
important alternatives for some time t0 come.

40. Moreover, at the Havana Summit COnfeKmCe
in
1979, the non-aligned countries reaffirmed the inalien5

eration Treaty, it has bluntly refused to do so, Iraq, in
contrast, by accepting the terms of the Non-Prolifers.
tion Treaty, has fully subscribed to those standards in
its nuclear programme. In that context, I should like te
quote the following from the statement made by the
Director General of IAEA at the opening meeting of
that Agency’s Board of Governors on 9 June:

able right of every country to undisturbed and independent development of the peaceful uses of atomic
energy.3 A similar position was adopted by the lsiamic
Conference of Foreign Ministers at its special Session
held at Fez, Morocco, in September 1980 [see S/14207,
annex]. ln addition, repeated resolutions of the General Assembly have reaffirmed that right, subject to
appropriate safeguards.
.a
41. Israel prepared the ground for its act of aggression by a vast propaganda campaign alleging that Iraq
was engaged in a programme of nuclear-weapons
production. The countries which had concluded COoperation agreements with Iraq were denounced and
vilified. The severity of the campaign prompted
Mr. Jean Francois-Poncet, the then Foreign Minister
of France, to question the reasons for such a campaign. He recalled that Iraq was, after all, the thirtyfifth country to buy a nuclear research reactor. There
were 34 other countries which had imported 78 atomic
reactors for such purposes, working with enriched
uranium, Most of the reactors were of American
construction. The countries included South Africa,
South Korea, Thailand, the Philippines, Zaire, and so
on. The French Government also issued a statement
on 29 July 1980 which expressed astonishment at the
fabricated accusations being levelled against it for its
co-operation with Iraq. The statement pointed out
Iraq’s right, together with that of all other States, to
utilize nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and found
no basis upon which Iraq could be prevented from
exercising that right. In conclusion, the statement
reaffirmed that the co-operation of the French Government with Iraq was carried out with perfectly legitimate objectives and was covered by all the necessary
safeguards.

“Iraq has been a party to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty since it came into force in 1970. In accord.
ante with that Treaty, Iraq accepts Agency safeguards on ail its nuclear activities. These safeguards
have been satisfactorily applied to date, including
during the recent period of armed conflict with Iran,
The last safeguard inspection at the Iraqi nuclear
centre took place in January of this year, and all
nuclear material there was satisfactorily accounted
for. This material included the fuel so far delivered
for the Tamuz reactors.“4
45. Iraq, being mindful of the danger posed to
international peace and security by the Israeli armament programmes, has taken the initiative since the
convening of the special session of the General
Assembly on disarmament in 1978, in bringing to the
attention of the world the dangers of those Israeli
programmes. The General Assembly, at its thirty-third
session, adopted a resolution sponsored by 36 Member
States entitled “Military
and nuclear collaboration
with Israel” [resolution 33171 A]. In paragraph 2 of
that resolution, the Assembly requested the Security
Council, in particular, to call upon all States, under
Chapter VII of the Charter and irrespective of any
existing contracts:
“(a) To refrain from any supply of arms, ammunition, military equipment or vehicles, or spare parts
therefor, to Israel, without any exception;

42. The Zionist campaign did not stop at that. There
were acts of terrorism, sabotage, international piracy
and physical liquidation carried out by Zionist undercover agents in order to obstruct Iraq’s peaceful
nuclear programme.

“(b) To ensure that such supplies do not reach
Israel through other parties;
“(c) To end all transfer of nuclear equipment
fissionable material or technology to Israel”.

43. The motives behind the Zionist campaign and
aggression against Iraq are, first, the desire to cover up
Israel’s possession of nuclear weapons and secondly
and more importantly, the determination not to allow
the Arab nation to acquire the scientific or technical
knowledge necessary for its development and progress. The Zionists believe that they can thus impose
their diktat on the Arab nation. The more the Arabs
advance in their scientific knowledge, the weaker the
Zionist chances are of maintaining their occupation of
Arab territories and their denial of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.

or

The resolution further requested the Council to establish machinery for supervising the implementation
of
the measures referred to in the paragraph just quoted.
46. During the thirty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, Iraq, supported by 25 other Member
States, inscribed an item on the agenda entitled
“Israeli nuclear armament”.
The Assembly adopted
resolution 34/89, in which it called upon Israel to
submit all its nuclear facilities to inspection by IAEA.
The Assembly also strongly condemned any attempt
by Israel to manufacture, acquire, store, test or
introduce nuclear weapons into the Middle East. It
further requested the Security Council to adopt
appropriate measures to ensure the implementation
of
the relevant resolutions concerning Israeli nuclear
armament .

44. It is evident that the Israeli nuclear programme
has been geared to military purposes from its very
inception and that all sorts of illegal means have been
employed for its enhancement, in total violation of
internationally
accepted standards. Despite the repeated calls upon Israel to accede to the Non-ProIif6

----

47. Furthermore, Iraq has actively supported the
initiatives taken in the General Assembly concerning
the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, particularly in the Middle East and in the Indian Ocean.

Iraq tried to rebuild the reactor, Israel would do all it
could to destroy it again.
52. Faced with this grave situation, the Council
cannot, in our opinion, limit itself to a mere condemnation of this act of Israeli aggression. The Council
should reaffirm the right of all States to develop
nuclear programmes for peaceful purposes. Mandatory sanctions in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter should be imposed upon
Israel to remove the grave menace to international
peace and security posed by its actions. Israeli
lawlessness should be brought to an end. The Council
must decide that all States-and especially the United
States of America-shall, under Chapter VII of the
Charter, refrain from providing Israel with any military material or technical co-operation or assistance
which might encourage it to pursue its policy of
expansion and aggression. Something more than condemnation should take place if we really want to have
a world of law rather than a world of blind force. In
addition; the Council should, in the interest of peace
and stability in the Middle Ea.st, demand that all Israeli
nuclear installations be opened to inspection, and
subject to the safeguards system of 1AEA.

48. The attack carried out by Israel against Iraq is
clearly an act of aggression in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter as expounded on in the
Definition of Aggression in General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX). The Israeli allegation that it acted in
legitimate self-defence is totally unfounded, in fact and
in law.
49. The Israeli act of aggression is a severe blow to
the internationally accepted system for the use of
atomic energy for peaceful purposes. The Director
General of IAEA, in his statement to the Board of
Governors, which I referred to earlier,4 said:
“This attack on the Iraqi nuclear centre is a
serious development with far-reaching implications.
The Agency’s safeguards system is a basic element
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. During my long
time here, I do not think we have been faced with a
more serious question than the implications of this
development. The Agency has inspected the Iraqi
reactors and has not found evidence of any activity not in accordance with the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. A non-NPT country has evidently not felt
assured by our findings and about our ability to
continue to discharge our safeguarding responsibilities effectively. . , , From a point of principle,
one can only conclude that it is the Agency’s
safeguards regime which has also been attacked.
Were will this lead us in the future? This is a matter
of grave concern which should be pondered well.”

53. There should be very little doubt, especially
among the members of the Council, that Israel’s real
target on Sunday, 7 June 1981, was not merely our
peaceful nuclear installations. The Zionists and their
friends were actually aiming at Iraq’s crucial role in
rallying the Arab nations against the Camp David
conspiracy, in making a real contribution towards
strengthening the world of Islam and the non-aligned
movement, and in being the vanguard of the fight
against colonialism, racism including Zionism, and all
other forms of domination. They want to undermine
the new Iraq and all that it stands for. That target is
indestructible.

50. Iraq had already warned the Council in a letter
dated 29 July 1980[S/14073]that the Zionist campaign
against Iraq was a prelude to an air strike against the
Iraqi nuclear reactor, as Israel had in its possession
American-manufactured aeroplanes with a range that
enabled it to strike within Iraqi territory. This Zionist
act of aggression against Iraq constitutes a qualitative
change in the aggressor’s policy in the area. It is a
clear indication of the determination of the Zionists,
after the failure of Camp David, to escalate their
provocations with acts of arme’d aggression prior to
launching a full-scale war in order to subjugate the
Arab countries and to impose full Zionist domination
over the whole Middle East.

54. The PRESIDENT (inferprefafionfiom
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel.
I invite him to make his statement.
55. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset,
let me take this opportunity of conveying to you our
felicitations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of June. You, Sir, represent
a country with which mine has the friendliest and most
cordial of relations. Since Mexico’s election to the
Council last year, you personally have exhibited great
qualities of diplomacy and statesmanship, That was
particularly the case when you acted as President of
the Council in April of last year, a month in which a
series of difficult debates took place. We have every
confidence that, as President of the Council for a
second time, you will handle its business with the
same wisdom and expertise.

51. in conclusion, I should like once again to
emphasize that the Israeli attack against my country is
a clear-cut act of premeditated aggression. The whole
world has recognized that fact. The elaborate preparations that preceded the commission of that act were
fully described by the Prime Minister of Israel and
other lsraeli leaders in their press conference held at
Tel Aviv on IO June. What is worse is that Mr. Begin
stated categorically at that press conference that, if

56. 1 should like to take this opportunity also to
express m.y compliments to the representative of
Japan, Mr. Nisibori, who conducted the Council’s
7

Israel in 1949, Iraq adamantly refused to do so.
Instead, it fomented and supported the unrelenting
Arab belligerency and terrorism against Israel. It also
took part in the Arab wars against Israel in 1967and
1973. And it has doggedly rejected any international
measure or instrument which might imply even the
mostindirect recognition of Israel and its right to exist.

business last month in an exemplary fashion, with all
his well-known skill and grace.
5’7. On Sunday, 7 June 1981, the Israel Air Force
carried out an operation against the Iraqi atomic
reactor called “Osirak”. That reactor was in its final
stages of construction near Baghdad. The pilots’
mission was to destroy it. They executed their mission
successfully.

64. On 22 October 1973, when the Security Council called for a cease-fire in the Yom Kippur War
[resolution 338 (1973)], the Baghdad Government
announced: “Iraq does not consider itself a party to
any resolution, procedure or measure in armistice or
cease-fire agreements or negotiations of peace with
Israel, now or in the near future”.

58. In destroying Osirak, Israel performed an elementary act of self-preservation, both morally and
legally. In so doing, Israel was exercising its inherent
right of self-defence as understood in general international law and as preserved in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

65. In June 1977, the then President of Iraq, Ahmad
Hasan Al-Bakr, asserted that “efforts . . . must be
consolidated . . . to support the liquidation of the
racist Zionist entity so as to build a democratic
society”.

59. A threat of nuclear obliteration was being developed against Israel by Iraq, one of Israel’s most
implacable enemies. Israel tried to have that threat
halted by diplomatic means. Our efforts bore no fruit.
Ultimately we were left with no choice. We were
obliged to remove that mortal danger. We did it
cleanly and effectively. The Middle East has become a
safer place. We trust that the international community
‘has also been given pause to make the world a safer
place.

66. More recently, the Iraqi ambassador at New
Delhi had the following to say at a press conference
reported by the Middle East News Agency on 24 October 1978: “Iraq does not accept the existence of a
Zionist State in Palestine , . , the only solution is
war”. And only last year, in his statement at the
4th meeting of the seventh emergency special session
of the General Assembly, the representative of Iraq
found it necessaryto restate his Government’s opposition to the very existence of my country.

60. Those facts and the potentials for a safer world
are widely recognized. Several States in the Middle
East and beyond are sleeping more easily today in the
knowledge that Saddam Hussein’s nuclear-arms potential has been smashed.
,,

!

,

67. In sum, Iraq declares itself to have been in a state
of war with Israel since 1948. Hence, it has rejected all
United Nations efforts to seek a peaceful settlementof
the Arab-Israeli dispute. It has publicly rejected
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)and 338(1973).

61. But all this will not preclude a hypocritical
parade here in the Council. Nothing will prevent
numerous Members of the United Nations from the
usual ganging-up on Israel for reasons of spite and
expediency. Nothing will stop them from hurling
abuse at us, even though they know in their heart of
hearts that it is Israel that has relieved them of an
awesome menace. Their cant and crocodile tears will
do the Organization no credit. The sham and charade
will not add to the stature of the Council, and
pontification will not further the cause of peace.

68. Iraq has missed no opportunity to make it clear
that it will not abide by international law in respect to
Israel and that it reserves its freedom of action with
regard to Israel. This perverse doctrine found expression in the so-called “National Charter” of Iraq,
proclaimed by its President, Saddam Hussein, in
February of last year and circulated at the request of
the representative of Iraq [S/13816, annex].

62. Israel has long believed in a different, more
constructive approach. We advocate the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East, grounded in a multilateral treaty, reached
through direct negotiations by all the States concerned. This is the moment for the Council to lend its
support to Israel’s proposal. I shall return to our
proposal at greater length towards the end of my
statement.

69. The principles allegedly underlying that Charter
were said to include, inter da, the non-use of force
and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Yet, in
paragraph 3, they were specifically excluded with
regard to my country on the grounds that it is a
“deformed entity [which] is not considered a State”.
That sameCharter, in paragraph 4, committed Iraq in
no uncertain terms to all-out warfare against Israel and
enjoined other Arab States to participate in that war,
using “all means and techniques”,

63. Ever since the establishmentof the State of Israel
over 33 years ago, Iraq has been conspiring to destroy
it. Iraq joined several other Arab States which
attacked Israel t.heday after it became independent in
1948.But while other Arab States-Egypt, Lebanon,
Jordan and Syria-signed armistice agreements with

70. In a letter to the Secretary-General of 11March
1980 [S/138381,I drew attention to the fact that this
undisguiseddenial by one Member State of the right of
8

another Member State to exist is in flagrant violation
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. 1 observed that it was a matter for
surprise that a document so violently opposed to
everything that the United Nations stands for should
be circulated at all as a document of the Council,
whose primary resljonsibility is the maintenance of
international peace and security. The United Nations,
and the Council in particular, were unmoved.

76. In recent years, Iraq has been the most active
Arab State in the nuclear field. Its goal has been the
acquisition of a military nuclear option. Permit me lo
elaborate.
77. In 1974, Iraq attempted to acquire a 500-megawatt nuclear power reactor of the graphite-gas type
which had been developed in the 1950s primarily for
the production of large quantities of plutonium for
military use. Although that request was turned down,
it was nevertheless agreed to supply Iraq with a
70-megawatt nuclear reactor of the Osiris type, which
is considered one of the most advanced reactors of its
kind in the world,

71. Not by accident has Iraq taken a lead among
those Arab States which reject out of hand any
solution of the Arab-Israeli dispute by peaceful means.
To translate its words into deeds, Iraq has used its
petro-dollars to develop a sophisticated technological
and military infrastructure. It seesitself as the leader
78. Iraq demanded that its supplier provide it with
and linchpin of the so-called Eastern Front which the weapons-grade nuclear fuel-that is, uranium enriched
Arab rejectionist States established in Baghdad in 1978 to a level of 93 per cent. When it comes to research,
against Israel. Despite its involvement in a war of
this type of fuel is generaily confined to use in nuclear
aggressionagainst Iran, Iraq has continued to indicate
faciIities
with an extremely low capacity-from 1 to
its willingness to send men and matPrie1 to take part in
10 megawatts,
any military hostilities that the rejectionist Arab States
may initiate against Israel,
79. Iraq’s supplier undertook to provide it with about
80 kilograms of this weapons-grade uranium. In 1979,
72. Over and beyond the development of its conventhe supplier tried to persuade Iraq to accept afar lower
tional forces, Iraq has in recent years entered the
.grade
of uranium, but the Iraqis insisted on the
nuclear armaments field methodically and purposeprevious deal. To fulfil it, the supplier had to draw
fully, while at the same time piously appending its
from stockpiles in its own military nuclear arsenal.
signature to international instruments specifically prohibiting it from doing so.
80. During 1980 the supplier dispatched to Iraq the
first shipment of the enriched uranium concerned,
73. As far back as 8 September 1975, Saddam
containing 12kilograms. This shipment enabled lraq to
Hussein was quoted in the Lebanese weekly Al-Usbu
put into operation a smaller nuclear reactor provided
Al-Arabi as saying that the acquisition of nuclear
by the same supplier. Israel learned from unimpeachtechnology by his country was the first Arab attempt
able sources that following the delivery, expected
towards nuclear armament. By way of comment on
soon, of two additional shipments of weapons-grade
reports that Iraq would be the first Arab country to
uranium weighing about 24 kilograms, Osirak would
acquire an atomic bomb, the Iraqi oil minister at the
be completed, and put into operation within the next
time was reported on 30 November 1976 in the
few weeks-and not later than the beginning of
Kuwaiti paper Al-Qabas to have declared a week
September 1981. Thirty-six kilograms of weaponsearlier that all Arab States should participate in a
grade uranium in Iraq’s possession would enable it to
project to produce an atomic bomb. And according to
make a nuclear bomb,
the International Herald Tribune of 27 June 1980,
Na’im Haddad, a senior member of Iraq’s Revolution81. This, of course, is by no means the end of the
ary Command Council, stated at a meeting of the
story. Iraq has also purchased complementary fuelLeague of Arab States in 1977 that “the Arabs must
cycle technology: namely, four research laboratories
get an atom bomb”.
for the study of the chemical processes of fuel
preparation and its recycling, as well as the repro74. In brief, the Council is now confronted with an
absurd situation, Iraq claims to be at war with Israel.
cessing of irradiated fuel, From the point of view of
Indeed, it prepares for atomic war. And yet it
nuclear weapons, the most significant is a radiocomplains to the Security Council when Israel, in selfchemistry laboratory, known as the “hot cell”, used
for the separation of irradiated fuel and the extraction
defence, acts to avert nuclear disaster.
of plutonium. This project is scheduled for completion
75, I would like to remind the representative of Iraq
in 1981.
that a State cannot invoke in its favour benefits
deriving from certain provisions of international law
82. Together with the construction of these facilities.
without being prepared at the sametime also to abide
Iraq has been energetically investigating the possibility
by the duties flowing from international law. Arab
of acquiring nuclear power reactors which operate on
States,including Iraq, seek to impose on Israel duties
natural uranium and heavy water. Such reactors
stemming from the international law of peace while
produce large quantities of plutonium which, as is
simultaneously claiming for themselves the privileges
well known, is used in the manufacture of nuclear
of the international law of war.
weapons.
9

83. Ih order to build up the reserves of uranium
needed to attain self-sufficiency, Iraq has operated in
four parallel directions: (a) it has bought weaponsgrade enriched uranium on the international black
market; (b) it has acquired uranium through bilateral
deals; (c) it has obtained enrichment facilities; and
(4 it has begun an intensive search for uranium on its
own territory.

89. The combination of an Osiris reactor, and about
80 kilograms of weapons-grade nuclear fuel, together
with laboratories for the production of plutonium
would have enabled Iraq to acquire a nuclear-weapons
capability by the mid-1980s. To produce nuclear
weapons, Iraq could have opted for one of two paths:
(a) the production of three to four nuclear explosive
devices on the enriched uranium path, by using the
fuel supplied for operating Osirak, or, (b) the use of
plutonium produced by Osirak and the reprocessing
laboratory for the production of one plutonium bomba
year.

84, Iraq already possessesaircraft capable of delivering nuclear warheads. In addition, it is involved in
the development of a new surface-to-surface missile
with an effective range of up to 3,000 kilometres, also
capable of delivering a nuclear warhead. Unlike Israel,
Iraq, for well-known reasons, has not embarked on its
large-scale nuclear programme for reasons of pure
research, despite its protestations to the contrary. And
again unlike Israel, Iraq has certainly not embarked
upon its nuclear programme because it faces an energy
crisis. Iraq is blessed with abundant supplies of natural
oil and, when not engaged in foreign adventures
against one of its neighbours, it is normally one of the
largest oil suppliers in the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries.

90. Further cause for anxiety was given by the
delivery of weapons-grade nuclear material without
proper provision for the return of the fuel rods after
use.
91. Any lingering doubts about Iraq’s intentions to
acquire nuclear weaponsto be used against Israel were
removed just two days ago by the Iraqi Minister of
Information. According to yesterday’s edition of The
New York Times, Latif Jassemwrote in the State-run
newspaper Al-Jumhuriya on 10 June that the Israeli
attack on Osirak last Sunday showed that Israel knew
that its “real and decisive danger” came from Iraq.

85. No amount of bluster can hide one simple, basic
fact: Iraq’s nuclear programme has, beyond a shadow
of doubt, just one aim-to acquire nuclear weapons
and delivery systems for them.

92. In plain terms, Iraq was creating a mortal danger
to the people and State of Israel. It had embarked on
ramified programmes to acquire nuclear weapons. It
has acquired the necessary facilities and fuel. Osirak
was about to go critical, in a matter of weeks.

86. Academic and public figures who follow these
matters have had no illusions about Iraq’s nuclear
objectives in the military field. For example, on
5 August 1980, the Paris newspaper France-Soir
published an article on Iraq’s nuclear programme
containing a warning by the eminent French atomic
scientist Francis Perrin, who had served as head of the
French Nuclear Energy Commission from 1951 to
1971. Referring to Osirak, Perrin explained that it is
fuelled by highly enriched uranium which can be used
to produce an atomic weapon.

93. Over the last few years Israel has followed Iraq’s
nuclear development programme with growing concern. We have repeatedly expressed our demand both
publicly and through diplomatic channels that nuclear
assistance to Iraq should be terminated. On various
occasions, Israeli representatives drew the attention of
the United Nations General Assembly and of its First
Committee to the frantic efforts being made by Iraq
and its supporters to establish a nuclear axis aimed
against Israel. The Government of Israel has repeatedly urged the European countries involved to
stop assisting Iraq’s systematic drive to attain a military nuclear capability, stressing the grave implications of such aid to Iraq for all concerned. We also
urged other friendly Governments to use their influence
in that direction. All these public and diplomatic
efforts by Israel went unheeded while, at the same
time, the pace of Iraq’s nuclear development increased.

87. Similarly, on 27 March 1981, Senator Alan
Cranston told the United States Senate thaV “This
massive Iraqi nuclear development program is underway despite the fact that Iraq has no parallel program
for developing commercial nuclear power. ” Senator
Cranston went on to say that he had been informed
authoritatively that Iraq was pursuing a nuclearweapons capability option and that: “Iraq, though at
the present time party to the nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty, is embarked on a full-scale program that
appears designed to develop the capability to extract
plutonium suitable for weapons purposes.”

94. I should add that Israel was not alone in its
apprehensions. Several neighbours of Iraq and other
States in the Middle East also expressed their deep
concern to Iraq’s suppliers over Iraq’s nuclear ambitions-but to no avail.

88. Senator Cranston explained that Iraq had vigorously embarked on an approach of. the Manhattan
Project type, which could provide it with nuclear
explosives of the Hiroshima size. Senator Cranston’s
concerns were heightened by the fact that Iraq is
governed by what he termed “a radical, militarily
aggressive rbgime which routinely employs terrorism
to advance its aims”,

95. Precious time was lost. and Israel was left facing
the stark prospect that wit&n a very short period 07
time Osirak would become critical, or, in the jargon of
ndclear scientists, was about to go “hot”. Israel was
10

left with an agonizing dilemma. Once Osirak had
become hot, any attack on it would have blanketed the
city of Baghdad with massive radioactive fallout. The
effect of that would have been lethal and tens of
thousands, and possibly hundreds of thousands, would
have been grievously harmed,
96. On the other hand, Israel could not possibly
stand idly by while an irresponsible, ruthless and
bellicose regime, such as that of Iraq, acquired nuclear
weapons, thus creating a constant nightmare for
Israel. Saddam Hussein’s regime has amply demonstrated its total disregard for innocent human life both
at home and in its war with Iran. Given the nature and
record of that unscrupulous regime, the vast dangers
for lsrael inherent in the creation of an Iraqi military
nuclear potential are self-evident,
97. The Government of Israel, like any other Government, has the elementary duty to protect the lives
of its citizens. In destroying Osirak last Sunday, Israel
was exercising its inherent and natural right to selfdefence, as understood in general international law
and well within the meaning of Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
98. Commenting on the meaning of Article 51 of the
Charter, Sir Humphrey Waldock, now President of the
International Court of Justice, stated in a lecture
delivered at The Hague Academy of International Law
in 1952 that
“it would be a travesty of the purposes of the
Charter to compel a defending State to allow its
assailant to deliver the first and perhaps fatal
blow. . , . To read Article 51otherwise is to protect
the aggressor’s right to the first strike.”
99. In a similar vein, Professor Morton Kaplan and
Nicholas de B. Katzenbach wrote in their book, The
Political

Foundations

qf International

Law:

“Must a state wait until it is too late before it may
defend itself? Must it permit another the advantages
of military build-up, surprise attack, and total
offense, against which there may be no defense? It
would be unreasonable to expect any State to permit
this-particularly when given the possibility that a
surprise nuclear blow might bring about total destruction, or at least total subjugation, unless the
attack were forestalled.“6
100. Professor Derek Bowett of Cambridge University, in his authoritative work on Self-Defense in
International
Law, observed:
“No state can be expected to await an initial
attack which, in the present state of armaments,
may well destroy the state’s capacity for further
resistance and so jeopardize its very existence.“’
101, So much for the legalities of the case. Still, we
have been accused of acting unlawfully. Presumably it

is lawful for a sovereign State to create an instrument capable of destroying several hundred thousand
Israelis; it is unlawful to halt that fatal process before it
reaches completion.
102. The decision taken by my Government in the
exercise of its right of self-defence, after the usual
international procedures and avenues had proved
futile, was one of the most agonizing we have ever had
to take. We sought to act in a manner which would
minimize the danger to all concerned, including a large
segment of Iraq’s population, We waited until the
‘eleventh hour after the diplomatic clock had run out,
hoping against hope that Iraq’s nuclear arms project
would be brought to a halt. Our Air Force was only
called in when, as I have said, we learned on the basis
of completely reliable information that there was less
than a month to go before Osirak might have become
critical. Our Air Force’s operation was consciously
launched on a Sunday, and timed for late in the day, on
the assumption that the workers on the site, including
foreign experts employed at the reactor, would have
left. That assumption proved correct, and the loss in
human life, which we sincerely regret, was minimal.
103. I should add that those same considerations
worked in the opposite direction as regards Iraq’s
other nuclear facilities and constrained Israel from
taking action against the smaller Western-supplied
research reactor, as well as a smaI1 Soviet research
reactor. Both of those facilities are operational and,
if attacked, could release substantial amounts of
radiation.
104. In this connection, I wish to deny in the most
categorical terms the false allegation made here by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq-who had the
courtesy to leave the Chamber when I started my
statement-that Iraq’s nuclear installations were
attacked by Israel on any date prior to 7 June.
105. With regard to the statement of the Foreign
Minister of Baghdad as a whole, let me just observe
that he added yet another tale to the Tules of
1,001 Nights, which, if I am not mistaken, were also
written, like his statement, in Baghdad.
106. Iraq has unashamedly used the United Nations
as an instrument to divert international attention from
its nuclear weapons programme. By way of a smokescreen, it launched an attack on Israel, which came to
be known as the “Iraqi initiative”; at the tenth special
session of the General Assembly in 1978 devoted to
disarmament. Despite its manipulation of that special
session and of the First Committee of the General
Assembly ever since, in its unremitting campaign
against Israel, nothing can or could camouflage its own
nuclear weapons programme.
107. By contrast, Israel has long been committed to
the concept that the most effective way to prevent the
spread of nuclear weapons to the Middle East would

114. Israel has always held the conviction that no
international conflict can be solved by the use of force.
By the same token it must also be clear that the selfish
pursuit of narrow interests, economic and other, can
only exacerbate international tensions.

be the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the
region, modelled on the Tlatelolco TreatyR, which is
based on an initiative of the Latin American countries
and on direct negotiations among them.
108. Israel has repeatedly given expression to this
idea. Since 1974 Israel has proposed it annually in the
General Assembly and in other international forums.
At the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly in
1980, Israel submitted a draft resolution on this subject
in document A/C.1/35/L.8, which spelt out in precise
terms our proposal for the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. To our great
regret, this proposal was rejected out -of hand by a
number of Arab States, first and foremost by Iraq,
whose representative even challenged Israel’s right to
sit in the First Committee. The Iraqi position could
only mean that Iraq rejects any possibility of creating a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.

115. For its part, Israel will not allow itself to be the
victim of such a cynical approach. We are an ancient
people. We are imbued with an indomitable will to
live. That will has been forged in a crucible of
3,000 years of suffering. We have survived the most
terrible of tests. We have re-established our national
independence. We are firmly rooted in our own land.
We have the means and the determination
to defend
ourselves and we are resolved to do so.
116. For 30 years and more the world has watched
with equanimity the unrestrained and unending aggression of Iraq and others against my country. Iraq and its
supporters, both in the Arab world and beyond, have
been encouraged by the apathy and appeasement of
the international community and by their own ability
to manipulate the world Organization for their bellicose ends and lawless policies.

109. Israel’s proposal stands. With full awareness of
the many political differences among the States of the
Middle East, and without prejudice to any political or
legal claim, it behoves all the States of the region, for
the sake of their common future, to take concrete
steps towards the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the Middle East.

117. The time has surely come for the United
Nations in general, and the Council in particular, to
persuade Iraq and its supporters that international
conflicts cannot be solved by plotting the demise of a
sovereign State. The only way to solve any conflict is
to negotiate its peaceful resolution, for peace and
peace alone will ensure the rights of all the States
involved and guarantee their well-being and security.

110. It is for that reason that, in a letter dated 9 June
1981 to the Secretary-General9 Israel further elaborated its proposal and formally and urgently requested
all States of the Middle East and States adjacent to the
region to consent in the course of the current year to
‘the holding of a preparatory conference to discuss the
modalities of such a conference of States of the Middle
East with a view to negotiating a multilateral
treaty
establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East.

118. Mr. CAID ESSEBSI (Tunisia) (interpretation
Since the announcement of the atrocious act committed on Sunday, 7 June, against one of
our Member States, Iraq, the eyes of the world have
turned to the United Nations and to its supreme body
entrusted with the task of maintaining international
peace and security, as well as respect for the fundamental principles of the Charter.

jkom French):

1 I 1. The Security Council now has a clear-cut choice
before it. It can resign itself to the perpetuation of the
well-established pattern of one-sided denunciations of
my country which can only serve as a cover and
encouragement for those who entertain destructive
designs against it; alternatively,
the Council can
address itself seriously to the perils and challenges that
confront us all.
es

119. Since that act of war was reported, the world
has been awaiting the reaction of the Security Council.
It considers that the Council should discharge its
responsibilities
to the full, The world awaits reassurance as to the capacity of the Organization to react
to the event and to respond in an appropriate manner
to the requests of its Member States when they are the
victims of blatant aggression. It also awaits reassurance as to the nature of the reaction of the
Organization to the aggressor, one of its Member
States, which persists in considering itself a Member
State while at the same time trampling underfoot the
basic principles of the Charter and the most elementary rules of international law and morality.

112. It is in keeping with this latter approach that
I invite the Council to consider carefully Israel’s
proposal regarding the establishment
of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. We believe that
the advancement’ of our proposal will constitute a
significant contribution to the future well-being and
security of all the States of the Middle East.
113. Beyond that, the time has come for serious
stock-taking, for we are concerned here with a matter
of grave import, crucial to the future of the Middle
East and, I dare say, to the entire world. Certain
lessons must be drawn.

120. Such, Mr. President, is the importance of the
task entrusted to us today. It means that we must rely
on your patience and your experience as well as on
Your dedication to the principles which govern our12

work, so that we may be able to give the world the
response it expects of us and the assurances it has a
right to require of the Council. In congratulating you,
Sir, on the occasion of your accession to the presidency of our important body, my delegation wishes to
express to you its best wishes for success and to
assure you at this particularly critical moment that you
will have its full co-operation. It does so with great
pleasure since you represent a great country, an
advocate of so many noble and just causeswith which
Tunisia has friendly and close relations.

being given to a military staff possessing the most
sophisticated weaponry and the most modern air force
to fly over the territory of an independent and
sovereign State, to violate the airspace of another
independent and sovereign State and to bomb the
vicinity of the capital of a third independent and
sovereign State, thus causing, among other things, the
loss of many human lives, among them that of a young
French technician, who died while on a mission of
peace and progress.

121I My delegation would be remiss were it not at the
same time to convey to your predecessor, the representative of Japan, the very sincere tribute he
deserves for the admirable and particularly effective
manner-reports of which have reached even our
capital cities-in which he led the work of the Council
for the month of May.

126. I leave it to the representative of Israel to
perorate cynically about crocodile tears and about
slimy cobras that show a smooth face, the better to
strike their victims and spread poison, death and
destruction. As for myself, I merely bow td those
innocent victims, and I offer to their relatives and to
their countries my most sincere sympathy, which is
that of a man who loves peace and justice.

122. Mr. President, in assuring you just now of
Tunisia’s full co-operation, my delegation was merely
expressing its loyalty to a constant principle of its
foreign policy that has existed since the dawn of its
independence and that consists in attaching absolute
primacy to international law, outside of which nothing
is valid. It was right here in New York on 22 November 1956 that the President of the Tunisian Republic,
President Bourguiba, declared that:

127. Once this outrage had been accomplished, the
Israeli leaders unabashedly and publicly declared that
they had committed that act of blatant aggression.
Pushing brazen arrogance to its limits, Israel even
went so far as to report on it in the most official
manner and in the greatest detail to the Security
Council itself, the body entrusted with dealing with
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression and with
taking the necessary collective measures.

“We shall work to strengthen the United Nations so
that it may be not only a moral force but a genuine
supranational tribunal which lays down the law and
has the ability to enforce it.“‘O

128. Let us look for a moment at the letter dated
8 June from the representative of Tel Aviv [S/14.510];it
is even more enlightening. What is the logic, what is
the morality behind it? It is nothing but a heap of
fallacious arguments, a pile of gratuitous and deceitful assertions, a justification based on unfounded
hypotheses and accusations.

123, In coming to New York today on behalf of
Tunisia and on behalf of the Arab nation that has been
the victim of blatant aggression, I am simply asking
you, the members of the Council, which is much more
than a moral force, to lay down the law and to draw
from the Charter that governs your work the means to
enforce it. That is precisely the substance of the
request just made with eloquence and conviction by
my colleague and friend the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Saadoon Hammadi, whose statement has broadly and objectively enlightened us as to
the significance we should attach to the Israeli act of
aggression.

129. I need hardly recall here that, according to the
Definition of Aggression contained in the annex to
resolution 3314 (XXIX) adopted by the General
Assembly on 14 December 1974, bombardment by the
armed forces of a State against the territory of another
State, regardless of a declaration of war, constitutes an
act of aggression. I need hardly recall article 5 of the
Definition of Aggression, which states:
“1. No consideration of whatever nature,
whether political, economic, military or otherwise,
may serve as a justification for aggression.

124. On 7 June, while the world was following with
all due attention the diplomatic activities taking place
in the Middle East region with a view to defusing the
crises and tensions there, and while we noted, with
some scepticism mixed with a feeling of mitigated
satisfaction, that diplomacy was winning out over
armed confrontation, the initiators of that so-called
peace action publicly received a resounding slap in the
face.

“2. A war of aggression is a crime against
international peace. Aggression gives rise to international responsibility.”
130. In our view that is the only appropriate response
to Israel’s quibbting. We refuse to give undue weight
to considerations not founded on generally accepted
international rules that are based on principle and law.

125. In fact, at that very moment the leaders of Israel
were putting the final touches to preparations for a
true war expedition. At that very moment, orders were

131. As to the other justificsltions given by ‘Israel,
I should like to quote the statement made on 9 June by
13

whose objective is to prevent any scientific or technological progress the Arabs may make, so as to
enable Israel to maintain its supremacy in the region.
President Bourguiba was not mistaken when he stated,
on 19 March 1973: “We believe that the struggle
between Arabs and Zionists is above all a problem of
scientific and technological disparity.”

the Director General of IAEA, who, speaking in his
most official and authoritative capacity, gave a most
categorical denial of Israeli allegations concerning the
character of the Iraqi nuclear installation. He stated:
“This attack on the Iraqi nuclear centre is a
serious development with far-reaching implications.
The Agency’s safeguards system is a basic element
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. During my long
time here, I do not think we have been faced with a
more serious question than the implications of this
development. The Agency has inspected the Iraqi
reactors and has not found evidence of any activity not in accordance with the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. A non-NPT country has evidently not felt
assured by our findings and about our ability to
continue to discharge our safeguarding responsibilities effectively. In the interest of its national
security, it has felt motivated to take military action.
From a point of principle, one can only conclude
that it is the Agency’s safeguards rCgime which has
also been attacked. Where will this lead us in the
future? This is a matter of grave concern which
should be pondered well. rr4

137. Only Israel, which recognizes no boundaries for
itself, imposes boundaries on science. Only Israel,
whose expansionism knows no limits, wishes to
impose limits on the expansion of progress. The
cowardly act of aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
research centre represents a new stage of escalation
and a new proof, if proof were needed, of the Zionist
spirit of arrogance and domination. So spoke a great
man, who is no longer with us, This was an outrage
with racist overtones, which men of science and of
conscience cannot tolerate and must condemn. This
act of terrorism, which is endangering world peaceand
has violated the basic principles of international law,
also constitutes a dangerous precedent. In fact, it has
introduced a new concept, which the civilized world
cannot permit: it is Israel’s justification of its infringements on the independence, sovereignty and security of other States by invoking the needs of a single
State to ensure its own national security. Today it is
the turn of Iraq along with Lebanon and Palestine.
Whose turn will it be tomorrow, on what could be an
interminable list? What will become of relations
among States if that concept is accepted and if the
international community does not react as vigorously
as possible to what would constitute a dangerous
precedent, likely to endanger irreparably international
peace and security?

132. Need I recall further that attacks against any
nuclear installations were formally prohibited by the
additional Protocols of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949?”
133. Furthermore, under what law, in what system of
logic, can one claim the right to prevent sovereign
States parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty from
developing their nuclear industry for peaceful purposes, under international controls, while oneself
refusing to sign that very Non-Proliferation Treaty and
while shamelessly arrogating to oneself the right to
possess the atomic weapon?

138. Those who are not sparing of their friendship for
Israel, providing it with aid, assistance and weapons,
invoking the notion of security, should reflect carefully on the dangerous slope down which they are
sliding.

134. What would happen if the arguments presented
here today by Israel were to be turned against it, since
it has been established now that this same rCgime has
made a State policy of the practice of international
terrorism? I repeat: today it has been established that
this rtgime had made a State policy of international
terrorism.

139. The situation we are considering today has the
merit of clarity-a rare merit, as will be recognized.
The facts are grave and intolerable, the responsibility
obvious and duly recognized. It is necessary in these
circumstances for the Security Council to live up to its
own responsibilities. It is necessary for the Council to
respond to the expectations of the world, whose eyes
are fixed today on every one of us. It is necessaryfor
the Council to show unanimity when it comes to taking
against those who jeopardize peace and international
security the vigorous measures demanded by the
seriousness of their actions and dictated by the
provisions of the Charter.

135. There remain to be noted, in that same Israeli
letter, the threats and challenges to two European
countries and to all other countries which refuse to
heed Israel’s injunctions. It is up to those countries
separately to shoulder their responsibilities and to
make their response as they see fit. For its part, the
Security Council must take note of that attitude of
,over-all defiance, which derives from the law of the
jungle, and take the necessary steps.

140. It is necessaryfor the Council to be unanimous
not only in the most vigorous possible condemnation
of Israel for its acts of vandalism and its blatant
aggression, but also, and above all, in drawing from
the Charter appropriate measures liable to deprive the
Government of Israel of the means of carrying out its

136. Leaving aside the quibbles and a posteviori
justifications, the Israeli attack of 7 June is in fact a
continuation of the acts of aggression committed
against the Arab people in Lebanon, Palestine and
elsewhere. At the same time it is above all an act
14

.

policy of provocation and defiance, as well as of the
assuranceof impunity it has enjoyed to date,

all, a state of war involves obligations-and precise
obligations- codified in the four Geneva Conventions
of 12August 1949,” and in all subsequent instruments,
as well as by general international custom,

141. The United Nations, which has a special responsibility in the present situation in the Middle
East-because the United Nations itself signed the
State of Israel’s birth certificate-can no longer
tolerate the intolerable behaviour of the spoiled child
which abuses the leniency shown it by some, in
contempt of the principles ofjustice and law. It is time
for international law, to which Tunisia and President
Bourguiba remain unswervingly committed, to be
respected, It is high time for United Nations law to be
applied in full. For the question which concerns us
today is in fact one episode in a more than ever
explosive situation throughout the Middle East, because as long as a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution is not found in the Middle East, as long as the
fundamental question-that of Palestine-is not resolved in accordance with the principles ofjustice and
law, as long as the Palestinian people under the
leadership of its sole legitimate representative, the
PLO, does not recover its right to self-determination,
independence and a State, stability, security and peace
will not be permanentty established in the region.

147. A peaceful research centre, whose activities are
covered by the terms of a treaty and are under the
control-considered to be perfectly satisfactory-of
an international agency, should never have been a
target of the Zionist forces precisely because of the
state of war they invoke. But furthermore, this
reasoning does not fail to surprise; for the Middle East
conflict exists, and it will exist as long as the
Palestinian people do not enjoy their legitimate national rights, and every Arab country, every Muslim
country, every non-aligned country will consider itself
to be at war as long as the Palestinian people have not
achieved their legitimate national aspirations.
148. Would the Israeli entity then be justified in
destroying those peoples, those countries which consider themselves at war because the Palestinian people
have not succeeded in winning their rights from the
Zionist entity?
149. But having said this, and since we are speaking
of a state of war which has not been brought to an end
by a peace treaty, does the fact that there is no peace
treaty in due and proper form putting an end to a
conflict justify the Zionists in attacking Baghdad
today, Riyadh or Kuwait or oilfields in the Emirates
tomorrow? And if one were to go further, I would say
that, legally speaking, there is a state or war existing
since 1939 between Germany and its opponents in the
Second World War. There has been no peace treaty
since 1939 between Germany and its enemies in that
Second World War, Does the reasoning that we heard
a while ago today justify an act of aggression by one of
the protagonists in that world war against another?
This would be truly absurd.

142. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fram Spunish); The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
143. Mr. BEDJAOUI (Algeria) (interpretation from
French): Algeria and Mexico combine their efforts so

harmoniously and blend their voices so felicitously in
the concert of nations which seeksto establish a more
just world, that I feel a very special satisfaction,
Mr. President, in seeing you preside over the fortunes
of the Security Council for this month of June, a month
I would have wished-for you, for the Organization,
and for peace in the world-less agitated than it is. The
profound relations of friendship which bind us add a
special quality to the pleasure I feel at seeing you at
the head of the Council.

150. The second argument that we heard seemseven
stranger and more specious. We have heard proposed
a conference for the denuclearization of the Middle
East and of Palestine. We have heard proposals for
direct negotiations between the States of the region.
The manoeuvre is a skilful one, but quite transparent
and the motives behind it are suspect.It is tantamount
to a desire to deal- with the consequences of the
situation in the region without correcting the cause.
They want us to believe that the whole problem of
peace in the Middle East boils down to the efforts of
each party to conquer and take possession of the
nuclear threshold. Yet the basic problem which
overshadows all the others is totally different: it is that
of satisfying the national aspirations of the Palestinian
people and of withdrawing from all occupied Arab
territories. Instead of hoodwinking international public opinion by calling for a conference for the denuclearization of the Middle East, the Zionists would be
better inspired to agree to a peace conference, a true
one, with the PLO under the aegis of the United

144. I should like furthermore to express my Government’s great appreciation for the manner in which
your predecessor, Mr. Nisibori of Japan, fulfilled his
lofty task.
145. A while ago we heard some very strange things
and, if we leave aside the unseemly invective directed
against the Arab countries, as well as the scorn for the
international community and for the United Nations,
what would remain from what we have heard is two
arguments-in fact, I was going to say two pieces of
sophistry.
146. The first is that the Zionist entity, in a state of
war with the Arab countries as a whole, would, so it
says, be perfectly justified in using all its military
means against one of them: Iraq. But that is legal
formalism with neither weight nor sincerity, First of
15

national peace and security. It should be made very
clear, first of all; that the seriousnessof the Israeli act
does not, in our view, lie in the fact that it involved a
nuclear reactor. Whether the target had been a
factory, a rural village, a naval yard, a railroad
crossing or an oilfield, the significance of the act, its
international scope and its political consequences
would be the same. In all those cases, it would be
nothing more nor less than a very serious violation of
the elementary rules governing international relations.
It is nothing more nor less than scorn for the
sacrosanct principles of national independence and
sovereignty. It is nothing more nor less than a
violation of the principles of the Charter and especially
of the principle of the non-use of force or the threat of
force against the territorial integrity of a State.

Nations and in accordance with its pertinent resolutions.
151. But I have dwelt too long on a statement whose
total inconsistency the Council will already have
noted, so let us go on to more serious things.
152. We are meeting at a serious time. Once again
the Zionist forces have struck and once again their
victim is an Arab country. Once again, it has been a
deliberate attack, coolly premeditated, programmed
and executed with total disdain for the reaction of the
international community, as well as for the consequences for the peace and security of the world. It
represents, today as before, and perhaps today more
than ever, a delirious craving for power, irresponsible
adventurism and unjustified aggression, as if war had
become for the Zionist regime a question of prestige in
order to glorify technological supremacy, to cultivate a
Dionysian exaltation of warlike virtues or to parade a
scornful skill before an adversary it wishes always to
humiliate. This has a name, the name Chancellor
Kreisky gave it yesterday, It is the madness of
Erostrates among leaders who would not hesitate to
light the match that would blow up the entire planet.
153. The incredible aggression perpetrated by the
Zionists against Iraq is, to be sure, not an isolated fact.
The international community and the Palestinian and
Arab peoples have for decades long known the,true
nature of the Zionist entity whose expansionism and
desire for domination have always been served by
aggression, a means to which it has always given pride
of place. But today the threat of an outbreak of a new
war carried gratuitously into the very heart of Iraq
highlights the fact that the Zionist regime thrives on
war and lives for war.

157. The Israeli action has the monstrous characteristic of introducing into international relations new
frightening forms of action based on aggression,
baptized “preventive” in order to make the unacceptable acceptable.
158. If this action brings us once again to the heart of
Israel’s constant expansionist and aggressive plans, it
also gives us, by its exceptional seriousness, a very
good idea of Zionist adventurism on all fronts, thereby
opening the way for all kinds of perilous disorders in
international relations, taking us back to the dark
, centuries when primitive mankind was exhausting
itself in the practice of war for war’s sake, and in
resort to the law of the jungle, with no holds barred.
159. The new theory of “preventive” aggression is
the very negation of law and of morality; it is
diametrically opposed to peace and reason. Permeated
by a suicidal subjectivism, it would in future authorize
any State to attack another for whatever reason it
considers valid-that is, in the final analysis, for no
reason at all.

154. The aggression committed against Iraq is both a
continuation of and a new stage in the execution of this
constant policy of the Zionist regime.

160. We can easily imagine the future of our world if
every State were entitled to attack the territory of
another by denouncing unilaterally, as posing a shortterm danger to its own security, any activity carried
out by its victim, even though it be universally
acknowledged as normal.

155. It is a continuation in that it shows more clearly
than ever the domineering, expansionist and adventuristic thrusts of the Israeli regime throughout the
region. It is a continuation, above all, in that it
provides irrefutable proof today that all Arab countries
are henceforth threatened by Israel’s bellicose nature.
This raid involves not only Iraq but, indeed, the whole
Arab world because the Zionist forces are with
impunity expanding the scope of action of their
aggression to the entire Arab nation. Only yesterday
Israeli military officials were inspecting the EgyptianLibyan border, probably preparing some evil design
there also.

161. Dilatory manoeuvres to draw the attention of
the international community to the nature and objective of such activities and the development of a whole
series of false arguments which we heard, focused on
Iraqi nuclear activities, can in no way diminish or
dilute the responsibilities of the Zionist aggressor, nor
can they explain, let alonejustify, its act of aggression.

156. But the Israeli aggression against Baghdad,
which is only a continuation of Israel’s constant
policy, stands out nevertheless by the fact that it is
a noteworthy intensification of the craving for power
of the Zionist leaders and, above all, because it
implies especially serious consequences for inter-

162. Even the least imaginative mind can easily
envisage the world-wide consequences, which we run
the risk of legitimizing, if any justification whatsoever
should by misfortune be given to the intolerable Israeli
example which would then become a precedent. The
least imaginative mind would then acknowledge the
16

frightening impossibility of living on a planet which
had become a powder-keg, where every State would
attack every other, for no reason other than the desire
to attack it. The primitive instincts of human societies
which we thought had been relegated to the dark ages
would then surface, destroying the thin, fragile layer of
human civilization.
163. Setting itself up as both judge and jury in
assessinga situation which it presents as a danger to
its security, the Zionist entity is hatching plans,
preparing scenarios, making its own calculations and,
in its power-hungry delirium, is committing irreparable
acts,justifying its crimes in the name of supposed selfdefence.
164. By creating a new battlefield in a part of the
world already fraught with conflict, Israel’s criminal
initiative, which even some of its traditional allies are
hesitating to sanction because of the seriousness of its
implications, must not go unpunished, lest we run the
risk of consecrating the primacy of might over right.

further their scientific, technological and economic
development”.
The same resolution emphasizes that this unspeakable
act of aggression, which compromises regional peace
and security, demonstrates:
“clear disregard for the Agency’s safeguards regime
and the Non-Proliferation Treaty and could do great
harm to the development of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes”.
167. But need we dwell any further on this aspect of
the supposed nuclear danger on which Israeli propaganda wishes complacently to focus so much attention? Actually, that is not the problem, for it is
impossible to understand how Israel, which-and this
is a proven fact-possesses the atomic bomb, can fear
Iraq, which-and this too is a proven fact-does not
possess it. Israel, strengthened .by its possession of
nuclear weapons, while crowing about its technological superiority, paraded emulously in the course of
its various aggressive raids, and refusing to be bound
by any limitation or any treaty in its quest for the
capacity for the mass destruction of the Arab countries, now falsely and abusively claims today that it
fears a State which is engaged in laboratory research
that is, in fact, peaceful in nature and, moreover,,
under the control of an international agency, besides
coming under the terms of a treaty requiring scrupulous compliance.

165’. This long-premeditated attack against another
State, an attack which futhermore violated the airspace of two others, could only be carried out thanks
to weapons on which the aggressor can alwa.yscount,
and to the impunity it has become accustomed to
enjoying in its evil doings. It is well known that Israel’s
challenge to the international community would not
have been possible without the constant encouragement given it by the very ones who assure it of the
protection of their weapons, while guaranteeing its
impunity by the very fact of the destabilizing function
which they have assigned to it in the region.
,
166. The implications of this act of aggression and
the need for its vigorous condemnation, as well as for
all measures likely to prevent its recurrence, are still
the same, whatever the target of the aggressor.
Moreover, today, the particular nature of the target,
far from diminishing the seriousnessof the act, in fact
makes it more serious. In this connection, furthermore, a great many facts now available, coming from
various authoritative sources, all agree in their radical
rejection of any sort of danger therein. Only yesterday, IAEA, through its Director General, who has
already been quoted this afternoon, declared that the
Israeli act of aggression against Iraq constituted, in
fact, an act of aggression against the Vienna Agency
itself.4 Iraq, he specified, had fully subscribed to the
Agency’s safeguards system, was a party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weaponsand had
thus far scrupulously complied, to the Agency’s
complete satisfaction, with the obligations it had
contracted in the matter of guarantees. In a resolution
adopted yesterday [S/14532], the Vienna Agency
condemned this act of aggression which violates not.
only the territorial integrity and political independence
of a State but also:

170. It is precisely the crystal-clear nature of this act
of aggression that has given rise to the severe criticism
of it by the entire international community. There is
today general condemnation of that act, coming even
from personalities and leaders who are traditionally
very open to Zionist theses, as well as from large
segments of the people of Israel themselves. Such
widespread repudiation results from the fact that this
act can be called only one thing-aggression-and
therefore causes the greatest anxiety about the dangerous habits it could introduce into international
relations,

“the inalienable right of all . . . States . . . to
develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, to

171. It is that severe critiscism and universal condemnation that the Security Council is duty-bound to
17

168. The truth is totally different: once again, more
dramatically than ever, it has been proved that peace
and security in the Middle East-in Palestine and the
world over-are irresponsibly threatened by the desire
for power and the expansionism of the Zionist rtgime,
which is waging a campaign of physical terror in the
region and of moral bIackmai1 of the entire international community.
169. Nothing, no one, has been opposing peace in the
Middle East and in Palestine for more than three
decades now except Israel, which denies the Palestinian people its legitimate national rights and continues its occupation of Arab territories.

,
!.

echo, by determining “the existence Of , . . [an] act of
aggression” under Article 39 of the Charter. BY the
same token, it is up to the Security Council, pursuant
to its major responsibility as the body entrusted with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and in conformity with the very terms of Article 39 of
the Charter, to “decide what measures shall be taken
in accordance with Articles 41 and 42”.
172. The seriousnessand the gratuitous nature of the
aggression forcefully require the international community-and particularly the States on which the
Charter has conferred particular responsibility for the
maintenance of peace-to prevent further danger and
to take a decision now for salutary action, with all the
necessary determination.
173. For the Zionist regime has already stated-in
advance, before any condemnation by the Security
Council, and even before any meeting of the Counci&that it would repeat its act if it deemed that
necessary. It is thus perfectly clear that any platonic
condemnation would appear more than ridiculous in
view of the serious stakes and Israel’s renewed
challenge. Only sanctionscan adequately respond to
this logic of renewed and renewable aggression and to
this provocation which, in advance, shows so little
regard for the Council’s authority.
174. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of the
Sudan. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

neous condemnation by the international commwnity is clear testimony and a mandate for the Council
to condemn and punish this unwarranted act of
aggression.
177. It is indeed ironic that a State like Israel, having
a developed nuclear-arms capability, not subject to
bilateral, regional or international supervision and
inspection, could attempt to justify its attack against
Iraq, a signatory of and a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, on the grounds that possession of a
nuclear research installation by Iraq constituted a
threat to Israel’s national security. It is worth noting
that IAEA has confirmed this week that the safeguards
of the Iraqi nuclear research installation have been
satisfactorily applied to date, and that the latest
inspection by the Agency took place as recently as
only five months ago.
178. It goes without saying that under the existing
international machinery, the Non-Proliferation Treaty
and the IAEA safeguards remain the only instruments
through which we could curb the ominous spread of
nuclear weapons. My delegation is therefore not at all
surprised that Israel has continued to refuse to sign the
Treaty, and has continued to ignore the justified
concern of the international community over its
acquisition and development of nuclear weapons,
concern expressed in General Assembly resolution
34189.
179. One can draw the conclusion that the bizarre
Israeli concept of “national security”, on which the
defence of the Sunday attack has been based, is
limitless and so undefined that any legitimate activity
in the region could be conceived and construed by
Israel as a potential threat to its security. Moreover,
one is bound to ask what law permits Israel to violate
the airspace and national sovereignty of Jordan, Saudi
Arabia and Iraq to strike deep into the outskirts of
Baghdad.

175. Mr. ABDALLA (The Sudan): I should like to
express at the outset my gratitude to you, Mr. President, and the other members of the Security Council
for allowing my delegation to participate in the
Council’s deliberations. It is my pleasure also to join
previous speakersin extending to you our congratulations upon your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. My delegation is confident that
with your vast experience and diplomatic skills the
current debate will, under your able guidance, come to
a satisfactory conclusion. We also express our admiration to your predecessorfor the able and commendable manner in which he presided over the work of the
Council last month.

180. The people and Government of the Sudan
strongly condemn the Israeli aggression and premeditated violation of the national sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of Iraq, Jordan and Saudi
Arabia. We further condemn in the strongest terms
the Israeli raid on the Iraqi nuclear research centre at
Osirak.

176. Tbday, once again, the Council is seized of a
situation with far-reaching consequences for international peace and security, a situation caused by a
grave and serious act of premeditated and unprecedented aggression committed last Sunday by Israel
against the Republic of Iraq. As if the unheard-of
atrocities inflicted upon the people of Lebanon and
Palestine were not enough, Israel shocked the whole
world by its recklessand irresponsible air raid against
the Iraqi nuclear research installation, This Israeli
naked act of aggression constitutes a breach of
international hW and a flagrant violation or ihi: Char&,
of the United Nations. The unanimous and instanta-

181. All of US should be very concerned with the
serious developments of last Sunday and the grave
consequences for peace and security in the region,
Those developments are an ominous indication of the
fact that we are on the verge of institutionalizing State
terrorism. The criminal acts of Israel should no more
be subjectedto mere words of condemnation. It is high
time for the Council to address itself to the dangerous
reality of the situation in the Middle East and uphold
the principles of the Charter. The Council should live
uP to its own primary responsibility as the guardian of
a world inspired by the norms of international law and
the ideals of the Charter.

182, Because of the continued Israeli acts of aggression and defiance of numerous resolutions of the
‘General Assembly and the Council, the Security
Council is called upon to act vigorously and decisively
to apply mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
183. The Charter contains all the necessary and
effective measures that are designed to deter and
punish such wanton acts of aggression as those
perpetrated by Israel. The adoption and application of
those measures depend clearly on the will and sense of
responsibility of all the members of the Council. Only
by opting for such a firm course of action will the
Council discharge its primary responsibility of restoring and maintaining justice, peace and security in
the world. Furthermore, since a real and continuous
threat is posed by the Israeli nuclear-arms capability,
the Council is called upon to find ways and means of
subjecting Israeli nuclear activities to regular international inspection and supervision.
184. Before concluding my statement, I should like
to avail myself of this opportunity to reaffirm, on
behalf of the people and Government of the Sudan, our
full support and backing of our brothers in Iraq in their
just cause against Zionist aggression and in their
endeavours for economic and social development.

to make it impelling for the Council to be seized of a
fundamental stock-taking pertaining to the continued
survival of an international order governed by international law or to its demise.
189. IS it to be supplanted by the criminal lawlessness and international terrorism which have been the
hallmark of Israeli policy before and since its inception more than three decades ago? The expanded
Israel of 1947-1948 was not baptized by the holy
waters of the River Jordan but by the blood of
innocent defenceless civilians in the mass massacres
of men, women and children at Deir Yassin west Of
Jerusalem and in many other towns and villages
throughout Palestine; the blowing up of defenceless
homes, hotels and motels, such as the Semiramis and
the King David Hotel, with victims buried under the
debris, now all but forgotten and unnamed; the slaying
of Lord Moyne, British Minister of State, in Cairo, in
the midst of a global war; off-duty British soldiers
hanged and dangling from the branches of trees; and
the venerable Count Bernadotte, assassinated in cold
blood on the hallowed streets of Jerusalem while
serving as the United Nations Mediator in the pursuit
of justice and peace.
190. The Palestinian and Lebanese peoples have
seen their countries and their civilians devastated by
ruthless and indiscriminate attacks by sea, air and on
the ground in the name of Israeli security. It is to be
hoped that those who claim to be concerned about
international terrorism will read the thick compendium
of Israeli systematic terrorism and realize who is the
foremost terrorist in the world.

185. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from SpanThe next speaker is the representative of Jordan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
ish):

186. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): This being the first
time that I have spoken in the Security Council for this
month, I wish to extend to you, Mr. Porfirio Mufioz
Ledo, my heartiest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. Your exemplary
record in the councils of the United Nations has
earned you the esteem, the friendship and the distinction which you so richly deserve as one of the most
accomplished and versatile statesmen, in the best
traditions of friendly Mexico’s fearless fidelity to the
Charter, to human freedom and dignity, and to amity
amongst nations. May I wish you all success in your
arduous task.

191. Only the other day a Palestinian diplomat who
was accredited to the European Economic Community
was assassinated in cold blood in Brussels-and
nobody has said that that was an act of aggression
against a diplomat. He had never carried a gun in his
life and belonged to one of the good families in
Jerusalem. He was doing a diplomatic job, but yet he
was assassinated in cold blood on the streets of
Brussels. Is that terrorism or is it not?
192. Those foul deeds which have initiated and
nurtured terrorism as a deliberate instrument of policy
are but the genesis of an unsatiated record of overt and
covert acts of aggression unique in their consistency
and diversity.

187. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor Mr. Masahiro Nisibori of friendly Japan for
the outstanding manner in which he handIed the duties
of this high office during the month of May.

193. There is only one diffilrence between yesterday
and today. The sticks of gelignite and dynamite which
tore to shreds innocent and unarmed civilians or
brought about their dispersal up to this day have since
been enhanced by the deadly appurtenances of modern technology,

188. The Security Council is in session today under a
very dark, ominous and menacing cloud. Perhaps in
years to come this meeting may well be evaluated as
one of the Council’s most niomentous meetings for the
profound consequences with which it is inescapably
fraught, for future peace and stability not only
in the Middle East but also far beyond. There are
so many ramifications to the perfidious aggression
against the Osirak nuclear research site in Baghdad as

194. Surprised by the sneak attack on Iraq and the
violation of the airspace in depth of Jordan and Saudi
Arabia? Not at all. For an aggressive and expansionist
Israel, this falls within its axiomatic norms of conduct
19

and we are all too familiar with it. And besides, it was
foretold by many an expert observer a long, long while
ago.
195. Daunted that a small scientific research Centre
with a few pounds of uranium fuel, presumably to
produce isotopes, manifestly for peaceful purposes,
should have been largely or totally incapacitated? Not
at all. For no power in the world can stop the
inexorable progress of mankind in the sciences, in the
humanities and in all other fields of knowledge. YOU
can destroy iron and steel and other raw materials, but
you can never destroy the human mind. In their hour
of misguided exhilaration and euphoria, the Israelis
should know, if they do not, that for countless
centuries Iraq was a beacon-light of civilization and
culture for the whole world. Iraq can never be wanting
or thwarted in scientific and technological advancement.
196. The Israelis know perfectly well that the small
scientific reactor, which was under international
inspection and control-an inspection had taken
place earlier this year-was never intended for other
than peaceful purposes and scientific progress. The
production of atomic bombs does not require the
existence of a small and controlled nuclear reactor.
A small quantity of plutonium could produce a bomb
or bombs if a country so willed, as a student from
Princeton demonstrated some three years ago.
197. As we all know, Iraq has signed and ratified the
Non-Proliferation Treaty in good faith and has subjected all its facilities to close international inspection
and scrutiny. What, then, is the real casualty of
Israel’s audacious aggression? It is no less than the
sanctity of the Non-Proliferation Treaty itself, and
I wish to emphasizethat.

199. Israel has over more than a decade tenaciously
refused to subscribe to the Non-Proliferation Treaty
and has kept its nuclear atom-bomb reactors incommunicado even to its greatest benefactors, without
whose incalculable assistance it would not be in a
position to trample upon the peace and security of the
world as it is doing today. Even senior Senators like
Howard Baker were refused accessto the Dimona, or
should I say demon, nuclear plant. I know that in the
mid-196Os,at our request, the United States Government tried to investigate the Dimona nuclear plant, but
it was denied access.But it did come up with facts and
information which totally verified the information
which we had supplied to it through people who were
working in that plant and in other plants in another,
European, country.
200. The explanation is anything but difficult, for the
crux of the matter is that, as far back as 1950, the
Israeli leadership determined to pursue the nuclear
option-and this was a conscious and calculated
decision of intent-in pursuit of a carefully laid down
policy of territorial expansion, political blackmail and
hegemony in its manifold manifestations.
201. An Atomic Energy Commission was established, accountable directly to the Prime Minister,
with the avowed purpose of assiduously working
towards the acquisition of nuclear power. In that same
year I wrote an editorial in one of our leading
newspapers in Jerusalem, Al-Difaa’, warning of the
dangerous long-term consequences of Israel’s pursuit
of that goal. That was 31 years ago, Several warnings
were given to various concerned Governments in the
mid-1960s when incontrovertible evidence became
available to my Government that Israel had reached a
threshold capability. And yet Israel’s determination to
surge ahead was met with bellicose connivance and
compromise as a result of the special United States
-Israel relationship essentially anchored in domestic
political imperatives.

198. The Council is all too familiar with the incessant
pleas and urgings of the numerous non-nuclear States
for practical and effective guarantees by the major
Powers against nuclear threat and blackmail. The
billions of human beings around the world will not 202. You should have seen Senator Cranston the day
forfeit their freedom and security or live in the shadow following the unabashed act of aggression, and while
of nuclear destruction by international arch-terrorists,
the rest of the world was stunned and unanimous in
which is what Menachem Begin and his clique have condemning it, defending poor tiny Israel for its
been all along. And, believe me, these are not mere perfidious attack. He might have bought a little crib for
epithets; I am doing no more than simply narrating the his pampered child, already the sixth or seventh
truth. The Israelis are armed to the teeth with a huge nuclear State. In a special dispatch for The Christiatz
arsenal of atomic weaponry and the sophisticated Science Monitor published on 4 June 1981, its corresystems to deliver them. All the States of the Middle
spondent in Jerusalem, Abraham Rabinovitch, had
East have been brutally alerted to this awesome fact this to say:
and will no doubt be exploring all available options, it
is to be hoped, through the Council, but, if that should
“The possible need to go nuclear, rarely talked
fail, by all other available means, whether through
about publicly in Israel before, has been raised with
Political alignments or self-reliance. This may very
increasing frequency in the past few months,
well someclaysomehowput the Middle East region on
a collision course with a nuclear holocaust. That is the
“The Center for Strategic Studies at Tel Aviv
message of the 7 June aggression against Baghdad,
University, headed by former army inteIIigence
It was a warlike act and it should be dealt with
chief Aharon Yariv, is presently completing a study
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
on
the subject. Former Foreign Minister Moshe
Charter.
! Dayan toId a closed political forum recently that
20

Israel might have to consider a nuclear option
because of the impossibility of keeping up with the
arms race.”
203. In 1968, United States Secretary of State
Mr. Dean Rusk declared that:
“The spread of nuclear weapons would aggravate
our difficulties in maintaining friendly relations with
parties to a continuing dispute. If one party ‘went
nuclear’ we might have to decide whether to help
the other party, directly or through security assurances, whether to sever economic aid to the country
acquiring atomic weapons, or whether to stand
aside, even though the result might be a war which
would be hard to contain.”
204. His analysis is as valid and rational today as
it was when he made it 13 years ago. Condemnations
will hardly assuage the genuine apprehension of the
I50 million people of the region faced with mortal
danger to their very survival, They have no reason to
fight phantom enemies and no interest in doing so. But
they have every reason to fight Phantom aircraft and
F-15 and F-16 aeroplanes, which are showering death
and destruction upon their lands.
205. It is time for the United States and others to
take full cognizance of this fact and cut off all forms of
assistance, as provided for under Chapter VII of the
Charter, in response to a blatant act of aggression
which is before us for all to see. Failing that, the
peoples of the Middle East will be left with no
alternative but to regard the donors of enormous
assistance to the dangerous gunman at large as
accessories after the crime of aggression,
206. Mr. Begin has stated defiantly that he could not
care less for American condemnation or Arab threats.
One day he will discover that Arab security can never
be compromised without the most serious consequences and at any rate that is our own problem, which we
must and will resolve. As for his disdain for American
condemnation, that should be an acid test of the
freedom of the United States to decide what is in its
best interests and its ability to act accordingly.

imperative can there be, particularly coming from a
country which intelligence experts estimate is already
in possession of a huge arsenal of atomic and hydrogen
bombs? Walter Cronkite, the anchorman at CBS, in
his last report-and I stand to be corrected-quoted
American intelligence sources as saying that Israel
was already in possession of 200 atomic and hydrogen
bombs. Is any country entitled to commit aggression in
order to maintain a monopoly of the weapons of mass
destruction and blackmail hundreds of millions of
people into submission or annihilation?
209. There are already more than 30 States that have,
in varying degrees, atomic energy programmes for
peaceful purposes. Are they going to stop their
scientific and economic progress because Menachem
Begin does not like the faces or the policies of their
governmental leaders, who refuse to condone aggression, expansion and occupation? And yet that is the
loud message which the sneak raid on Baghdad and
Begin’s almost daily utterances are sending to the
whole world. He has declared audaciously that he
would perpetrate similar operations not only against
Iraq but elsewhere. Where elsewhere is, he did not
specify; presumably it is the whole planet. In his
duplicity, he would not mind attacking perhaps India
or Pakistan for being staunchly supportive of Arab and
Palestinian rights. And if what I have said seemstoo
incredible to believe, this is how an official in Prime
Minister Menachem Begin’s Administration, with a
wry smile, put it succinctly, according to the reputable
paper, The New York Times, on 11June: “If Begin had
been President of the United States instead of Truman
in 1949, there would not be an arms race.” What he, of
course, means is that Begin would have atom-bombed
the 250 million citizens of the Soviet Union, to
annihilate them. I do not think the American people
would be terribly amused by this dangerous, criminal
advice-not then and not today. That is a code for
world destruction and not for legitimate self-defence.
210. Begin has so far spared the People’s Republic of
China his wrath and his vision of legitimate selfdefence and secure boundaries, notwithstanding that
Republic’s unfailing support of Arab and Palestinian
rights. Perhaps his atomic stockpile, big as it is, is not
yet large enough to take on all those formidable
adversaries at once. But it surely reveals what his
concept of security and legitimate self-defence is.
211. The Israeli Prime Minister did not refrain on
11 June from lecturing America on minding its own
business, He said: “We do not accept America or any
other State’s advising us as to how we should use our
weapons.” If that is the case, why does he crawl on his
belly to accept American armaments and huge infusions of assistance, without which his vituperation
would be cut down to size? Or does he think that
America is a part of his domain? Or has he unilaterally
abrogated the United States-Israel arms agreement of
1952,13which specifically and categorically prohibits
the use of American-supplied arms in aggression
against neighbouring States?

207. During the past several years the lines have
been grotesquely blurred as to what is an American
decision and what is an Israeli penchant, drawing upon
the unbounded resources of a great Power.
208. Indeed, all of us at the United Nations are facing
one of those turning points on issues which strike at
the heart of the United Nations system. Can we
tolerate an international order in which one State
arrogates unto itself, in total disdain for the Charter,
the right to commit a flagrant and confessed act of
armed aggression against another State on the totally spurious, subjectively super-moral grounds-as
Begin, the arch-terrorist describes them-of so-called
legitimate self-defence.7 What kind of self-defence
21

221. It is my earnest hope that the Council will act
decisively and in a manner commensurate with the
enormousness of the challenge, if only to avert a drift
to war and incalculable devastation, for the world can
ill afford to drift into that kind of situation.

212. The use of force and the threat of force, whose
prohibition is the core of the Charter, have been
openly advocated as an appropriate instrument of
policy. The Non-Proliferation Treaty, with all its
international safeguards, has been practically annulled
as an instrument to regulate the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. I think we have been mortally
wounded. The concept of secure boundaries has as a
first step been extended more than 1,000 kilometres
beyond the occupied territories. Begin is confronting
the world with a total breakdown of the United
Nations system.

222, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Iraq, who has asked
to be permitted to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
223. Mr. KITTANI (Iraq): The hour is late and, in
any case, my delegation will have ample opportunity
before this debate is over to give all the necessary
replies and elucidations. However, the statement
made by the representative of Israel should not go
unanswered at this meeting. In order to show the
bankruptcy of that statement and the total failure of
the representative of Israel to justify the naked
aggression committed by his entity against my country-which is, incidentally, the only subject before the
Council this evening-I wish to take up only four of
the points in his statement.

213. If this fiendish plan is to be thwarted, the
Council can do little less than take the following steps,
in accordance with the Charter and the international
order of mankind, based on international law. We
cannot afford to do otherwise or behave otherwise.
214. First, the Council is urged to declare Israel an
aggressor, in accordance with the Charter.
215. Secondly, having made that declaration, the
Council has no alternative but to impose the sanctions
provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter.

224. The professor referred to Article 51 of the
Charter. The representative of Algeria has already
answered him, I believe adequately. We can go back
to this at a later stage, but, to show the shallowness
both of his case and of his credibility, I shall simply
read out Article 51just to refresh the memories of the
members of the Council. It reads:

216. Thirdly, since Israel’s concept of legitimate selfdefence is predicated on the destruction of other
peoples to make the world safe for Israel and on the
destruction of countries regardless of boundaries,
Israeli atomic installations should be opened to international inspection and control under the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which Israel adamantly refuses to
sign.

“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the
inherent right of individual or collective self-defence
if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the
United Nations, until the Security Council has taken
measures necessaryto maintain . . .”

217. The evasive Israeli contention, which surfaced
only last year, that talks among the States of the region
should be held as a substitute for the Non-Proliferation
Treaty is a sham on two grounds.

With the quotations he made and with his acrobatics,
Professor Blum forgot also that it is not an isolated
article; it comes after a series of other articles, all of
them referring to actions by the Council or by
Members of the United Nations individually and
collectively in cases of the occurrence of armed
aggression.

218. First, ratification of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty is a multinational arrangement and commitment which requires no negotiation, Jordan did not
negotiate with anybody when we affixed our signature
and seal to that Non-Proliferation Treaty. Besides,
how can we negotiate with a country that is in
occupation of our territory and declares publicly that it
is not willing to relinquish it?

225. The second point I want to make has to do with
the strange accusations levelled against my country.
I quote the statement of the professor. He said that
Iraq “has begun an intensive search for uranium on its
own territory” [para. 83 above]. How low can he sink
in his search for arguments to justify whatever he is
trying to justify? What is being perpetrated here? Are
they challenging even the right of a State to search for
minerals within its own territory? Is he preparing the
ground to come back to the Council someday to justify
another act of aggression, perhaps against another
Arab country which has not yet reached the level of
having a nuclear reactor? Perhaps he will bombard
Geiger counters.

219. Secondly, a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East after Israel has acquired a huge arsenal is
a contradiction in terms: it simply means a perpetuation of the Israeli monopoly of weapons of mass
destruction.
220. The Council should decide that Israel must pay
compensation for the substantial losses incurred by
Iraq in consequence of Israeli aggression. What the
Iraqi Government decides to do with that compensation is its own business; it might well decide to give it
to some humanitarian agency. But Israel should pay
compensation for the substantial losses which were
imposed upon Iraq as a result of blatant aggression.

226. The third point I want to make is concerned
with the references to and quotations from Senator
22

Cranston made by Professor Blum. They are in
themselves very indicative of the shallowness of his
arguments; indeed, they are not merely shallow
arguments: they have no depth at all. In a short one
third of a triple-spaced page, he mentions Senator
Cranston four times.
227. We preferred to quote Mr. Eklund. We preferred
to quote the most authoritative agency within this
Organization in the field in which Israel claims
justification for attacking us, IAEA established in that
field. We leave it to the Council to judge the
objectivity of IAEA and that of Mr. Eklund, who has
been the Director General of that Agency for 20 years,
as against the credibility of Senator Cranston on the
subject before the Council. Perhaps tomorrow Professor Blum will quote that other paragon of objectivity in
the Arab-Israeli dispute, columnist William Safire of
The New York Times.

228. Fourthly, and last, I shall quote again from
Professor Blum’s statement: “Israel has always held
the conviction that no international conflict can be
solved by the use of force” [para. 114 above]. Now if
the members of the Council can believe that, they can
believe anything. You do not have to go very far; all
you have to do is spend five minutes scanning the
annals of the Council, and you will find that the
number of times that Israel has resorted to force-not
to settle disputes, for most of the time there was no
dispute, just naked aggression from beginning to
end--exceeds all the instances brought before the

23

Council involving all other Members of the United
Nations combined.
The meeting rose at 8.10 p.m.

NOTES
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-jiith Session,
Plenary Meetings, 17th meeting,
paras. 259 and 260.
2 Alfred M. Litienthal, The Zionist Connection: What Price
Peace? (New York, Dodd, Mead and Company, 1978), p. 331.
3 A/34/542, Political Declaration, para. 228.
4 This statement was made at the 563rd meeting of the Board of
Governors of IAEA, the official records of which are published in
summary form.
J United States of America, Congressional Record, Vol. 127,
Part 4, (United States Government Printinn Office, Washington,
D.C., 19‘81), pp. 4450-4451.
6 Morton A. Kaolan and Nicholas de B. Katzenbach. The Political
Foundations oflniernational Law (New York, John Wiley and Sons
Inc., 19611, pp. 212 and 213.
’ D. W. Bowett, Self-Defense in Intertrational Larv (New York,
Frederich A. Praeger, 19581, pp. 191 and 192.
8 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(United Nations. Treatv Series. vol. 634. No. 9068. .D. 326).
9A136/31S.
v
I0 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Plenary Meetings, 590th meeting, para. 192.
‘I International Committee of the Red Cross, Protocols additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, Geneva, 1977, p. 3.
‘* United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
I3 Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement of 23 July 1952. (United
States Treaties and Other International Agreements, Vol. 3, Part 4,
1952, United States Government Printing Office, Washington, DC,
19551, p. 4985.
