UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

tth
216 I

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

12 SEPTEMBER

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (WAgendaI2167)
of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee
on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application
of Saint Lucia for admission
to membership
in the U&ted
Nations (S/13535)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.2167

1
1

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Record of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordaffce with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2167th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 12 September 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Paul J. F. LUSAKA

(Zambia).

provisions of the last paragraph of rule 60 ofthe provisional
rules of procedure pursuant to which it would immediately
present its recommendation to the General Assembly. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council wishes to
depart from the time-limits set forth in the penultimate
paragraph of rule 60.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

4. In paragraph 4 of the report, the Committee recommends to the Council the adoption of a draft resolution on
the application for admission to membership of Saint
Lucia. In accordance with the procedure followed on previous -ions,
I propose that the Council should first
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution and that those
who wish to speak do so thereafter. If I hear no objection, I
shall take it that that procedure is acceptable to the members of the Council. Accordhigly, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2167)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Saint Lucia
for admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/13535)

A vote was taken by show of had.

T7zemeeting was called to order at 4. I5 pm

The &aft resolution was adopted unanimously.’

Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT:
I shall immediately request the
Secretary-General to transmit this recommendation to the
General Assembly.

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
ReportofulecOmmitteeonthe~~ofNewMembers
concerning the application of Saint Lucia for admission
to membership in the United Nations (S/l3539

6. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): First,
Mr. President, I wish to associate my delegation with your
most moving expressioti @ &ief at the tragic death of the
late President Neto of Angola. President Neto was one of
the great leaders of independent Africa; he was a man of
formidable intellectual power and dedicated patriotism. In
these troubled days, talents and abilities such as hi can be ill
spared by the world community. I extend my deepest condolences and regrets to the fan&y of the late President and
to the people of Angola.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I have received letters dated 12
September from the representatives of Barbados and Liberia in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the application of Saint Lucia for admission to
membership in the United Nations. In accordance with the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, as well as with the usual
practice of the Council, I propose to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.

7. It is many years since 1 last ,sat in ihe Security Council
and I am delighted to return to the United Nations family; it
gives me particular pleastiie to make my first statement as
representative of the United Kingdom on an occasion when
the Council is united in welcoming a new Member, Saint
Lucia. It is also a sour& of pleasure to me to open my
account under the presidency of a distinguished fellow
member of the Commonwealth, Zambia. I should like personally to express my warn@ thanks to you, Mr. President, for the very kind words which you spoke about me at
our meeting this morning.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maycock (Barba&.xs)
and Mr. Tubman (Liberia) took the places reservedfor them
at the s-i& of the Councii chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now consider the report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Saint Lucia for
admission to membership in the United Nations [S/135353.

8. Assuming that the General Assembly agrees with our
recommendation that Saint Lucia should be admitted to

3. In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee recommends to the Council that it should have recourse to the

’ Seeresolution 453 (1979).
1

membership of the United Nations, it will be the 152nd
Member of the Organization and the eighth Commonwealth member from the Caribbean region.

Middle Fast much easier. I welcome him, and I should like
to say to hi in our language which he commands so
admirably “AhIan wasahlait’.

9. The fortunes of my country and those of Saint Lucia
have been linked for more than two centuries. In 1967 Saint
Lucia became an Associated State. In February of this year
Saint Lucia became fully independent as a constitutional
monarchy and a member of the Commonwealth. The United Kingdom does not regard this as a parting of the ways,
but rather as a natural evolution of the nature of the bonds
which link our peoples and our countries. We have fully
supported Saint Lucia’s moves towards independence. The
United Kingdom provided Saint Lucia with more than El5
million in aid between 1971 and 1977. In November 1978 we
decided to provide a further 810 million during the first
years of independence.

15. The delegation of Kuwait welcomes the Council’s
decision to recommend to the General Assembly Saint
Lucia’s admission as a Member of the United Nations. We
in Kuwait believe in the principle of universality. We believe
that every State, regardless of sire, ideology or the circumstances of its independence, is entitled to membership in the
United Nations ifit chooses that. We warmly welcome Saint
Lucia and congratulate its Government and people on their
decision for independence and membership in the United
Nations. We are certain that we will benetit from their
experience and, no doubt, the Organization will be enriched
by the admission of Saint Lucia.
16. We also look forward to seeing more independent
States joining the United Nations. No doubt, we will be
seeing-1 hope not in the distant future-the independent
States of Palestine, Namibia and Zimbabwe in years to
come joining the Organization, notwithstanding the impossible odds against that.

10. Saint Lucia has a healthy economy and a vigorous
democratic political system. All of us know that the contribution of a Member State to the Organization is not necessarily measured by geographical size, number of population or physical power. I am contident that Saint Lucia, like
so many other island States, will make its own individual
and valuable contribution to our activities. The best wishes
of my delegation go to the Government and people of Saint
Lucia.

17. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretationfrom Chinese):
Mr. President, first of all, I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the
important post of President of the Security Council for this
month.

11. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Ihe delegation of Kuwait
was shocked by the news of the passing of Mr. Neto, President of Angola. Mr. Neto was a revolutionary leader and a
genuine nationalist who placed the interests of his people
above anything else. He was accused by the ignorant Westem .press of following Moscow or Havana, but we know
that he was a true leader who defended genuine independence for his country. His teachings will remain for ever and
his successorswill continue his unfinished endeavours for
the attainment of equality, justice and peace, not only in
Africa but the world over. I express sincere condolences to
the delegation of Angola, to Africa and, indeed, to the
family of nations. May his soul rest in peace.

18. I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome
warmly the representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Anthony Parsons, who is participatingin the work of the United
Nations and the Security Council. I believe that fruitful
relations of friendship and co-operation will be established
between us in our future work.
19. On 22 February 1979 Saint Lucia proclaimed its independence and became the twenty-ninth independent State
in Latin America. On 28 August Saint Lucia applied for
admission to membership in the United Nations and
declared that it accepted the obligations contained in the
Charter of the United Nations and undertook to fulfil them.
In the view of the Chinese delegation, Saint Lucia is qualitied for membership in the United Nations in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter. We fully support
its application and are in favour of the Security Council’s
recommending to the General Assembly the admission of
Saint Lucia to membership.

12. I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for the month of
September. I have always benefited from your experience,
guidance and wisdom during ‘the many years that I have
known you, beginning in the early 1970s. We are certain
that the business for this month will be handled skilfully and
tactfully thanks to your wisdom and experience with which
we are so familiar.

20. The people of Saint Lucia are industrious and courageous. Like the people of other Caribbean islands, they
have freed themselves from colonial shackles and won
national independence after prolonged valiant struggle. The
Chinese people sincerely rejoice in the brilliant victory won
by the people of Saint Lucia on the road to national independence. The victory in the struggle of the people of Saint
Lucia once again demonstrates that countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want
revolution and that this is an irresistible historical trend of
our time.

13. I should also like to thank Ambassador Young, the
outgoing President, for his efforts as President of the Council for the month of August:It was a busy month in terms of
the magnitude of the issues that we discussed; but he
emerged as a powerful advocate of justice and freedom,
despite the campaign launched against him by the enemies
of freedom. We wish him successin hi future undertakings.
14. I welcome sincerely Sir Anthony Parsons, the new
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. He is no
stranger to the United Nations, and indeed he knows our
area very well. The fact that he knows our area will, we
hope, make the Council’s work on the thorny issues of the

21. After independence, while developing the national
economy and culture, the Government of Saint Lucia took
2

an active part in international affairs and in promoting
friendly relations with the third-world countries and all
peace-loving countries. We sincerely wish the people of
Saint Lucia continued new victories in their just cause of
opposing imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism, safe+
guarding national independence and State sovereignty and
building their own country.

with inter& and satisfaction. We are plcased.with the role
we have been able to play in its economic development. In
addition to private investment, the United States, through
various multilateral agencies, has provided development
assistance to Saint Lucia for a number of years. There is also
a Peace Corps programme on’the island. It is gratifying to
us that, among the ties that exist between the United States
and Saint Lucia are those that are provided by a number of
people of Saint Lucian origin who are participating actively
and productively in our society.

22. On the occasion of the proclamation of the independence of Saint Lucia, Premier Hua Guofeng of the People’s
Republic of China sent a cable to the Prime Minister of
Saint Lucia on behalf of the Chinese Government and
people, extending warm congratulations to the Govemment and people of Saint Lucia and announcing the decision of the Chinese Government to recognixe Saint Lucia.
Both China and Saint Lucia are developing countries. Our
two peoples face many common tasks. We hope and believe
that the relations between the two countries and the fiiendship between the two peoples will continue to develop. We
are also convinced that, upon its admission to membership
in the United Nations, Saint Lucia, together with all justiceupholding and peace-loving countries, will make positive
contributions to the realimtion of the purposes and principles of the Charter.

29. We have noted with pleasure the peaceful and responsible manner in which Saint Lucia attained its independence. We are confident that this achievement demonstrates
that the Government and people of Saint Lucia share the
principles that guide the United Nations: to establish a
world peace, justice and prosperity.
30. Mr. MATHIAS (Portugal) (interpretatonfiom French):
First of all, my delegation would like to associate itself with
the sentiments expressed around this table on the death of
His Excellency President Agostinho Neto of the People’s
Republic of Angola. He was a man of action and a statesman. Resident Neto always had the courage and the
strength of mind to fight for his convictions and ideals to
preserve a future of dignity and freedom for his people and
his country. He was a poet and a thinker, and he has
bequeathed to us writings which enrich in a remarkable way
the Portuguese language. My delegation bows to the
memory of that personality, whose passing has been deeply
felt in my country, as is shown by the national mourning
that has been decreed by my Government.

23. Mr. PEIREE (United States of America): First of all,
Mr. President, I should like to join you and others in
expressing our deep regret at the untimely death of President Agostinho Neto of the People’s Republic of Angola.
Mr. Neto was a distinguished leader of hi country, whose
co-operation and efforts to resolve peacefully the problems
of southern Africa we greatly valued. We extend our most
sincere condolences to his family and to the people of
Angola.

31. Sir, allow me to congratulate you now most warmly
on your accession to the presidency of the Council. Your
diplomatic talents, together with your eminent moral and
intellectual qualities, your knowledge and your wisdom,
assure us of the competence with which you will conduct
our work. You also represent a great country with which my
country enjoys close relations of friendship and solidarity. It
is within this context that we view the forthcoming visit of
the President of the Republic of Portugal to Zambia, a visit
that we consider to be another profound reaflirmation of
these relations.

24. I should also like to express appreciation of the many
kind words addressed to Ambassador Young regarding his
conduct of the Council’s work last month. I can assure the
Council that I shall pass these comments on to Ambassador
Young as soon as he returns from his current trip abroad. I
know he would wish me to expresshis gratitude to everyone
in the meantime.
25. I also wish to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
presidency of the Council. I know that you will lead us in
our work in a most able fashion during the month of
September, and my delegation will give you its full cooperation.

32. Your predecessor, Ambassador Andrew Young, once
more displayed in the performance of hi task gifts of which
we are all well aware. We remember him with profound
feeling.

26. Finally, I join you in welcoming back to these halls the
new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Parsons.

33. Regarding the item on our agenda, we should like to
congratulate the people of Saint Lucia on its accession to
independence, an independence .achieved by a process of
democratic and peaceful evolution. We are happy to
support the admission to membership in the United
Nations of a new State which has undertaken to accept
and respect the obligations contained in the Charter.

27. The United States is pleased to support the application
of the Government of Saint Lucia for membership in the
United Nations. The admission of this new State, which
achieved its independence on 22 February thii year, will be
a further step towards achieving the universality of the
United Nations and towards ensuring co-operation among
all countries.

34. The presence of this new country will bring the
Organization closer to universality, the principle and the
objective that we cherish. It is in this spirit that we shall
extend a most cordial welcome to the representatives of
that country, to which Portugal extends the best wishes
for peace and prosperity.

28. The United States has for many years maintained
friendly relations with this neighbour to the south, and we
have followed Saint Lucia’s development in, recent years
3

35. I would also address a heartfelt welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir
Anthony Parsons, and to assure him that the cooperation between our two delegations will continue in
the spirit that has marked the traditional excellent relations between our two countries.

42. I am particularly happy, Mr. President, to congratulate you on behalf of the delegation of Gabon on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of
September. Your vast experience in international affairs.
your qualities as a skilled diplomat, your characteristic
dynamism and other qualities all lead us to expect you to
perform your duties with successand distinction.

36. Mr. WLGARD (Norway): It is with great sadness
that we have received the news of the untimely death of
President Agostinho Neto of the People’s Republic of
Angola. I wish to express to the Government of Angola
and to the family of the late President my sincere condolences and heartfelt sympathy.

43. Permit me too to join the other delegations that have
preceded me in paying a heartfelt tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Young, who last month guided the work
of the Council with much dignity and competence.
44. After taking cognizance of the letter addressed to the
Secretary-General by the Prime Minister of Saint Lucia
[see S/1353Ol concerning his country’s application for
admission to membership in the United Nations, I should
like to state here that my delegation fully supports this
application. We believe, in fact, that it is our duty to do all in
our power so that the people of Saint Lucia, which attained
independence on 22 February 1979, may, through its admission to the United Nations, strengthen and contirm that
independence.

37. Mr. President, I should like to take this opportunity
to welcome you to the presidency of the Council. Our two
countries have very close and friendly relations. We are
honoured to serve in the Council together with one of the
front-line States in southern Africa whose support for
peaceful solutions in that part of Africa has been crucial
in the past and no doubt will be equally important in the
months ahead.
38. I also take much pleasure in welcoming to our midst
the new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Anthony Parsons. Ambassador Parsons has
served his country with distinction for many years,
including here at the United Nations. I look forward to
working with him not ‘only in the Council but also in
other United Nations organs.

45. The United Nations cannot but rejoice at the admission of new States, particularly as, in most of the resolutions
adopted by its various bodies, it has always supported the
right of colonial peoples to accedeto complete independence.
46. The peaceful people of Saint Lucia, who may be considered as already having had positive experience in the
administration of public affairs, has shown in an exemplary
manner that it is able to comply with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations. The recognition of
Saint Lucia by various countries furthermore proves, if
proof were needed, that that country does meet all the
conditions required by international law and practice.

39. The Norwegian delegation was delighted to support
the resolution which the Council has just adopted recommending Saint Lucia for admission to membership in the
United Nations. Over the last few years several new States
from the Caribbean region have joined ‘the United
Nations. Norway welcomes such. a development. We
have always strongly supported efforts towards decolonixation and independence based on the principle of selfdetermination for the peoples involved. Saint Lucia, with
its population of about 100,000, will be one of the smaller
nations represented in the United Nations. Nevertheless,
we are confident that it will shoulder with determination
its responsibilities within the Organization.

47. In his application for admission to membership in the
United Nations, the Prime Minister of Saint Lucia solemnly
declared that his country accepted all the obligations contained in the Charter, that it was able to fulfil them and that
it committed itself to compliance with them.

40. Before concluding, I should like to take this opportunity to express, on behalf of the Norwegian Government, our sincere felicitations to the Prime Minister of
Saint Lucia and his Government. I also want to express to
the people of Saint Lucia our best wishes for the future. I
want to assure them that we look forward to working
together with their representatives within the framework
of the United Nations.
’

48. Accordingly, my delegation is totally convinced that
.Saint Lucia has not only proved its adherence to the high
principles of the Charter, but has further shown its determination to apply them in all circumstances. Thus, in admitting Saint iucia, the Organixation will be able once again to
rejoice at having among its Members one which is prepared
to commit itself to the promotion of international peace and
security, understanding, friendship and co-operation among
all the peoples of the world.

41. Mr. NGUEMA-MBA
(Gabon) (fnterprerurfon jkom
Z+e&): The Security Council is meeting at a particularly
distressing time for the African continent. The President of
the People’s Republic of Angola, His Excellency Mr. Agostinho Neto is no more. An implacable diseasetook him from
us during the night of 10/l 1 September. Africa has lost one
of its noblest sons and the world has lost a most vigorous
defender of oppressed peoples. In these painful circtunstances, the delegation of Gabon addresses to the people and
Government of Angola and to the bereaved family its most
sorrowful condolences.

49. It is this spirit and this understanding which should
guide us in order that we may always provide friendship and
assistance to newly independent countries and welcome
them most warmly among us.
50. To conclude, I should like to greet and extend a warm
welcome to the new ‘Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom and to assure him of the cooperation of
the delegation of Gabon in the work of the Organization.
4

58. Mr. R. RAHMAN (Bangladesh): It was with a deep
sense of grief and shock that we received news of the
tragic death of Mr. Agostinho Neto, President of the
People’s Republic of Angola. The struggle of the people
of Angola for freedom and independence under his leadership has become a byword in Bangladesh and a source
of inspiration to all peoples still under the yoke of colonialism and foreign domination. He rightfully belongs
among the ranks of the great pioneers of peace, freedom
and justice. We join with the people of Angola and Africa
and with humanity at large in mourning his loss, and we
extend our heartfelt condolences to his family and to the
people and Government of Angola.

5 1. Mr. PENAZKA (Czechoslovakia) (inferpretation
from Rzmiun):First, I should like to associate myself with
you, Mr. President, and with other Council members and
express the shock and profound sadness that we felt at the
sudden passing of His Excellency Mr. Agostinho Neto,
President of the People’s Republic of Angola. The untimely
death of Agostinho Neto, one of the great sons of Africa,
who devoted his whole life to the struggle against colonialism and for his country’s freedom, is a great loss, not only
for the people of Angola but for the whole of Africa and the
international community as a whole. On behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation, I should like to express our sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of the People’s Republic of Angola and to the bereaved family.

I

59. Mr. President, allow me to extend to you our warmest congratulations on your accession to the presidency of
the Council. Bangladesh has the closest of friendly relations with Zambia, and we welcome with pride your
presence in the Chair. Your diplomatic ability, knowledge, devotion to duty and personal charm are all well
known to us. We are confident that under your wise and
able leadership our affairs will be conducted efficiently
and expeditiously.

52. Allow me to congratulate you sincerely, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
September. I am pleased to be able to note with satisfaction
that relations between Zambia and Czechoslovakia, in the
political, economic, cultural and other fields, have been
developing successfully to the benefit of the peoples of both
our countries and in the interests of the strengthening of
peace and international co-operation.
53. I should like to take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, Mr. Young, for his able and skilful guidance of
the work of the Council during August.

60. I would also take this opportunity to reiterate our
grateful thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Andrew
Young, who presided over our affairs with such consummate skill in the month of August. We shall sorely miss hi
presence in the Council. We wish him all success in his
future undertakings.

54. The delegation of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
wasgratified to support Saint Lucia’s application for admission to membership in the United Nations. We are convinced that the positive recommendation by the Security
Council on this item will be another step towards the implementation of the principle of universality in the United
Nations and towards securing the development of equitable
relations and co-operation between all States.

61. My delegation also takes great pleasure in welcoming
Sir Anthony Parsons, the new Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom, into our midst. We look forward to
working in closest co-operation with him and his delegation.
62. Bangladesh has noted with great satisfaction the accession of Saint Lucia to sovereign independence on 22 February 1979. We welcome its application for membership in the
United Nations and unreservedly support its admission as a
sovereign equal to the world community of nations. We
believe that its admission constitutes another vital step forward in the process of decolonization and in vindicating the
inalienable right of all peoples to self-determination and
independence. Its admission will mark another crucial
milestone on the road to the goal of universality of United
Nations membership.
’

55. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic consistently supports the inalienable right of all countries and peoples to
self-determination and independence, and it welcomes the
fact thatthe people of Saint Lucia have embarked upon the
path of independent national development. This represents
a major successin the struggle for the final elimination of
the colonial system and complete implementation of the
historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
56. When Saint Lucia achieved independence, the head of
Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,
Lubomir Strougal, in a telegram sent to thepresident of the
Government of Saint Lucia, warmly congratulated the peaple of that country and expressed the hope’that *‘relations
between our two countries will develop successfully to the
benefit of both peoples and in the interests of peace and
progress in the world”. The telegram also emphasizes that
the Government and people of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic have always supported and will continue to support the struggle of peoples for independence and social
progress.

63. It is the sincere expectation and desire of the Government and people of Bangladesh that we shall be able to
consolidate and strengthen our ties with the Government
and people of Saint Lucia. We look forward to working in
close co-operation with the‘members of its delegation to the
United Nations.
r
64. Mr. PALACIOS de VIZZIO (Bolivia) (interpretation
from S’anishj: My delegation wishes to avail itself of this
opportunity to extend to his bereaved family and to the
people and Government of Angola its heartfelt condolences
on the untimely passing of their President, the outstanding
African leader, Agostinho Neto.

57. The delegation of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
would like to take this opportunity once more to congratulate the people of Saint Lucia on its achievement of independence. We wish it peace and every successin the further
all-round development of its country.

65. Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation I would
congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of September. Your
5

eminent:d&lo~matic.ski&
-will ensure eff!cient guidance foi
our work. We would also express our appreciation of and
esteem for the ir&grh~ and competence of your brilliant
predecessor, Ambassador Young of the United States.

bia and other front-line States to preserve their. independence and sovereignty from any outside encroachment is
xi&sing with full understanding, solidarity and support in
the Soviet Union. I should like to assure you that, while you
are performing your duties, you can count on the full
cooperation of the Soviet delegation in the resolution of the
issues before the Security Council.

66. We extend a welcome to Ambassador Parsons of the
1 United Kingdom.
67. We are gathered for a happy event, the admission of a
new Member to the United Nations, whereby one of the
fundamental principles of the Charter, namely the selfdetermination of peoples, effectively finds fulfilment. On
this occasion, with the admission of Saint Lucia, that principle has once again become a reality in the history of the
Organixation and a further step has been taken towards its
universal acceptance.

74. Guided by its foreign policy of principle, which is
aimed at securing the equality and selfdetermination of all
peoples, the development of friendship and cooperation
between all countries, and universality in the United
Nations, the Soviet Union supported the application of
Saint Lucia for admission to membership in the United
Nations.

68. The recommendation that Saint Lucia should be
admitted to the United Nations is particularly welcome to
my country because Saint Lucia’s voice will provide new
expression of the desire of Latin America for freedom,
dignity and independence, reatXrming our belief in the
principles and ideals of the Charter.

75. The Soviet Union expresses its entire satisfaction at
the Council’s decision to recommend to the General Assembly that Saint Lucia should be admitted to membership in
the United Nations. We heartily welcome that young State
as the 152nd Member of the world Organimtion. The
admission of Saint Lucia is a further step towards achieving
universality in the United Nations and will increase equitable cooperation between the States.

69. On its own behalf, and in compliance with the special
and honoured request of the Latin American Group, Bolivia extends to Saint Lucia a most cordial welcome,

76. The declaration of independence of Saint Lucia on 22
February 1979 is another significant successin the consistent struggle for the exercise of the right of peoples to
national and social self-determination. The result of that
process is fully in keeping with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations as well as the historic
‘Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.

70. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me on
behalf of the Soviet delegation to extend profound condolences to the Government and people of the People’s
Republic of Angola and to the bereaved family on the
untimely passing of one of the most eminent figures in the
world revolutionary movement, an eminent statesman and
politician of Africa, President of the Workers’ Party and
President of the People’s Republic of Angola, Mr. Agostinho Neto.

77. On the day on which the independence of Saint Lucia
was proclaimed, the Soviet Government sent to the Prime
Minister of that country, Mr. John Compton, greetings and
best wishes for the progress and successof the people on
their path of independent development. In hi telegram, the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, Mr. Kosygin, says:

71. Agostinho Neto’s entire life and all his activities were
devoted to the struggle for the liberation of Angola and
other African countries. In 1975, under the guidance of
Agostinho Neto, the people of Angola, after a persistent
.struggle,achievedindependence and embarked on a path of
building a free and independent country. The outstanding
personal qualities of Mr. Neto, his clear thinking and his
humanism won him respect and authority throughout the
whole world.

“The Soviet Government, unswervingly following its
policy based on the principles of equality and the selfdetermination of peoples, supports the development of
friendship and cooperation between all countries and
hereby declares that it recognixes Saint Lucia as an independent and-sovereign State and is ready to establish
diplomatic relations with it.”

72. President Neto was a great friend of our country.
Along with the Angolan people and the many friends of
-Mr. Neto. throughout the world, we mourn his untimely
passing. We are convinced that the people and Government
of the People’s Republic of Angola will continue the work
begun by Mr. Neto and will put into practice all his great
and creative plans.

78, The delegation of the Soviet Union wishes once more
to congratulate the.young and independent State and the
people of Saint Lucia on the positive decision taken by the
Security Council on that country’s application for admission to membership in the United Nations. We wish them
prosperity and success in their national development.

73. Mr. President, I should now like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the responsible duties of President of
the Security Council for September. The role of your country and your personal role in the liberation struggle of the
peoples of Africa to remove the vestiges of colonialism and
racism and the hotbeds of tension and conflict are well
known at the United Nations. The valiant struggle of Zam-

79. In conclusion, I should also like to congratulate the
new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Parsons. As he is embarking upon his new
activities at the United Nations, we hope to be able to
cooperate constructively with him here and outside the
Security Council on the questions that are before the United
Nations.
6

80. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): It was with profound sadness
and regret that my delegation learned of the untimely death
of the distinguished President of Angola, the late Mr. Agostinho Neto. President Neto, the prime architect of contemporary Angola, has been in the forefront of the liberation
struggle against all forms of imperialism and colonialism in
Africa, and his contribution to advancing the cause of
human freedom in Africa and throughout the world is outstanding. I take this opportunity to expressour condolences
to the people and the Government of Angola at this
moment of acute national loss.

86. Geography and history have placed Jamaica and
Saint Lu& ih a special relationship with each other. The
Caribbean area was among the first to experience European colonialism, this dating as far back as to the end of the
fifteenth century, when the first Europeans came to thii
hemisphere. Since then, imperial rivalries, slavery and the
transplantation of European and African cultures and peoples have constituted our common experience. The growth
of national sentiment and the desire for self-government
and, ultimately, independence surfaced early in this century. Jamaica feels a special senseof pride when one of our
family of islands takes its place among the family of nations.
We have long enjoyed fruitful cooperation and friendship
with Saint Lucia within our own regional organixation, the
Caribbean Community.
As small developing island
countries-and we in the Caribbean are mostly small developing island countries-we have worked together towards
building a future in which we can survive and prosper.

81. Mr. President, I should like warmly to congratulate
you on your assumption of the office of President of the
Security Council for the month of September. Your outstanding qualities as a statesman and your undoubted diplomatic experience fully assure us of dedicated and effective
leadership for the duration of your presidency. It is for me a
particular pleasure to see you once again at the United
Nations, having already worked with you here and enjoyed
warm personal relations, which are, I think closely paralleled by the very close and warm relations between our
countries.

87. We SUDDOI-~ without reservation the an&cation submitted by the Prime Minister of Saint Lucia-for his country’s admission to membership in the United Nations and
welcome that State as an addition to the Group of Latin
American countries in the Organization. We do so in the
full confidence that the new nation will fulfil its obligations
as a State Member of the United Nations and promote the
ideals of the Charter by constructive involvement in efforts
for the goals we are seeking to achieve: peace, justice and the
social and economic welfare of mankind. This is a task in
respect of which we have seen a growing contribution from
newly independent developing countries which have a
strong interest in the commitment to international cooperation within the Organization.
s.

82. I should like to express my own personal appreciation
and to pay my own tribute to your predecessor, my friend
and colleague Ambassador Andrew Young, for his able
presidency during the month of August. He brought an
unusual freshness, candour and spirit of dedication to the
United Nations and its activities and, in particular, to the
issues before the Council. I believe that all of us in the
international community at the United Nations have
greatly benefited from his work here and hi unique qualities. His departure from our midst represents a great loss,
but his personal attributes and his outstanding contribution
to the cause of human dignity and freedom in the United
States, Africa and the world at large will long be
remembered.

88. In welcoming the annlication of Saint Lucia we at the
same time exprei the hope that others still subjected to-.
colonialism will soon be in a position to enjoy the same right
to self-determination and independence and take their rightful place in the family of nations.

83. I should also like to express, on behalf of my delegation, our welcome to Ambassador Parsons of the United
Kingdom and say that we look forward to working constructively with him in the Security Council and other areas
of work in the United Nations.

89. Mr. BLANKSON (Nigeria): It was with shock and
sadness that we learned of the untimely death of President
Agostinho Neto of the People’s Republic of Angola. By his
death, Africa has lost one of its most illustrious sons and
statesmen. He will be remembered for his many sacrifices
and contributions to the cause of freedom for his country
and Africa, and indeed for the whole world. In my delega-‘
tion’s judgement, however, he will be immortal&d
for his
unswerving stand against the extension of apartheid from
South Africa to Angola. We offer our deepest condolences
to hi immediate family and to the people of Angola. It is
our hope that his life will continue to .be a beacon of
inspiration to Angola and to the rest of the world.

84. It is a snecial honour for my delegation wholeheartedly to support the application of the I%ime Minister
of Saint Lucia, in his letter of 28 August, for admission to
membership of his country in the United Nations and also
the resolution relating to this matter.
85. Early this year, Saint Lucia became an independent
sovereign nation through the exercise of its right to selfdetermination and with the co-operation of the admiitering Power, the United Kingdom. This achievement is within
the context of one of the great movements of our time. A
prominent feature of the transformation of world politics
since 1945 has been the decolonization movement and the
emergence of new nations. In the Caribbean area this procesS has been steady and is now irreversible. We in the
region have been fortunate in being able to achieve national
independence without the sacrifices of an armed struggle.
This is largely the result of the universal recognition of the
right to selfdetermination, which is a principle of the Char
ter consistently upheld by the Organization.

90. On behalf of the Nigerian delegation, Mr. President, I
should like to join those who have preceded me in offering
our heartiest congratulations to you on your assumption of
the high offtce of President of the Security Council. We are
proud that a representative of the Republic of Zambia, a
country with which Nigeria has excellent relations, is presiding over the affairs of the Council in September. My delega- ’
tion has no doubt that, as a representative of a country that
has since its independence served in the vanguard of the
crusade for freedom, independence and respect for human
7

dignity throughout the world, and particularly in southern
Africa, you will be as successful in directing our work
during this challenging period in international relations as
you were when you distinguished yourself both as a Minister who wore many hats in the Cabinet of your national
Government and as the personable and talented Ambassador of your country.

ful. Let me assure you that in fulfilling your delicate task
you can rely on my delegation’s complete co-operation.
97. I would also request the delegation of the United
States to express our appreciation to Ambassador Young
for the manner in which he guided our deliberations on
important subjects during the month of August.

91. I should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Andrew Young of the United States, for the
wisdom and skill with which he guided our work during the
month of August. His departure from the United Nations
has left us the poorer. We shall miss not only his candour
and engaging personality, but also his voice and his dedication to the cause of human freedom, dignity and a more just
world.

98. I should also like to extend warm congratulations to
Sir Anthony Parsons, who has just taken up his post as
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. His
brilliant career makes him especially qualified for the post
with which he is now entrusted. His vast experience will be
most useful in this forum and in other United Nations
bodies.
99. France was most pleased to welcome the application
of Saint Lucia for admission to membership in the United
Nations. We are mindful of the historical, economic and
cultural ties that for several centuries have linked us with
that island of the Antilles; we hope to see such ties increase
and become even stronger. In fact, Saint Lucia is one of our
nearest neighbours in the Caribbean region, and we have
every reason to look forward with confidence to our future
relations.

92. I would also join in welcoming Ambassador Parsons,
the new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom.
I assure him of my delegation’s co-operation.
93. As borne out by our positive vote on the draft resolu.
tion contained in paragraph 4 of document S/13535 which
the Council has just adopted, my delegation wholeheartedly supports the application of Saint Lucia for admission to membership in the United Nations. This is because
we believe in the principle of the universality of the United
Nations. It is our hope and our expectation that, sooner
rather than later, other non-independent Territories like
Zimbabwe and Namibia will join us here in the comity of
sovereign nations and contribute their share to the search
for a more just and a better world.

100. Having been under the responsibility of the United
Kingdom until 22 February of this year, Saint Lucia fulfils
the conditions for admission required by the Organization
and has undertaken to comply with the provisions of the
Charter. France, therefore, is in favour of its admission to
membership. The United Nations has a universal mission;
the entry of Saint Lucia as the 152nd Member brings us
closer to that objective which we all seek.

94. We have watched the constitutional development in
Saint Lucia with keen interest, and we share in the joy of
that country’s accession to independence on 22 February of
this year. Nigeria, as a member of the Commonwealth,
shares many interests with Saint Lucia. It is our fervent
hope that the bonds of traditional friendship will be further
strengthened and that co-operation between our two
nations will wax stronger. We believe that the Government
of Saint Lucia has satisfied the conditions for membership
and we look forward to collaborating with that country’s
delegation at the United Nations.
95. Mr.

LEPRETTE

(France)

(intmpretation

101. The French delegation extends a warm welcome to
our new partner in the United Nations family. We extend
our heartfelt congratulations to the Prime Minister of Saint
Lucia and to his Government, and we express to the people
of that young country our best wishes for happiness and
prosperity.
102. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Liberia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

porn

103. Mr. TUBMAN (Liberia): Permit me at the outset,
Mr. President, to extend to you, on behalf of the Liberian
delegation and the African Group, which I have the honour
of chairing this month, our warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. We are confident that your demonstrated interest, competence, experience and diplomatic
skill will facilitate the work of the Council during this very
busy month. I wish to assure you that you will have the total
support of the members of the African Group in the execution of your responsibiities.

French): I should like to join my colleagues and to express

the condolences of the French delegation upon the death of
the President of the People’s Republic of Angola. President
Neto was one of the foremost architects of his country’s
independence, earning for himself a prestige extending
beyond the frontiers of Angola and a position as one of the
great spokesmen of Africa. I would request the Permanent
Mission of the People’s Republic of Angola to the United
Nations to accept our condolences on this unhappy
occasion.

104. At the same time, I seize this opportunity to pay a
tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Andrew Young of
the United States, for the effective way in which he directed
the work of the Council during the month of August.

96. On the occasion of the first September meeting of the
Security Council, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your accession to the presidency. The French delegation is
very pleased that during this month our work will be guided
by the representative of the African State, Zambia, with
which my country enjoys .the most cordial relations. We arc
sure that under your authority our discussions will be fruit-

105. The decision taken by the Council today to recommend to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session
8

the admission of Saint Lucia to membership in the United
Nations is noteworthy and significant. For that country,
this day marks another achievement of its aspirations for
self-determination and independence, as well as the assump
tion of its major international rights and their concomitant
responsibilities. For the United Nations, this expansion of
its membership is another significant step towards the ultimate goal of universality of membership.

111. Within Angola itself, President Neto, once the reins
of power were in his hands, showed even greater concern
for the ordinary people of his country. Unceasingly he
sought ways of involving them at all levels and in all activities of their country’s life. Thus the MPLA-Worker’s Party
stands today as a concrete expression of the President’s faith
in the Angolan people.
112. But, even while we laud the great services which
President Neto rendered to Angola while he lived, it would
be misleading were we to leave the impression that all is now
smooth sailing for that young nation. Unfortunately, as in
most of the States of Africa, that is not the case: serious
economic and reconstruction problems remain; the country
still struggles to achieve greater unity; and it is having to do
all of this at the same time as it bears the brunt of repeated
savage bombings and military incursions into its territory
inflicted by the South African racists. Angola certainly will
continue to need the service and dedication of men like
President Neto, men whose revolution will always advance
in triumph because their strivings are not for themselves nor
for outsiders but for the people they represent.

106. We wish the State of Saint Lucia every successin the
task of nation-building and in the noble duty of safeguarding the rights and promoting the welfare of its people.
Without a doubt, Saint Lucia stands as another example of
a successful, peaceful transition from colonial status to
independence. We warmly congratulate the leaders and
people of Saint Lucia on their accession to independence,
and particularly on the exemplary manner in which it
attained independence in order and tranquillity. We seize
this opportunity to express to that nation, which becomes
the 152ncl Member of our great international family, our
best wishes that its efforts in nation-building and develop
ment, on the basis of its own national identity, may be
crowned with success.

113. Only last July, Agostinho Neto travelled to Monrovia where, with his fellow heads of State and Government of
African countries, he worked hard and long hours trying to
find solutions for Africa’s many problems. The African
leaders at Monrovia engaged in serious discussions regarding the laying of foundations for a better economic future
for the people of Africa. This preoccupation now consumes
the leaders of Africa because they know that, without a
sound economic foundation, the promise of African independence will never be real&d.

107. As we have all now come to learn with grief, President Agostinho Neto of Angola is dead. A stalwart and
humane leader has fallen. By pausing at this time in tribute
to him, the Security Council and through it the entire
United Nations family honours a worthy son of Africa. For
this gesture we in the African Group are grateful.
108. President Neto was a poet and a physician. The
qualities underlying those callings were reflected in the President’s deep preoccupation with the condition of his people,
particularly the ordinary man. His concern for the material
well-being of people was matched and, indeed, caused by
his belief in social justice. Because of that belief, during
much of his life he was consumed by the determination that
colonial domination of his country had to be brought to an
end. Thus he threw himselfwith zeal and dedication into the
struggle for Angolan independence until, on 11 November
1975, Angola’s freedom was finally won.

114. That great task has not even begun, and President
Neto, who would have made so many worthy contributions
to it, has passed from labour to rest. We in Africa are
saddened by his passing and, in extending our condolences
to his family and country, we take comfort in the realization
that the Angolan nation which he fathered is destined to
play a greater, more positive role in the great future of our
continent. This being the case, we are confident that the
name of President Agostinho Neto will live always.

109. Angola is one of the richest countries in Africa. That
fact, plus its strategic location at the front line between the
racist r&imes of southern Africa and free Africa, ensured
that the fight for its liberation would be fierce and
protracted.

115. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Barbados. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
116. Mr. MAYCOCK (Barbados): I crave the Council’s
indulgence as I associate myself with the remarks of those
representatives who have expressed profound sorrow at the
death of President Neto and extended condolences to the
Government and people of Angola and to the sorrowing
relatives.

110. When independence came to Angola, perhaps as
many as a quarter of a million Portuguese left the country,
creating a great vacuum in all facets of that country’s life:
administration, agriculture, industry and commerce. It is no
exaggeration to say that the conditions the Angolan leaders
faced upon the accession of their country to independence
were as adverse as any ever faced before by any newly
independent African country. Confronted with great pressures, deprivations and dislocations approaching chaos,
lesser men would have compromised their principles and
their honour for political expediency and material advantage. But Agostinho Neto and his collaborators, to their
undying credit, stood firm; they never sold out. What is
more, under their leadership to&y Angola remains steadfast in its support of the fierce liberation struggle which is
still nobly being carried on in southern Africa.

117. I also thank you, Mr. President, for your very kind
invitation which affords me the opportunity ofjoining those
representatives who have spoken before me in welcoming
the application of Saint Lucia for admission to membership
in the United Nations. I am particularly happy to be able to
make this brief statement not only on behalf of my own
delegation but also on behalf of the delegations of the
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago and the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas. The delegation of Jamaica, which has
already spoken, also associates itself with this statement.
9

118. The delegations on behalf of which I speak, while
associating themselves fully with the eloquent remarks of
the representative of Bolivia who spoke on behalf of the
Latin American Group, of which, of course, we are all
members, felt that the close association that our countries,
Governments and ‘peoples have always enjoyed with Saint
Lucia merits a special statement on this’ auspicious
occasion.

125. On behalf of the Zambian delegation, I wish warmly
to welcome the decision just taken by the Council to recommend to the General Assembly the admission of Saint Lucia
to membership in the United Nations, in accordance with its
application contained in document S/13530. It is indeed an
honour for Zambia that the Council had considered thii
application and unanimously recommended Saint Lucia for
membership to the General Assembly during the month of
our presidency.

119. As is very well known, the group of countries in the
Caribbean known as the Commonwealth Caribbean share
a common heritage and history, a tradition of constitutional
government and respect for the rule of law. These countries
have always, despite difficulties and setbacks, striven to
achieve a high level of co-operation in the interests of the
peoples of the region as a whole. No country has shown a
greater inclination towards close association and cc+
operation in the region than has Saint Lucia.

126. Saint Lucia and Zambia, though geographically far
from each other, have a lot in common. Like a number of
other Caribbean countries, Saint Lucia has strong cultural
bonds with Africa. Besides, Saint Lucia and Zambia have a
history rooted in a common colonial experience. Only last
month, we in Zambia had the pleasure of welcoming a
high-level delegation from Saint Lucia which, together w&h
other delegations, participated actively in the Commonwealth summit.

120. Saint Lucia has made significant contributions to the
political, cultural and social development of the Caribbean
region. Since the attainment of its independence on 22
February 1979, Saint Lucia has continued, both under the
Government that led the country to independence and
under the present Government, which assumed power as a
result of elections held three months ago, to display its
commitment to regional solidarity.

127. The decision of Saint Lucia to join the United
Nations fanlily consecrates the independence it attained on
22 February 1979, over which we in Zambia could not but
rejoice. There can be no doubt that, in accordance with its
declaration, Saint Lucia will honour and be able to fulfil its
obligations as a Member of the United Nations. By the
action of the Council today, the Organization is the richer.
128. We are closer today to the much cherished goal of the
universality of membership in the United Nations. On this
occasion, my delegation cannot but express its regret that
there are countries that are still under foreign domination
and racist minority rule. It is Zambia’s strongly held view
that occasions such as this one should also provide further
impetus for us to liberate Zimbabwe, Namibia and other
Non-Self-Governing Territories, so that they too can have
the option of seeking United Nations membership. We
must strive to make the goal of universality of membership
in the United Nations a reality for all couxitries and peoples.

121. We are confident that in exercising its membership of
the United Nations Saint Lucia will display the same dedication and commitment which has been evidenced in regional
affairs. We are equally sure that deriving from its participation in activities in the international arena will flow benefits
which will assist the Government in its valiant effort to
overcome the many problems that so readily plague small
developing countries.
122. We welcome the Council’s decision to recommend to
the General Assembly that Saint Lucia should be admitted
to membership in the United Nations, and we commend
that decision to the Assembly for favourable consideration.

129. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): I simply
wish to say how touched and how grateful I am at the many
expressions of friendship addressed to me by members of
the Council on this occasion of my return to the United
Nations. I have been in New York only three days, but my
colleagues in the Council have already made me feel very
welcome and very much at home. I should like to confirm
that I and my delegation will, as in the past, continue to
co-operate to the full with our colleagues in the Council and
in the other organs of the United Nations.

123. The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of ZAMBIA.
124. At this morning’s meeting I already referred to the
untimely death of His Excellency President Agostinho
Neto. I shall therefore confine my remarks to the question
of the application by Saint Lucia for admission to membership in the United Nations.

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

W.S.

1.50

79-70002~March

I982-2,250
