S/PV.9082

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9082nd meeting

Wednesday, 29 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Spasse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Shaheen
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2022/446)
Letter dated 1 June 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/448)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40532 (E)
*2240532*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9082

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2022/446)
Letter dated 1 June 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/448)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/517, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/446, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, and
document S/2022/448, which contains a letter dated
1 June 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received
13 votes in favour, none against and two abstentions.
The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2640 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
2/7

29/06/2022

The situation in Mali is fragile. Insecurity is
increasing, and civilians are the primary victims.
The Blue Helmets’ mission, just as that of the Malian
armed forces, is a difficult one. The country still
needs MINUSMA. During the negotiations, France
listened carefully to the positions of each member of
the Council and of Mali. We regret the fact that there
were abstentions, of course, because MINUSMA needs
our unanimous support. In order for it to be able to
discharge its mission, however, the Malian transitional
authorities must also shoulder their responsibilities.
Resolution 2640 (2022), which we have just adopted,
contains three messages that I would like to highlight.
Obstacles to the work of the Mission and contingent
rotations troops must be overcome. MINUSMA’s
freedom of movement must be ensured, because that
is a precondition for its effectiveness. Violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law
must end. Such violations have been committed not only
by terrorist groups but also by elements of the Malian
armed forces along with Wagner Group mercenaries.
MINUSMA must be able to gain access to the areas
affected in order to carry out its mandate and publish
quarterly reports on human rights. The perpetrators of
violations must be brought to justice.
Finally, the Security Council takes note of the
announcement in the resolution of a two-year extension
of the transition period. The text also calls upon Mali
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to continue their discussions in order to
reach agreement on a return to constitutional order
and the convening of elections. We hope that the
3 July ECOWAS Summit will help us make progress in
that respect.
We call for the early resumption of the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, which has been at a standstill
since October 2021. We remain convinced that the
agreement is the appropriate framework to ensure a
lasting improvement in the situation in Mali.
In that context, France hopes that the strategic
review of the Secretary-General, set to take place in
six months, will provide us with an in-depth analysis
22-40532

29/06/2022

The situation in Mali

of the conditions in which MINUSMA can carry out its
mandate and draw the appropriate conclusions.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): The United
States voted in favour of resolution 2640 (2022) to
extend the crucial support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) to the people of Mali for another year.
We are grateful to France for its collegial
engagement as the penholder on this important
resolution. However, we regret the fact that two Council
members abstained and stood in the way of the Security
Council’s unanimous adoption of today’s renewal of the
mandate for MINUSMA — a Mission that has enjoyed
unanimous adoption every year since its establishment
in 2013.
We believe it was important to vote for this renewal
so that the Malian transition Government has a renewed
opportunity to work with MINUSMA to fully implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
hold free and fair elections, and protect civilians. We
hope to see the Malian transitional Government and
the Economic Community of West African State reach
agreement on a robust monitoring mechanism with
tangible benchmarks for the remainder of the transition.
We also voted in favour of the resolution because it
strongly condemns the alarming increase in violations
and abuses against civilians and again calls for all
parties to cease committing or abetting any violation or
abuse. That includes terrorist armed groups, the Malian
armed forces and the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group.
Through this important vote, the Council has
renewed MINUSMA’s critical mandate to monitor,
investigate and publicly report on the human rights
situation in Mali and to protect civilians from further
attacks. The resolution sends a clear message that
MINUSMA’s freedom of movement must be respected
in order for it to do its job.
Along those lines, we supported this mandate
renewal because the resolution also calls on the
transition Government to respect the status-of-forces
agreement and end restrictions on MINUSMA’s
flights and movements. I would like to underscore the
need for the Malian authorities to immediately grant
access to the reported massacre site and mass graves
in Moura and all other such sites of reported attacks
against civilians.

S/PV.9082

Importantly, the resolution clearly puts a check
on all support provided by MINUSMA to the Malian
Defence and Security forces. MINUSMA’s support
must comply with the United Nations Human Rights
Due Diligence Policy across all phases of operations,
ensuring that the recipients comply with the status-offorces agreement and human rights and international
humanitarian law.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2640 (2022), submitted by France,
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), which plays an important role in
the stabilization of the country.
We sought to convey our views during the
negotiations on the draft but deem it important publicly
to reiterate them today.
We firmly believe that the resolution’s intrusive
language on the Mission’s human rights mandate
will not advance the Malian people’s exercise of their
sovereign right to protect their citizens and investigate
incidents. Bamako is meaningfully committed to that.
We are concerned that the resolution could be used by
those who are displeased with the independent approach
to foreign policy of the transitional Government to
damage its reputation.
We have become somewhat inured to the fact that
our Western colleagues continue to feed the Security
Council with false stories about Russia’s allegedly
destructive activities in Mali. They do not want to hear
from us or our Malian colleagues, who have thanked
Russia, along with others in this Chamber, for its
bilateral assistance in combating terrorism. Moreover,
we have not hear any complaints about us from other
African partners.
However, something else comes as a surprise
to us. Mali is engaged in a difficult struggle against
terrorism. Every month, hundreds of civilians and
dozens of peacekeepers are killed by extremists there.
MINUSMA is finding it increasingly difficult to fulfil
its mandate in the face of the increasing security threats
that have resulted from, inter alia, the withdrawal of
French forces.
Nevertheless, for our Western colleagues all such
dire challenges fade into the background when it comes
to Russian assistance to this African country. Instead

22-405323/7

S/PV.9082

The situation in Mali

of working to ensure that our assistance to the Malians
is more effective, and thereby resolving rather than
exacerbating existing regional disagreements, our
Western colleagues would rather focus on issues that
have nothing to do with the priorities of MINUSMA,
or Mali itself for that matter. That raises the question
of what their true motives are with regard to
MINUSMA’s activities.
Despite the external pressures placed on them,
we are confident that the United Nations and the
Mission’s leadership will remain impartial, act only in
the interests of the Malian people and resolve all issues
that arise through constructive engagement with the
authorities of the host country.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): As the Security
Council comes together to fulfil its purpose by renewing
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
we would like to pay tribute to the peacekeepers and
civilians who perished in the recent terrorist attacks and
reiterate our commitment to improving the Mission’s
mandate in order to better protect the lives of United
Nations personnel and Malians.
The renewal process offered us an opportunity
to take a step forward in that direction, as well as to
seek other improvements in the provisions of resolution
2640 (2022). Brazil regrets that such an opportunity
was missed with regard to climate change, in particular
the way the current language associates it with security.
It is one thing to recognize that environmental factors
and extreme weather events may concretely impact
conditions on the ground, thereby having possible
indirect adverse effects on an existing situation
of instability.
However, as we understand it, it is another
thing that the reference to security in one of the
preambular paragraphs — the eighteenth preambular
paragraph — suggests a direct cause-and-effect
linkage between climate change and violent conflict.
In our view, that is inconsistent with the assessment of
the concrete causes of the Malian conflict, as well as
the general findings of the sixth assessment report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change with
regard to the impacts and vulnerabilities associated
with climate change.
The root causes of conflict and terrorism in Mali
are political and socioeconomic in nature. Therefore,
despite their impact in terms of affecting the existing
4/7

29/06/2022

situation of instability on the country, climate events
are not the cause of the Malian conflict. Therefore, we
regret the retention in the text of language that implies
an automatic association between climate and security,
which lacks a scientific basis and does not adequately
reflect the nature of the conflict.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has been
working tirelessly to achieve the maintenance of peace
and stability in Mali for many years. In that regard,
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
have also made tremendous efforts, which China
commends. China supports MINUSMA’s mandate
renewal and hopes that the Mission will continue to
play a constructive role in improving the situation
on the ground. We pledge our continued support to
MINUSMA and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-Genera1 in their work.
We must note, however, that Member States bear
the primary responsibility for the protection and
promotion of human rights. The Mission’s main task
is to assist the Government of Mali in implementing
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
and restoring the State’s authority in the north. That
should remain a top priority. In fulfilling its human
rights mandate, the Mission should communicate and
cooperate closely with the Malian Government and
listen carefully to its views. Resolution 2640 (2022)
lends too much prominence to human rights issues and
excessively emphasizes the Mission’s human rightsrelated mandate. As a result, it is out of touch with the
reality on the ground and does not reflect full respect
for the Malian Government’s ownership. Therefore,
China abstained in the voting on resolution 2640 (2022).
The security situation in Mali is complex and grave.
The international community should continue to support
the Malian Government’s efforts to combat terrorism
and maintain stability, while respecting Mali’s right to
carry out external security cooperation independently.
The security of the Blue Helmets attached to the
Mission has become a prominent concern. This month
alone, many deadly attacks have been carried out
against them, which we find very distressing. TCCs/
PCCs are generally concerned about the security risks
posed to the Mission as a result of the withdrawal of
foreign troops. When the United Nations conducts a
comprehensive assessment of the work of the Mission
in the next phase, it should carefully identify the
22-40532

29/06/2022

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9082

outstanding risks and weaknesses in the context of the
security of peacekeepers and take effective measures.

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I take the floor to explain
India’s position on resolution 2640 (2022).

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom welcomes the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
and I thank our French colleagues for their hard worker
as penholder.

Terrorism remains the single most serious threat
to peace and security in Mali and the Sahel. We thank
the French delegation, the penholder, for taking into
consideration our suggestion to reinforce the language
on terrorism and on the pressing need to address
that challenge.

MINUSMA has a key role to play in helping to build
long-term peace in Mali. The mandate renewal takes
place in a particularly difficult political and security
context in Mali. MINUSMA itself faces significant
challenges. Restrictions by Mali’s authorities limit its
ability to protect civilians and to monitor and report on
the recent surge in human rights violations and abuses.
That jeopardizes both the safety and the security of
peacekeepers and civilians.

The primary responsibility of fighting terrorism and
providing security to its population lies with the Malian
authorities. The peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) need to support the relevant Malian
authorities in countering terrorist groups.

In that context, the United Kingdom would have
preferred a greater emphasis on human rights and
the freedom of movement in resolution 2640 (2022).
Nonetheless, MINUSMA has a clear mandate to
conduct human rights investigations and to report
swiftly and publicly. Its mandate must be respected,
and we call on the Malian authorities to cease all
restrictions and uphold the status-of-forces agreement.
It is vital that the Security Council be kept informed
of obstructions to MINUSMA discharging its mandate.
We therefore welcome the new reporting requirement
in the resolution.
Following the allegations against State forces and
Wagner Group personnel, we welcome the reinforced
conditionality governing MINUSMA’s support for the
Malian defence and security forces in order to ensure
that is not misused. Given the scale of challenges
facing Mali and MINUSMA, we support a United
Nations review and expect it to assess whether and how
the Mission may need to adapt in order to ensure its
future success.
Finally, the United Kingdom hopes that MINUSMA
can continue to provide effective support towards
establishing Mali’s long-term stability. It is now up
to the Malian authorities to deliver on their stated
commitments to human rights, to a timely political
transition in agreement with the Economic Community
of West African States and to upholding MINUSMA’s
freedom of movement.

However, MINUSMA peacekeepers cannot be
tasked with undertaking counter-terrorism operations.
Ambiguous phraseology in the resolution — such as
wording that refers to a robust posture, robust and
proactive steps to protect civilians, and enhancing
the robustness of the posture of MINUSMA — may
possibly place United Nations peacekeepers on the
ground at a disadvantage.
The interpretation of peacekeeping mandates must
be well defined and have a strong legal basis, without
any scope for creative interpretation. In addition, the
issue of climate change should be addressed holistically
through the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, in accordance with its provisions and
principles, as well as through the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. No artificial link should be drawn
between climate change and security-related issues
without any firm scientific basis.
Mali needs the continuous support of its bilateral
and international partners, including the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, to overcome capacity gaps. We
reiterate our commitment to supporting Mali in its
pursuit of lasting peace, stability and security.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Gabon voted in favour of renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), in the light
of our concerns about maintaining consensus on an
African issue and so as to enable MINUSMA to work
in the best possible conditions.
Nevertheless, we do not believe that the mandate
meets the main aspirations of the Malian people. Mali

22-405325/7

S/PV.9082

The situation in Mali

is at a critical juncture in its history and must face major
security challenges, while at the same time fighting
against armed groups and violent recurring attacks
perpetrated by terrorists. We are convinced that, at
this stage, Mali’s people need more substantial support
from the international community, instead of a barrage
of insults and admonitions, which serve only to worsen
the situation on the ground.
We also deplore the rejection of the request
submitted by the three African members of the Security
Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya — for a firmer
commitment to protecting civilians and combating the
effects of climate change, which without a doubt have
an impact on the people of Mali and their lifestyle.
Resolution 2640 (2022), which focuses only on
human rights, does not serve the interests of the people
of Mali but, as is often the case, serves only the interests
of foreign Powers. The resolution does not support
the commitment of the United Nations to continuing
to support Mali on the long road of restoring peace
and stability.
Finally, the resolution violates the sovereignty of
Mali. It does not take into account the efforts made by
the Malian defence forces in honour of their sovereign
duty to defend their territory, in conditions that are very
often challenging. We believe that the international
community should review its objectives and priorities
in Mali and focus only on the interests of the people
of Mali.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Since the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
last year, there have been several developments in Mali
on the political, security and humanitarian fronts. We
therefore engaged in the negotiations on the mandate
renewal with the expectation that there would be broad
appreciation for the need to ensure that the new elements
introduced in the text reflected the current realities and
position the Mission to overcome the known challenges
in order to make it more responsive to the security
needs of Mali.

29/06/2022

towards reaching a balanced text, we regret the fact that
the text does not fully capture our concerns, including
those related to the protection of civilians, human rights
and climate and security.
Despite the concerns I mentioned, my delegation
strongly believes that the peace for which the good
people of Mali yearn cannot be achieved or sustained
without the presence of MINUSMA. The gallant troops
on the ground serving under MINUSMA are also
committed to supporting efforts to find peace in Mali.
Consequently, in the spirit of compromise Ghana voted
for the renewal of this very important mandate.
We believe that the request to the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 58 to provide, no later than
13 January 2023, a detailed analysis of the political
and security challenges that impacted on the Mission’s
ability to implement its mandate and an assessment of
the cooperation with the host authorities and movement
restrictions, among other things, will help identify
issues and inform perspectives on ways to better
strengthen the Mission’s efforts to address the security
situation in Mali.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): Kenya’s vote in favour
of resolution 2640 (2022) is based on our belief that
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) plays a
key role in Mali. We also note an overall improvement
in the adopted resolution as compared to the original
draft resolution.
Nevertheless, the growing security threats posed by
terrorist acts, as well as the lack of adequate resources,
leave Mali struggling to secure its borders with very
limited resources. Kenya also believes that a legitimate
Government in Mali remains the key to establishing the
conditions required for effective counter-terrorism and
counter-insurgency actions. The worsening effects of
climate change, which trigger food insecurity, poverty
and displacement in Mali, are also a major concern
for us.

We also approached negotiations in a manner
that sought to enhance cooperation between the two
host authorities and the Mission by calling for a more
focused, constructive and balanced text.

We would therefore have preferred that the resolution
placed a stronger focus on positively supporting Mali
in its efforts to rebuild its democracy, protect civilians
and counter the effects of climate change in order to
reflect the situation and needs on the ground.

While acknowledging the constructive engagement
by all delegations and the efforts made by the penholder

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.

6/7

22-40532

29/06/2022

The situation in Mali

Albania draws attention to the deteriorating
security situation and the dire humanitarian situation
in Mali. We thank France, as the penholder, for leading
the challenging negotiations on the mandate renewal.
We are in full support of the one-year extension and
believe that resolution 2640 (2022) provides the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) with the necessary
mandate to support Mali and its people. It is undeniable
that the security situation in Mali remains complex
and is further challenged by the presence of foreign
military personnel.
The recent sharp increase in human rights
violations remains of great concern. We urge the
Malian forces to adhere to international human rights
law and international humanitarian law in conducting
military operations. MINUSMA must be guaranteed the
freedom of movement in order to implement its mandate
in full. Any restrictions may impact the Mission’s
effectiveness in carrying out its mandated tasks.
Finally, we encourage the Malian authorities to
work constructively with the Economic Community
of West African States and develop a transition
calendar for the holding of elections and the return to
constitutional order.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
Government of the Republic of Mali takes note of
resolution 2640 (2022), which renews the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for
an additional year. Members will recall that the
Government of Mali expressed its support for the
renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate, while clearly
formulating its expectations and strong reservations
with regard to the new mandate.
However, the Government of Mali regrets that
some of its strongest reservations were simply ignored
in the final version of the resolution on which the
Security Council voted. The Government of Mali
reiterates its firm opposition to the freedom of

S/PV.9082

movement of MINUSMA in the execution of its human
rights mandate.
As members are well aware, Mali has always
cooperated in good faith with the United Nations Mission
since its establishment in 2013. However, in line with
the principle of respect for Mali’s sovereignty, as well
as for coordination and security reasons, MINUSMA’s
movements can take place only with the agreement of
the competent Malian authorities. Similarly, Mali is not
in a position to guarantee the freedom of movement for
MINUSMA investigations without the prior agreement
of the Government.
Consequently, Mali does not intend to implement
those provisions of the resolution, despite their adoption
by the Security Council. In any event, the Government
of Mali believes that allegations concerning human
rights violations are the primary responsibility of the
Malian authorities. MINUSMA’s role is to provide
them with the necessary assistance in that regard; it is
not supposed to replace the Government of Mali.
The delegation of Mali calls on the Security
Council to allow MINUSMA to devote itself to the
priority tasks for which it is deployed in my country,
namely, to support the restoration of security and State
authority throughout our national territory, which is an
essential condition for better protecting the population
and their property.
The people of Mali expect MINUSMA to contribute
to the search for lasting solutions to Mali’s challenges.
They do not want MINUSMA to become part of the
problems in our country, and neither do they want
human rights to be used for hidden political purposes.
On behalf of the Government of Mali, I would
like to thank Russia and China for abstaining from the
voting on the resolution.
I conclude by reiterating the gratitude of the people
and the Government of Mali to the United Nations for
its constant support for our efforts to end the crisis.
I pay tribute to the memory of all the victims of the
Malian crisis — both civilian and military, Malian and
foreign — who have lost their lives in my country.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

22-405327/7
