A/63/PV.81

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

81

st plenary meeting
Friday, 24 April 2009, 19 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. YañezBarnuevo (Spain), Vice President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Members will recall that the Assembly concluded its
consideration of agenda item 65 and its sub-items (a)
to (c) at its 68th plenary meeting, on 11 December
2008. As indicated in the footnote to document
A/63/L.67*, in order to enable the Assembly to
consider the draft resolution, it is necessary to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 65.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 65?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
further take it that the Assembly agrees to proceed
immediately to consideration of sub-item (b) of
item 65? I see no objections, so we shall proceed
accordingly.

Agenda item 65 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance:
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/659)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.67*)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I call
on the representative of Kazakhstan to introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.67*.
Ms. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Today is Friday, but
so many members of the Assembly are here. They are
most welcome, and from the bottom of my heart I
would like to wish all a pleasant weekend after they
have taken action on this draft resolution, which I hope
will be adopted today.
I am honoured to present draft resolution
A/63/L.67*, entitled “International cooperation and
coordination for the human and ecological
rehabilitation and economic development of the
Semipalatinsk region of Kazakhstan”, which has been
submitted under agenda item 65 (b).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-31258 (E)

*0931258*

A/63/PV.81

This is the sixth time such a draft resolution is to
be adopted. In this regard we express our deep
appreciation to Member States that have previously
supported these resolutions and those that are
sponsoring the draft resolution on the Semipalatinsk
region for the first time. Today 88 Member States have
already co-sponsored the draft resolution. My
delegation deems this support to be recognition of the
historical contribution of Kazakhstan to nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Indeed, in 1991, for the first time in world
history, the largest nuclear test site in the
Semipalatinsk region of Kazakhstan was shut down by
decree of the President of our country, Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev.
It is known that from 1949 to 1989 there were
458 atmospheric and underground nuclear and
thermonuclear explosions, the cumulative capacity of
which equalled 2,500 bombs of the size dropped on
Hiroshima in 1945. The area affected by that nuclear
testing is more than 300,000 square kilometres, and the
consequences are tragic. More than a million people
have been recognized as victims of this inhuman
exercise. Radiation has weakened people’s immune
systems. Disease rates have subsequently risen, and the
cost and duration of diseases have been exacerbated.
The harmful impact of nuclear testing is transmitted
from generation to generation.
It is worth noting that the problem of
Semipalatinsk is not entirely new to the international
community. Kazakhstan has struggled with the
consequences of the nuclear tragedy for almost two
decades, and it calls on the international community to
intensify efforts aimed at nuclear disarmament and
prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Kazakhstan has real reason to argue
vociferously about the need for the early entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
since for 40 years our land has been a testing ground
for deadly weapons and our people are today
experiencing the dire consequences of those tests.
The draft of the sixth resolution on the
Semipalatinsk region is clear evidence of the
recognition by the international community that this
issue remains a matter of serious concern for the
people and Government of Kazakhstan with regard to
the long-term nature and adverse effects on the life and
health of people, especially children, and on the
environment of the region.

2

The draft resolution notes the important role of
the Government of Kazakhstan in allocating the
domestic resources for rehabilitation of the region in
the context of relevant national programmes, including
that entitled “Complex solution of the former
Semipalatinsk nuclear test site problems for 20052007” and the elaboration of a new programme cycle
for 2009 to 2011.
In addition, the draft resolution recognizes the
contributions of various United Nations agencies,
donor countries and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations in providing humanitarian
aid and projects for the rehabilitation of the
Semipalatinsk region.
In particular, I wish to express deep gratitude to
the Government of Japan for its substantial financial
support for a number of projects implemented by the
United
Nations
Development
Programme
in
Kazakhstan aimed at improving the living standards in
the region. Moreover, Japan has assisted the local
government in implementing a major project to
improve the health care system in the region. In
addition, the Unites States Agency for International
Development is implementing a project in the field of
primary health care. The United Kingdom is rendering
assistance in the development of a plan for collective
land use in secure areas of the Semipalatinsk test site.
The European Commission is funding a project in the
field of nuclear safety. Also, there have been a number
of other projects with financial support from the
Governments of our neighbouring countries and of
Switzerland, Italy and Canada, among others.
The draft resolution also invites Member States to
observe, in 2011, the twentieth anniversary of the
closure of the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site and
welcomes initiatives commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the international anti-nuclear movement
“Nevada-Semei”, and the international conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency on
remediation of land contaminated by radioactive
material resides, to be held in 2009.
The novelty of this draft resolution is that the
results of its implementation will be reviewed at the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly under the
agenda item “Sustainable development”, whereas all
previous resolutions were considered under the item on
humanitarian aid to countries with special needs. The
reduced relevance of the humanitarian component in

09-31258

A/63/PV.81

the draft resolution is related to the increase in
domestic resources for regional socio-economic
programmes in the context of overall development,
while international assistance in the form of relevant
technical expertise aimed at overcoming the effects of
nuclear explosions comes to the fore. In fact, the
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Kazakhstan to overcome the effects
of nuclear explosions is reaching a new level.
It should be also stressed that the report of the
Secretary-General (A/63/659) noted the need to
provide advanced technologies to minimize and
mitigate radiological, socio-economic, environmental
and health problems in the Semipalatinsk region. The
draft resolution calls upon the international community
to support Kazakhstan in the development and
implementation of special programmes and projects to
address the situation in our efforts to achieve economic
growth and sustainable development in the
Semipalatinsk region.
In conclusion, I would like to note that this draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus, without a
vote. I thank the Assembly for its kind support.

09-31258

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution
A/63/L.67*, entitled “International cooperation and
coordination for the human and ecological
rehabilitation and economic development of the
Semipalatinsk region of Kazakhstan”. I should like to
announce that, since the introduction of the draft
resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Australia, Austria, Benin, Burkina
Faso, Cyprus, Colombia, Croatia, Djibouti, France,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Mauritius,
Monaco, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Slovakia,
Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic and Thailand.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.67*?
Draft resolution A/63/L.67*
(resolution 63/279).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 65.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

3
