Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

20 October 1947

350

most hearts and was in keeping with the hopes of
the world?
I know very well that nothing will really be
changed by the mere ratification of these Conventions. I know that facts are sometimes stronger
than principles and that men continue to resist
progress; but I also know that if you accept the
resolution as it stands, if you utter these words of
freedom, greatness and generosity, these words
will remain and will bring- reality in their train,
because words are always the forerunners of reality and shape it.

venait du plus profond d'eux-memes et ctait en
rapport avec les aspirations du monde?
Je sais tres bien que rien ne sera vniiment
change du selli fait qu'on aura ratifie les Conventions en question. Je sais que les choses sont parfois plus fortes que les principes, et que les
hommes, en verite, continuent a opposer une resistance au progres. Mais ce que je sais aussi, c'est
que si vous approuvez, si vous acceptez la resolution telle qu'elle est formulee, si vous prononcez
les mots de liberte, de grandeur et de generosite,
ces mots resteront et entra!neront leur suite les
realites, parce que les mots precedent toujours les
realites et les obligent se modifier.

a

a

T he meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

La seance est levee

a13 h. 10.

NINETY-SEVENTH PLENARY
MEETING

QUA'rRE~VINGT-DIX-SEPTIEME SEANCE

Held in the General Assembly fl all
at Flushing Meadow, New York,
on Monday, 20 October 1947, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. O. ARANHA (Brazil).

Tenue dans la salle de l'AssembUe generale
eFlushing Meadow, New-York,
le lundi 20 octobre 1947, a 15 heures.
President: M. O. ARANHA (Bresil).

38. Continuation of the discussion of the
transfer to the United Nations of the
functions and powers exercised by
the' League of Nations in respect of
traffic in women and children and in
obscene publications

38. Suite de la discussion sur le transfert
a l'Organisation des Nations Unies
des fonctions et pouvoirs exerces par
la Societe des Nations en ce qui con~
cerne la traite des femmes et des en~
fonts et les publications obscEmes

The PRESIDENT: We shall continue the discussion of the report' of the Third Committee
concerning the transfer to the United Nations of
the functions and powers exercised by the League
of Nations in respect of traffic in women and
children and in obscene publications (document
A/412) .
I call upon the representative of the United
Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
alions maintenant poursuivre la discussion sur
le rapport de la Troisieme Commission relatif
au transfert a l'Organisation des Nations Unies
des fonctions et pouvoirs exerces par la Societe
des Nations en ce qui concerne la traite des
femmes et des enfants et les publications obscenes
(document A/412).
Je donne la parole au representant du
Royaume-Uni.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom) :
I am very sorry to have to trespass again on the
time of the Assembly, but the position in regard
to this matter seems to be so widely misunderstood, owing, I am afraid, to my own failure
to make it sufficiently clear when I spoke previously, that I must say just a word or two more
in regard to it.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Je regrette vivement de
devoir abuser de nouveau du temps de l' Assemblee mais, en ce qui concerne cette question, la
situation me semble donner lieu a de tds malentendus - dus, je le crains, au manque de clarte
de mon expose precedent - qu'il me faut ajo~ter
quelques mots a ce sujet.

I am not going to attempt to follow the
representative who spoke on behalf of the delegation of Haiti in that exceedingly eloquent,
not to say emotional, address which he delivered
before we adjourned for lunch. It was, If I
may venture to say so, an address which, delivered on some other occasion and about some
ot~er matter, would form a very model of that
kind of oratory which nowadays unfortunately,
is ali too rare and which I always envy but to
which I cannot myself ever attempt to aspire.
With charm and frankness, the Haitian representative said that he had not really studied the
question at issue, but he appealed to our hearts.
I am all in favour of appealing. to hearts. I do
not mean to feminine hearts but, within reason,

Je ne vais pas essayer de suivre le representant qui, parlant au nom de la delegation
d'Haiti, a prononcc un discours extremement
eloquent, pour ne pas dire emouvant, avant que
naus ne levions la seance pour le dejeuner. Si je
puis ainsi dire, c'est un discours qui, prononce
en une autre occasion et sur un autre sujet,
constituerait le modele meme de ce genre
d'610quence, malheureusement trop rare al'heure
actuelle, que j'envie toujours mais que, pour
ma part, je dois renoncer atteindre jamais.
Avec une franchise charmante, le representant d'Haiti nous a avoue qu'il n'avait pas
reellement etudie la question, mais il a fait appel
a notre cceur. Je suis tout a fait d'avis de faire
appel aux sentiments. J e ne veux pas parler de

PLENIERE

a

20 octobre 1947

Quatre-vingt-dix-septh"rlme s~ance pleniere

351

to those instincts of humanity and civilization
, which I hope most of us have within our own
hearts. And I ask the Haitian representative to
believe, because I am, like him, rather a sentimental person, that, if there really was anything
to touch our hearts in this matter, I should certainly align myself with him. But we ought, in
this Assembly, to be careful not to allow our
hearts to run away with our heads when, in
truth and in fact, there is nothing at all even
to excite our hearts. There is nothing to excite
our hearts in regard to this matter of constitutional procedure.

la sensibilite feminine, mais, dans des limites
raisonnables, il faut s'adresser aux instin~ts
d'humanite et de civilisation qui sont, je I'esper~,
au fond du cceur de la plupart d'entre nous.
Je demande au representant d'Haiti de croirecar je suis, comme lui, plutot sentimental- que
s'il y avait vraiment quelque chose qui puisse
toucher nos cceurs en cette matiere, je me
rangerais surement a. ses cotes. Mais dans cette
Assemblee, il nous faut veiller a ne pas laisser le
cceur entraIner la raison, quand, en fait, il n'y
a vraiment aucune raison de s'emouvoir et il
n'y a, dans cette question de procedure constitutionnelle rien qui soit de nature a toucher nos
cceurs.
j

As I said many times in my previous remarks
to the Assembly, the question at issue here is
not whether these Conventions, these important
Conventions about the traffic in women and
children and about obscene literature, should
be applied in our colonies. There is no question
as to that; they are already applied; they have
been applied for a very long time and they are
going to continue to be applied, whatever the
decision of this Assembly and whether or not
we assume the functions of the League, as indeed I hope we shall. The question at issue here
has really nothing to do with the application of
, the existing Conventions in regard to the traffic
in women and children and obscene literature.
We are all agreed about that. At least, I say we
ourselves are all agreed. There are some State~
represented here, of course, which have not
signed or ratified these Conventions, but, so far
as the United Kingdom and its colonies are concerned, we are all agreed that these Conventions
must be applied in the future as they have been
applied in the past. The only question at issue
here is whether we should establish a precedent
now, reversing the previous practice in this matter, by stating that the colonial territories which'
have their own legislatures and their own governments are not entitled to be consulted and
are not entitled to decide for themselves whether
in the future, to adhere to the other conventions
dealing with trade or other matters which may
arise from time to time and which may be of
a non-political nature.

Comme je I'ai deja repete a plusieurs reprises
en m'adressant a 1'Asemblee, il ne s'agit pas ici
de rechercher si les Convenpons en question, ces
importantes Conventions sur la traite des femmes
et des enfants et sur la litterature obscene, doivent
etre appliquees dans nos colonies. I1 n'y a aueun
doute a ce sujct: elles sont deja appliquees; eUes
le sont depuis tres longtemps et vont continuer de
l'etre quelle que soit la decision de l'Assemb16e et
que nous assumions - cornme je l'espere - ou
non les fonctions de la Societe des Nations. La
question qui nous occupe n'a reellement rien a
voir avec l'application des Conventions existantes
sur la traite des femmes et des enfants et la
litterature obscene. Nous sommes tous d'accord
sur ce point. Tout au moins, je veux dire que
pour nous-mcmes, nous sommes taus d'accord.
11 y a evidemment certains 'des Etats representes ici qui n'ont ni signe, ni ratifie ces Conventions mais, en ce qui concerne le Royaume-Uni
et ses colonies, nous sommes tous d'accord pour
considerer que ces Conventions doivent etre
appliquees a l'avenir comme elles 1'ont ete dans
le passe. La seule question qui nous occupe est
de savoir si nous devons maintenant erecr un
precedent en admettant, contrairement a la
pratique precedemment suivie en la matiere, que
les territoires coloniaux possedant leur propre
legislature et leur propre gouvemement n'aient
le droit ni d'ctre consultes ni de decider par euxmemes, sur le p0int de savoir s'ils ratifieront a
l'avenir les conventions relatives a d'autres questions - questions commerciales ou autres - susceptibles de se poser de temps a autre et n'ayant
pas un caractere politique.

It is wholly untrue to say, as the delegation
of the USSR said-and not for the first time-that we are seeking to secure some privileged
position for our colonies and to exempt them
from obligations which may arise under these or
other conventions. States are free to adhere or
not to adhere to these or other conventions, as
they choose. The USSR has not chosen to adhere to these Conventions about the traffic in
'Y0men and children. All our colonies have, and
they' will continue to adhere to those Conventions. What we seek to preserve, and to preserve
for the future, is the constitutional right of the
colonies to decide for themselves whether they
shall or shall not adhere to conventions on all
the other matters which, may arise on future occasions.

11 est tout a fait contraire a la verite de
declarer, comme la delegation de l'URSS l'a fait
a plusieurs reprises) que nous cherchons a
assurer a nos colonies une situation privilegiee
et a les exempter des obligations qui peuvent
decouler pour eUes des Conventions dont il s'agit
ou d'autres conventions. Les Etats sont libres
d'adherer ou non a ces Conventions, a leur gre.
L'URSS a prefere ne pasadherel' aux Conventions relatives a la traite des femmes et des
enfants. Toutes nos colonies, elles y ont adhere
et continueront de le faire. Ce que nous cherchons a sauvegarder pour l'avenir, c'est le droit
constitutionnel des colonies a decider par ellesmcmes si ellesadhereront ou non a des conventions relatives a toutes les questions susceptibles
de se poser.

j

j

j

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

20 October 1947

352

It would be very easy and very simple for
us in the United Kingdom to say, as the proposal of the USSR would seek to. make us say,
that we' will decide these matters for our colonies,
that we will impose our will upon our colonies
and that they shall adhere to conventions or
not adhere to conventions as we please; that we
will bind all our colonies or not bind them without consulting them in regard to the matter.
That would be a very easy position for us to
take. That would be very good fascist or totalitarian doctrine for us to adopt, but it. would
not be democractie practice; it would not be the
kind of practice that will help to lead our colonies, as we are leading them-and there is evidence of that in this Assembly-towards complete self-government and autonomy.
That is why we are insisting not on the right
of the colonies not to be bound by these particular Conventions on the traffic in women and
children-they are bound by those alreadybut on the right of each colony to decide for
itself in the future, through its own legislature
and through its own government, whether or
not it will adhere to future conventions of a
non-political nature in regard to other matter1J.
They must be free to make up their own minds
about these matters, whatever may be the view
of the United Kingdom Government. We shall
seek to ensure that our colonies take a 'good international view about these matters, al}d we
shall use our good offices to secure their adherence to all the conventions which arc recommended by this Assembly.
However, we maintain for our colonies the
right to decide for themselves in future cases,
as and when they arise, whether they will adhere
to conventions or not. That is a right which wc
insist is in accordance with good democratic
practice, and one which is consistent with the
progressive development of real self-govcrnment
and autonomy among the colonial peoples.
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of Pakistan.
.
Mr. PIRZADA (Pakistan): This question came
up before the Third Committee too soon after
our admission to the United Nations to give us
an opportunity to express our attitude on the
subject before that' Committee. Hence, I thought
I would make it clear now.

.

I was glad to hear the representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir Hartley Shawcross, express himself in favqur of consultation with
the colonial legislatures before any adherence to
these Conventions on behalf of the colonies. He
went further 'in his second speech today and
said that we must even let them decide things
for themselves rather than decide things on their
behalf. These two sentiments are really very
good, and I am in perfect agreement with this
principle, the principle that they should be allowed to have their own way and that they
s~ould decide these matters whenever thequestIOll comes up. I further hope that this principle

Il serait trcs simple et trcs facile pour le
Royaume-U ni de dire, conune la proposition
de l'URSS tend Do nous le faire dire, que nous
trancherons ces questions au nom de nos
colonies, que nous leur imposerons notrc volonte,
qu'elles adbCreront ou non aux Conventions
scIon notre desir, que nous engagerons ou non
toutes nos colonies sans les consulter en la
matiere. Ce serait pour nous une attitude trcs
facile a prendre. Cc serait adopter un systeme
parfaitement fasciste ou totalitaire mais non
dcmocratique; ce n'est pas le systcme qui
permettra. d'achemincr nos colonies, commc nous
le faisons actuellement -1'Assemblee en a la
preuve - vel'S l'autonomie complete.
C' est pourquoi nous insistons non pas sur le
droit qu'ont les colonies de ne pas ctre liees, dans
le cas particulier, par les Conventions sur la traite
des femmes et des enfants - e1les le sont dejamais sur le droit qu'a chaque colonie de decider
par elle-meme a l'avenir, par la voie de sa
legislature ou de son Gouvernement, si elle
adherera ou non aux conventions de caractere
non politique qui pourraient intervenir sur
d'autres questions. Les colonies doh'cnt etre
lihres de prendre leurs propres decisions a ce
sujet, quel que soit le point de vue du Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni. Nous nous efIorccrons
de veillcr a ce que nos colonies examinent ces
questions sous un angle vraiment international
et nous userons de nos bons offices pour les
amener a adherer a toutes les conventions
recommandees par l'Assemblee.
Toutefois, nous maintenbns pour nos colonies
le droit de decider par elles-mcmes" a l'avcnir si,
le cas echeant, dIes adhereront ou non a des
conventions nouvelles. C'est un droit qui, nous
le rcpetons, est conforme a la veritable methode
democratique et qui est compatible avec le developpement progressif d'une autonomic rcelle des
populations coloniales.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je
donne la parole au representant du Pakistan.
M. Pm.ZADA (Pakistan) (traduit de l'anglais): La question que nous discutons actuellement. a ete soumise a la Troisieme Commission
trop peu de temps apres notre admission au sein
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour que
nous ayons eu l'occasion d'exposer notre attitude
a cc sujet devant cette Commission. C'est pourquoi j'ai cm devoir preciser id cette attitude.
J'ai ete heureux d'entendre le representant du
Royaume-Uni, Sir HartIey Shawcross, e declarer partisan de consultations avcc les pouvoirs
lcgislatifs coloniaux prealablement a toute adhesion ccs Conventions au nom des colonies. 11
est alle encore plus loin dans son second discours
aujourd'hui et il a dit que nous devons meme
les laisser prendre la' decision plut6t que de decider eI1 !cur nom. Cc sont HI. reellement d'excellentes intentions et j'admets parfaitemel1t qu'il
faille en principe laisser les colonies agir d'elles
mcmes ct prendre une decision sur ces questions
toutes les fois qu'clles se posent. J'espcre egalement que ce prindpe sera. applique jusqu'a sa

a

20 octobre 1947

353

will be carried to its logical conclusion, and that
all these Non-Self-Governing Territories will be
granted full self-government, so that they may
become Members of the United Nations; then
instead of having colonial Powers decide for
them, they will come here and ratify these Conventions as Member States.
I am sorry to say, h~wever, that this attitude
on the part of the colonial Powers is not consistent with that adopted by them in the Trusteeship Committee. No doubt, Sir Hartley Shawcross was not present when certain questions
were being discussed there, which accounts for
the fact that he has expressed certain hopeful
sentiments in this Assembly. He has said that
evidence will be observed in the proceedings of
the Assembly of the fact that the colonial territories are progressing quickly towards the attainment of self-government. I am sorry to say, how~
ever, that proceedings in the Committee, on
the contrary, showed that this progress is in fact
slackening and slowing down.
In this connexion, I refer particularly to the
attitude of some of the colonial Powers in stoutly
refusing to supply to the United Nations information on political questions concerning NonSelf-Governing Territories. Not only did they
oppose the proposal, but they expressed their
intention not to supply the informatibn even if
the resolutiQn concerning it were adopted by
the General Assembly.

,
i

I am sorry, also, to have to refer to the attitude of another State which has refused to
place South West Africa under trusteeship, although the General Assembly has asked that this
should be done and has twice' recommended it.
In view of all these facts, I find it impossible to
accept the intentions to which I have referred,
and my delegation is not in a position to support the amendment moved by the representative of the United Kingdom.
Quite apart from the considerations to which
I have already referred, the reasons for this attitude on the part of my delegation are obvious.
The first is that the constitutional position of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories at present does
not justify consultation with them or even allowing them to reach decisions for themselves.
This is the position held by the colonial Powers:
these Non-Self-Governing Territories are either
approaching or a~e on the verge of self-govern, ment so that it is not necessary to consult them,
since they can decide for themselves; or else they
. have legislatures consisting entirely of nominated
members, or a majority of nominated members,
who can be counted upon to dance to the tune
of the, colonial Power and to say "yes" to whatever it suggests. In these two cases, therefore,
consultation is held to be unnecessary.

The third category consists of colonial territoties whose legislatures do not include any of

Quatre-vingt-dix-septiEmie seance pleniere

conclusion logique et "que tous ces territoires non
autonomes recevront une pleine autonomie et
pourront de la sorte devenir Membres de 1'01'ganisation des Nations Unies; a ce moment-la,
au lieu que ce soient les Puissances coloniales
qui prennent des decisions pour eux, ils seront
representes ici et ratifieront ces Conventions en
tant qu'Etats Membres.
J'ai cependant le regret de dire que cette
attitude de la part dc;s Puissances coloniales ne
correspond pas a celle qu'elles ont adoptee au
sein de la Commission de tutelle. Sir Hartley
Shawcross n'etait sans doute pas present lorsque
ccrtaines questions y furent discutees et cela explique qu'il ait exprime devant l'Assemblee certaines
opinions optimistes. 11 a dit que les debats de
l'Assemblee fourniront la preuve que les territoires coloniaux progressent rapidemenf vel'S la
realisation de l'autonomie. J'ai le regret de dire
que les debats de la Commission montrent, au
contraire, qu'en fait ce progres est stagnant et
se ralentit.
A cet egard, j'ai particulieremenf en vue l'attitude prise par certaines des Puissances eoloniales qui ont refuse resolument de fournir aux
Nations Unies des renseignements sur des questions politiques interessant les territoires non
autonomes. Non seulement elles se sont opposees
a la proposition qui avait ete faite concernant
la communication de ces renseignements mais
encore elles ont manifeste l'intention de. ne pas
donner suite a toute resolution qui porrait etre
adoptee a ce sujet par l'AssembIee generale.
Je regrett~ aussi d'avoir a faire mention de
l'attitude d'un autre Etat qui a refuse de placer
le Sud-Ouest Africain sous le Regime de tutelle
bien que l'Assemblee generale eut demande qu'il
en flit fait ainsi et l'eut par deux fois recommande. En raison de tous ces faits, il m'est
impossible de me fier aux intentions exprimees
ici et auxquelles j'ai fait allusion; ma delegation
n'est .pas en mesure d'appuyer l'amendement
propose par le representant du Royaume-Uni.
Independamment ,des considerations que je
viens d'exposer, les raisons de l'attitude de notre
delegation apparaissent clairement. La premiere
de ces raisons c'est que, la situation constitutionnelle des territoires non autonomes, telle
qu'elle existe a l'heure actuelle, ne justifie pas
des consultations avec eux et ne les met meme
pas en mesure de prendre des decisions d'~ux­
memes. Void l'attitude prise par les Puissances
coloniales: ou bien les territoires non autonomes
approchent de l'autonomie, ou sont meme sur
le point d'obtenir l'autonomie, de sorte qu'il
n'est pas necessaire de les consulter puisqu'ils
peuvent decider d'eux-memes; ou bien, iIs ant
des corps legislatifs comprenant exclusivement
des membres nommes -ou une majorite de
membres nommes - et 1'0n peut escompter
qu'ils se conformeront docilement aux vues de
la Puissance coloniale et acquiesceront a toilt ce
qu'elle proposera. Daus ces deux cas, estime-ton, les consultations sont donc inutiles.
U ne troisieme cat~gorie comprend des territoires coloniaux dans les corps Iegislatifs des-

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

354

the indigenous peoples, and where representation depends upon racial discrimination and is
restricted to Europeans, as in the case of South
West Africa. It is' no use consulting such legislatures because we know that their views will be
the same as those of the colonial Powers themselves.

20 October 1947

quels les populations indigenes ne sont pas representees et ou la representation depend d'une
discrimination raciale et est restreinte aux seuls
Europeens, comme c'est le cas dans le Sud-Quest
Mricain. I1 ne sert a rien de consulter des corps
legislatifs de ce genre parce que nous savons
que leurs vues seront identiques a cenes des
Puissances coloniales elles-memes.
A fourth category consists of territories where
La quatrieme categorie comprend les territhere are no legislatures at all, the legislative toires ou il n'existe aucun corps Iegislatif, le
and other work being carried out by the officials pouvoir legislatif et les autres pouvoirsetant
of the colonial government which legislates by exerces par les fonctionnaires de l'administratibn
orders in council. In these cases, therefore, it coloniale qui legiferent par voie de decrets. Dans
would be futile to' consult non-existent legisla- ces cas egalement, il serait ,vain de consulter des
tures concerning the ratification of the' present corps legislatifs qui n'existent pas, au sujet de
Conventions.
la ratification des Conventions dont il s'agit
actuellement.
The second reason why the delegation of
La seconde raison pour laquelle la delegation
Pakistan opposes this amendment is that the du Pakistan s'oppose a cet amendement est que
omission of the colonial' application clauses, as la suppression des clauses d'application aux colorecommended by the Third Committee, would nies que recommande la Troisieme Commisnot prevent the colonial Powers from consulting sion, n'empecherait pas les Puissances coloniales
the legislatures of Non-Self-Governing Terri- de consulter les' corps legislatifs des territoires
tories, if they wished to do so, before agreeing to non autonomes, si elles le voulaient, avant de
~hese ratifications. They would have ample time,
proceder aces ratifications. Elles en auraient
and it would be a simple routine matter for the amplement le temps et ce serait pour elles une
colonial Powers to consult their officials in the simple question de travail administratif que de
territories concerned.
consulter leurs fonctionnaires dans les territoires interesses.
If this amendme)1t is passed, it will provide a
L'amendement, s'il est adopte, fournira une
loophole for the reactionary elements in the echappatoire aux elements reactionnaires des
colonies, and there can be no doubt whatsoever colonies et il n'y a pas le moindre doute qu'il
that there are certain elements opposed to the existe certains elements opposes au progres des
advancement of the indigenous populations of . populations indigenes de ces colonies. Creel' sans
these' colonies. Creating a loophole, I say, in a aucune necessite une telle echappatoire dans la
matter in which it is not at all necessary to do question fournira un encouragement a ces eleso, will provide encouragement for those reac- ments reactionnaires.
tionary elements. r
Finally, I should like to inquire-if it is still
Enfin, je voudrais demander, s'il subsiste endoubtful-whether or not these Conventions are core un doute a ce sujet, si ces Conventions ont
for the be~efit of humanity in general. If the oui ou non pour objectif l'interet de·l'humanite
answer is that they are not, then certainly it is en general. Si la reponse est negative, il est
necessary to give the colonial Powers time to alors certainement necessaire de donner aux
consult their colonies. However, if it is held, as Puissances colonialesle temps de consulter leurs
I believe all the delegations will hold, that these colonies. Mais si 1'0n estime, comme le feront,
Conventions are definitely for the benefit of je crois, tautes les delegations, que ces Convenhumanity, then certainly I do not see any' rea- tions sont nettement dans l'interet de I'humason why the colonial Powers should not adhere nite, alors je ne vois aucune raison pour que les
to them on behalf of their colonies.
Puissances coloniales n'y adherent pas au nell
de leurs colonies.
Under the Charter, as the Assembly is awaJ;'e,
Aux termes de la Charte, comme le sait l' Asthe colonial Powers have the responsibility of semblee, les Puissanc,es coloniales assument la
administering these territories. They take very responsabilite de l'administratian de ces terrimany decisions on behalf of these territories, and toires. Elles prennent beaucoup de decisions au
then they justify those dec~sions on the grounds nom de ces territoires; puis, eUes justifient ces
that the people concerned are not sufficiently decisions en pretendant que les populations inadvanced to decide things for themselves and teressees ne sont pas suffisamment avancees pour
that therefore the colonial Powers must take les prendre d'elIes-memes et qu'en consequence
decisions for them. If that responsibility, under c'est aux Puissances coloniales qu'il appartient
the Charter and otherwise, is accepted by the de decider au nom de ces populations. Si ·les
Colonial Powers in other matters, I see no rea- Puissances coloniales acceptent pour d'autres
son why it should not be accepted by them in questions cette responsabilite, en vertu de la
this case.
.
Charte ou pour d'autres raisons, je ne vois pas
pourquoi elIes ne devraient pas l'assumer dans le
cas present.
For all these reasons, my delegation opposes
Pour tous les motifs que je viens d'indiquer,
the amendment proposed by the United King- ma delegation s'oppose a l'amendement propose
dom.
.
par ~e Royaume-Uni.

20 octobre 1947

I

•

355

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pJe~iere

The PRESIDENT: In accordance with our
rules of procedure, I shall first call for a vote on
the United Kingdom amendment.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de [> anglais): Conformement notre reglement interieur, je mettrait
tout d'abord aux voix l'amendement du
Royaume-Uni .

Mr. LANG;E (Poland): I request a roll-call
vote.

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Je demande le vote par appel nominal.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
The result of the voting was as follows:
In favour: Argentina, Belgium, Bolivia, Can-

On procede au vote par appel nominal.
Les resultats du vote sont les suivants:
Votent pour: Argentine, Belgique, Bolivie,

ada, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, France,' Iceland, Luxem~
bourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Paraguay, Peru, Turkey, Union of South Africa,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Canada, Costa-Rica, Cuba, Danemark, Republique Dominicaine, Salvador, France, Islande,
Luxembourg, Pays-Bas, Nouvelle-Zelande, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Perou, Turquie, Union SudAfricaine, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Votent contre: Afghanistan, Bresil, Republique socialiste sovietique de Bielorussie, Chili,
Colombie, Tchecoslovaquie, Egypte, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Inde, Iran, Liberia, Norvege,
Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Pologne, Suede,
Republiquc socialiste sovU~tique d'Ukraine,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques,
Venezuela, Yougoslavie.
S)abstiennent: Australie, Chine, Ethiopie,
Irak, Liban, Mexique, Arabie saoudite, Siam,
Syrie, Yemen, Uruguay.
.
Absents: Equateur, Grece.

Aogainst: Afghanistan, Brazil, Byelorussian
Soviet SoCialist Republic, Chile, Colombia,
Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Guatemala, Haiti, Hon~
duras, India, Iran, Liberia, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Philippines, Poland, Swedeh, Ukrain'ian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist R~publics, Venezuela, Yugoslavia.
Abstaining: Australia, China, Ethiopia, Iraq,
Lebanon, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Siam, Syria,
Y"men, Uruguay.
Absent: Ecuador, Greece.
The amendment was rejected by 23 votes to
21, with 11 abstentions) two delegations being
absent.

a

L)amendement est rejete par 23 voix contre
21 avec 11 abstentions) deux delegations etant
absentes.

The PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed to
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l)anglais): Je met&
vote on the report of the Third Committee as, maintenant aux voix l'ensemble du rapport de
a Whole.
la Troisieme Commission.

The report was adopted by 52 votes to none
Le rapport est adopee par 52 voix contra zero,
with 3 abstentions.
'avec 3 abstentions.
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of the United Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l)anglais): J e
donne la parole "aU representant du RoyaumeUni.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom) :
I merely wish to explain the United Kingdom
delegation's vote. The United Kingdom delegation voted in favour of the adoption of the
report of the Third Committee' because, as I
had attempted to indicate, our delegation agreed
with it in principle. Of course, we shall reserve
our position as, to any future conventions, and
we shall not regard the present decision as constituting any kind of precedent for the future.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (Royaume-Uni)
Je desire simplement expliquer le vote de la delegation du RoyaumeUni. La delegation du Royaume-Uni a vote
pour l'adoption du rapport de la Troisieme
Commission parce que, comme j'avais essayede
l'indiquer, notre delegation etait d'accord sur son
principe. Bien entendu, nous reservons notre
position au sujet de toutes conventions futures
et nous ne considerons pas que la decisionactueUe constitue un precedent quelconque pour
l'avenir.

39. Utilization of the services of the Secretariat

39. Utilisation des services du Secretariat

The PRESIDENT: We shall now discuss the
draft resolution proposed by the Swedish delegation concerning the utilization of the services
of the Secretariat (document A/403).
I call upon the representative of Argentina.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
allons discuter maintenant le projet de rCsolution
propose par la Suede relatif l'utilisation des
services du Secretariat (document A/403).
Je donne la parole au representant de l' Argentine.

Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): It is always disagreeable to oppose

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de Pespa':'
gnol): Il est toujours desagreable de devoir s'op-,

something which, in principle, seems to meet
with general approval" but the Argentine dele-

(traduit de l'anglais):

a

poser a ce qui semble, en principe, recueillir
l'assentiment general; mais la delegation argen-

Ninety-seventh Plen01'Y: Meeting

356

20 October 1947

tine n'aime pas prodiguer les hommages, elle
n'aime pas emettre des votes de confiance, surtout lorsque ce vote de confiance doit etre emis
par l'Assemblee contre elle-meme; en dIet la
proposition de la delt~gation de la Suede demande au fond que nous hesitions a instituer
de nouvelles commissions qui entrainent des
depenses, ou a autoriser des commissions que
nous .avons nous-memes nommees au sein de
l'Assemblee, et qui, eUes aussi, entrament des
depenses.
.
l'Assemblee ne peut pas deleguer au Secfl~­
The Assembly cannot delegate responsibility
to the Secretariat for a number of tasks which tariat le soin de mener a bien un grand nombre
must be performed by the Assembly itself, or de taches qui sont du ressort de l'Assemblee
by the Security Council, Economic 'and Social elle-meme, clu Conseil de securite, du Conseil
Council, or Trusteeship Council, or by the com- . economique et social ou du Conseil de tutelle,
ou encore des commissions que l'AssembIee
missions appointed by the Assembly.
designe.
D'autre part, il est evident que le Secretariat
Moreover, it is obvious that the Secretariat.
must collaborate in this task, not because it is doit collaborer a ces taches non parce qu'on le
lui demande, mais parce qu'il est tenu de le
asked to do so, but because it is its duty.
faire.
En raison de ces considerations, pour ne pas
In the light of these considerations, not to
mention others, the Argentine delegation wishes parler des autres; la delegation argentine a voulu
to state that it cannot vote in favour of this monter a la tribune afin de bien preciser qu'elle
resolution because, I repeat, it does not like ne peut pas voter en faveur de cette resolution
votes of confidence and compliments, especially parce que, je le repete, elle n'aime ni les votes
in this case, when such a compliment from the de confiance, ni les hommages, plus specialement
Assembly to the Secretariat would reflect on dans le cas present, OU l'hommage que l'Assemthe Assembly itself, since we are asked to econo- bIee rendrait au Secretariat se retournerait contre
mize and make fuller use of the Secretariat's elle puisqu'on nous demande d'cpargner les deservices. Besides this reason, and more as a per- penses et d'utiliser davantage les services du
sonal matter than as the Argentine delegation's Secretariat. Outre ce motif, et il s'agit la d'une
opinion, I also could not give this vote of con- question qui m'est pe'rsonneUe plutot qu'elle ne
fidence because, as is patent and well known, r touche la delegation argentine, je ne pourrais pas
. have on a certain occasion criticized the activi- non plus emettre ce vote de confiance, parce
ties o~ some members of the Secretariat who qu'il est de notoriete publique qu'en certaine
have overstepped their limits and sometim~s even occasion j'ai critique les abus de certains memusurped the powers of the Assembly itself.
bres du Secretariat qui ont depasse les limites
permises et sont meme alles parfois jusqu'a
s'arroger des attributions appartenant a l' Assemblee elle-meme.
Voila, tout ce que je voulais dire. Pour aller
That is all I have to say. I assure you I am
not asking for anything: I merely wanted to jusqu'au fond de ma pensee, je ne demande
explain my negative vote, that is why I have rien: j'ai voulu seulement exposer les raisons de
had to impose upon the kind attention of the man vote contre la resolution, et c'est pourquoi
Assembly.
j'ai dll abuser de l'attention de l'Assemblee.
gation does not like compliments and votes of
confidence, particularly a vote of confidence
which the Assembly would be giving against itself, since in reality the Swedish delegation's
proposal asks us. to be chary of setting up new
commissions which involve expenditure, or of
authorizing the commissions which we have ourselves appointed in the Assembly because they
too involve expenditure.

The PRESIDE'NT: I call upon the representative of Sweden.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole au representant de la Suede.

Mr. HAGGLOF (Sweden): When the delegation of Sweden raised this question during. the
General Assembly, we thought that it would be
a non-controversial matter, and I still believe it
is. I think there is a ,slight misunderstanding of
our proposal. At this time, I should like to explain what our intention was.
.

M. HAGGLOF (Suede) (traduit de l'anglais):
La deIe~ation suedoise en soulevant la question
au Cours de I'Assemblee generale, pensait qu'elle
ne donnerait lieu a aucune controverse, et c'est
encore notre opinion. Je crois qu'il existe un
leger malentendu sur notre proposition. .J e voudrai~ expliquer maintenant quelle est notre intention.
Le chef de notre delegation a expose au cours
de la discussion generale qu'iL avait note de la
part des commissions et des conseils une certaine
tendance a ereer de sous-commissions et des commissions ad hoc toutes 'les fois qu'une question
technique nccessitait une enquete, au lieu de
demander au Secretariat de preter son concours
a la commission ou au conseil interesse.
11 est aise d'expliquer comment cette habitude
d'ctablir des sous-commissions en toutes occasions

The head of our delegation explained during
the general debate that he had observed a certain tendency on the part of committees and
councils to set up sub-committees and ad hoc
committees whenever a technical question de.manded investigation, instead of asking the
Secretariat to help the committee or council in
question.
It is very easy to explain how this habit of
setting up sub-committe~s on every occasion has

20 octobre 1947

f

357

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pil~niei'e

become so well established. During centuries of s'est si bien etablie. Au COUl'S de plusieurs siecles
diplomatic history, it was regarded as obvious d'histoire diplomatique on avait estime naturel
that a sub-committee had to be set up, simply d'etablir des sous-commissions, simplement parce
because in those days there was nothing like a que, dans ces temps-la, il n'y avait rieri qui respermanent. and impartial secretariat. If, one semblat a un secretariat permanent et impartial.
hundred and thirty years ago, somebody had Si, il y. a cent trente ans, quelqu'un avait deasked to consult the secretary~general of the· mande a consulter le secretaire general du
Congress of Vienna, he would have been· in-' Oongres de Vienne, on l'aurait presente a un
traduced to that charming Austrian diplomat charmant diplomate autrichien, von Gentz, qui
van Gentz, who was, it is true, secretary-general ctait, cela est vrai, secretaire general du Oongres,
of the Oongress but at the same time the inti- mais qui etait en meme temps le conseiller intime
mate counsellor of the chief Austrian delegate. du chef de la delegation autrichienne. 11 est
It is clear that in such. circumstances delegates clair que dans de telles conditions les dclegues
did not like to refer questions, even mere ques- n'aimaient pas renvoyer des questions, meme s'il
tions of investigation, to the secretariat, as there s'agissait simplement d'enquetes, au secretariat,
was no secretariat in our meaning of the word. car il n'existait pas de secretariat dans le sens ou
nous l'entendons.
The situation today is obviously quite differAujourd'hui, la situation est evidemment tout
ent. We are now happy to have a permanent and a fait differente. Nous scimmes heureux de
impartial Secretariat. We therefore thought it disposer d'un Secretariat permanent et impartial.
would be a good idea to draw the attention of Nous avons donc pense qu'il serait ban d'attirer
the various bodies of the United Nations, by l'attention des divers organismes des Nations
adopting this resolution, to the fact that very Unies, au moyen de cette resolution, sur le fait
often they can ask the Secretariat to carry out que, tres souvent, ils peuvent demander au
investigations instead of setting up ad hoc com- Secretariat de proceder a des enquetes au lieu
mittees. I think it is clear that, by asking the d'etablir des commissions ad hoc. Je crois qu'il
Secretariat to perform these services, we are not est clair qu'en demandant au Secretariat de
in any sense giving away what belongs to the s'acquitter de cette mission, nous ne faisons en
Assembly or to a Committee or Oouncil. We are aucune maniere abandon des attributions qui
simply asking the Secretariat for a technical appartiennent a l'Assemblee, a une commission
ou a un conseil. Nous demandons simplement
.service.
au Secretariat de nous rendre des services d'ordre
technique. .
J'ai donc l'honneur de deposer le projet de
I now beg to ·move this draft resolution, and
I do so for reasons which I may sum up as fol- resolution et je le fais pour des raisons que je
lows. First, by adopting this resolution and its puis resumer comme suit: tout d'abord, en adopprinciple of asking the Secretariat whenever pos- tant cette resolution et le principe cOI).sistant a
sible for its services instead of setting up sub- faire appel aux services du Secretariat, toutes
committees, we shall save time. Secondly, we les fois que c'est possible, au lieu d'etablir des
shall save money. Thirdly,if, as I still hope, this sous-commissions, nous epargnerons du temps;
resolution is adopted unanimously by the As- deuxiemement, nous epargnerons de l'argent et,
sembly, we shall pay a tribute to the Secretariat, troisiemement, si comme je persiste a l'esperer,
a tribute which I think is fully merited if we la resolution est adoptee a l'unanimite par.
look back on the two years of United Nations l'Assemblee, nous rendrons au Secretariat un
activities and think of the impartiality and high- hommage ,que je crois etre pleinement merite si
mindedness which, in our opinion, the Secretariat nons jetons un regard en arriere sur l'activite
des Nations Unies au cours des deux dernieres
has always shown.
annees et si nous pensons a l'impartialite et a
l'elCvation d'esprit dont, a notre avis, le Secrc~­
tariat a toujours fait preuve.

Mis aux voix, le projet de resolution presente
A vote was taken and the Swedish draft resolution was adopted by 45 votes to 1, with 9 , par le Suede est adopt! par 45 voix contre 1"
avec 9 abstentions.
abstentions.

40. Threats to the political independence 40. Menaces it I'independance politique
and territorial' integrity of Greece:
reports of the First and fifth Committees'
.
The PRESIDENT: I shall first call upon the
Vice-Ohairman of the First Oommittee to present the Oommittee's report (document A/409),
which has been distributed. After the presentation of the report of the First Oommittee, I shall
call upon the Rapporteur of the Fifth Oommittee to present the report of that Oommittee
( document AI 415 ), which states, in accordance
with rule 112,' the effect which the resolution

et a I'inh!grite territoriale de la Grece:
rapports des Premiere et Cinquieme
Commissions
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : J'invi-

terai d'abord le Vice-President de la Premiere
Oommission a presenter le rapport de la Oommission (document A/409) qui vous a ete
distribue, apres quoi, j'inviterai le Rapporteur
de la Oinquieme Oommission a presenter le
rapport de cette Commission (document A/415)
qui expose, conformement a l'article 112 du
reglement interieur, les repercussions qu'aurait

&

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

358

proposed by the First Committee would have
on the budget of the United Nations.
I should like to point out that the report of
the Fifth Committee does not require action by
the Assembly in connexion with the consideration of the report of the First Committee. The
report of the Fifth Committee reveals that that
Committee ,has considered the effect which the
resolution proposed by the First Committee
would have on the budget of the United Nations. rhe budgetary estimates required, in case
the Assembly approves the resolution of the
First Committee, will, appear in the supplementaryestimates for 1947 and in the budget for
1948, items, which will be considered by the
Assembly at a later date.

:11' '

1

1

I now call upon Mr. Costa du Rels, ViceChairman 'of the First Committee,
: ..:

20 October 1947

sur le budget de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies
la resolution proposee par la Premiere Commission.
J e voudrais faire remarquer que le rapport de
la Cinquieme Commission n'exige aucune action
de l' Assemblee en ce qui' concerne le rapport
de la Premiere Commission. Le rapport de la
Cinquieme Commission indique que cette Commission a examine les repercussions de la
resolution proposee par la Premiere Commission
sur le budget de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Les previsions budgetaires necessaires,
dans l'hypothese, OU l'Assemblee approuverait
la resolution de la Premiere Commission, figure-'
ront dans les previsions des depenses supplementaires pour 1947 et dans le budget de 1948, qui
seront examinees par l' Assemblee a une date
ulterieure.
Je donne maintenant la parole a M. Costa du
Rels, Vice-President de la Premiere Commission.

Mr. COSTA DU RELS (Bolivia) (translated
M. COSTA DU RELS (Bolivie) : Le Rapporteur
from French): Mr. Kaufmann, the Rapporteur de la Premiere Commission, M. Kaufmann, qui,
of the First Committee, who, as you know, is comme vous le savez, represente le Danemark
the Ambassador of Denmark to the United aupres du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis, a ete
States, has been called to Washington. As he appele a Washington. Ne pouvant donc assister
is consequently unable to be present at to-day's ala seance pleniere d'aujourd'hui, M. Kaufmann
plenary meeting, he has asked me to submit his m'a demande de presenter son rapport (docureport for him (document A/409).
ment A/409).
I have described the First Committee's work
J'ai rendu compte des travaux de la Premiere
in chronological order. You will notice that, in Commission dans l'ordre chronologique. Vous
this report, the commentary is reduced to a remarquerez que, dans ce rapport, le commenminimum. The report <;:learly shows the nature taire est reduit au minimum. Le rapport etablit
of the draft resolutions and amendments pre" clairement la nature des projetil de resolutions et
sented to the First Committee and the way in celle des amendements presentes a la Premiere
which they were received by it. It also records Commission et indique l'accueil que la Comthe voting on these resolutions and amendments, mission leur a reserve. Le rapport rend compte
and emphasizes certain delegations' attitude to aussi du vote de ces resolutions et de ces
the substance of the measures proposed in the amendements; i1 souligne l'attitude de certaines
resolution, which was adopted 'by a majority of delegations a. l' egard des mesures proposees dans
the C0111mittee.
la resolution qui a ete adoptee par la majorite de
la Commission.
This last point seems to require special menCe dernier point devait, semble-t-il, faire
tion and detailed explanation. In this connexion, 1'0bjet d'une mention speciale et d'une explicaI should like to tell the Assembly that the Chair- tion detai11ee. A ce sujet, je voudrais faire
man of the Political and Security Committee, connaitre a I'Assemblee que le President de la
Mr. Bech, has received a letter from, the secre-, Commission des questions politiques et de
tary-general of the delegation of the USSR in- securite, M. Bech, a re~u une lettre du secretaire
forming him that paragraph 7 of the First Com- general de la delegation de l'URSS, lui faisant
mittee's report does not entirely cover the point connaitre que l'inea 7 du rapport de la Premiere
in question, that is to say,that the statements Commission ne couvre pas tout a fait le point en
, made by the representative of the USSR, and question, c'est-a.-dire que les declarations faites par
supported by the representatives of the Byelo- 'le representant de l'URSS, et appuyees par les
russian SSR, the Ukrainian SSR, Czechoslovakia, representants de la RSS de Bielorussie, de la RSS
Poland, Yugoslavia, Colombia and Egypt do d'Ukraine, dela Tchecoslovaquie, de la Pologne,
not sufficiently cover this point. According to de la Yougoslavie, de la Colombie et de I'Egypte,
the letter of the secretary-general of the delega- ne couvrent pas suffisamment ce point. Ces
tion of the USSR, these States were opposed Etats se sont opposes, selon la lettre du secretaire
to the procedure adopted for votil1g on the general de la deh~gation de l'URSS, a la proUnited States resolution on the grounds that cedure adoptee pour le vote sur la proposition
that procedure was contrary to the United Na- des Etats-Unis, comme etant contraire a la
tions Charter.
.
Charte des Nations U nies.
Furthel1110re, I wish to draw the Assembly's
En outre, je tiens a attirer l'attention de
attention to an error in the English text of the l'Assemblee sur une erreur dans le texte anglais
report. On page 7, in paragraph 7, the word du rapport. A la page 7, paragraphe 7, il faut
"obligations" should be replaced by the word remplacer le mot obligations par le mot functions.
"functions".

2C1 octobre 1947

I

359

Quatre-vingf-dix-septieme seance plenhllre

You all no doubt have this report before you
and, if the President has no objection, it will
.
not be necessary to read it.

Vous avez tous sans doute ce rapport sous les
yeux et, sauf aviscontraire du President, il ne
sera pas necessaire d'en donner lecture..

The PRESIDENT: I call upon Mr. Bagge,
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais) : Je donne
la parole a M. Bagge, Rapporteur de la
Cinquieme Commission.
.

Mr. BAGGE (Sweden): Members of the Assembly have before them document A/415 entitled "Financial implications of establishment
of a General Assembly special committee on the
Greek question". I shall summarize the basie
points.
In accordance with the request of the President of the General Assembly in this communication dated 18 October 1947 (document A/C.
5/170), the Fifth Committee gave priority on
the agenda of its seventieth meeting, on 18
October 1947, to the financial implications of
the establishment of a General Assembly special
committee on the Greek question (document
A/C.5/172).

M. BAGGE (Suede) (traduit de l'anglais):
Vous avez sous les yeux le document A/41'5
intitule "Incidences financieres de la creation
d'une commission speciale de l'AssembIee generale pour la question grecque". Je vais en
resumer les points essentiels.
Conformement a la demande formulee par
le President de l' Assemblee generale dans sa
communication en date du 18 octobre 1947
(document A/C.5/170), 'la Cinquieme Commission a donne la priorite, parmi les questions
inscrites a l'ordre du jour de sa soixante-dixieme
seance, tenue le 18 octobre 1947, aux incidences
financieres de la creation d'une commission
speciale de 1'Assemblee generale pour la question
grecque (document A/C.5/172).
In accordance with the terms of rule 112 of" • Conformement aux dispositions de 1'article
the provisional rules of procedure of the Gen- 112 du reglement interieur provisoire de l'Assemeral Assembly, this report of the Fifth Commit- blee generale, ce rapport de la Cinquieme Comtee does not constitute an appropriation; the mission ne comporte pas d'allocation de credit;
Committee· is merely transmitting information la Commission ne fait que transmettre a
to the General Assembly concerning the effect l'AssembIee generale des renseignements concerof the proposal upon the budget of the United nant les repercussions de la proposition sur le
Nations. The Fifth Committee agreed that, if budget de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies. La
the proposal of the First Committee for the es- Cinquieme Commission a decide que si l'Astablishment of such a special committee were to sembIee generale devait donner une suite
be acted upon favourably by the General As- favorable a la proposition de la Premiere Com- .
sembly, the lump sum estimate approved by the mission visant a la creation de la commission
Fifth Committee would be referred to the Ad- speciale dont il s'agit, les previsions d'ensemble
visory Committee on Administrative and Budget- des depenses par la Cinquieme Commission
ary Questions, with appropriate supporting de- seraient renvoyees a la Commission consultative
tails supplied by the Secretary-General, for study pour les questions administratives et budgetaires,
and report to the Fifth Committee· before avec, a l'appui, des details appropries fournis
par le Secretaire general aiin que ladite Comamounts for specific items were voted.
mission les etudie et fasse rapport ala Cinquieme
Commission avant que 1'on ne passe au vote sur
les sommes a allouer a chaque article particulier.
The total estimate of the Secretary-General,
Le montant total des previsions presentees par
together with 193,200 dollars added for travel le Secretaire general, plus une somine de 193.200
and subsistence of one representative and one dollars pour frais de voyage et d'entretien d'un
alternate for each Member State was approved representant et d'un representant suppleant de
by the Committee by thirty-two votes to six, chaque Etat Membre, a ete approuve par la
with seven abstentions. The Fifth Committee Commission par trente·deux voix contre six
therefore has the honour to state to the General avec sept abstentions. La Cinquieme CommisAssembly that it believes the effect of the pro- sion a done l'honneur de porter ala connaissance
posal concerning the establishment of a General de l'Assemblee generale que l'adoption de la
Assembly special committee on the Greek ques- proposition visant acreel' unecommission speciale
tion to be 72,840 dollars in 1947 and 538,600 de 1'Assemb16e generale pour la question grecque
entrainerait, a, son avis, une depense de 72.840
dollars in 1948, a total of 611,440 dollars.
dollars pour l'annee 1947 et de 538.600 dollars
pour l'annee 1948, soit au total 611.440 dollars.
Nous signalons que si l' Assemblee, generale
Attention is called to 'the fact that, if the
General Assembly approves the report made by .approuve le rapport de, la Cinquieme Commisthe Fifth Committee, it will be necessary to add sion, il sera ne~essaire d'ajouter a la resolution
to the resolution of the First Committee the de la Premiere Commission le passage suivant:
following provision: "Authorizes the Secretary- "Autorise le Secretaire general a rembourser les
General to reimburse travel and subsistence ex- frais de voyage et d'entretien d'un representant
penses of a representative and an alternate repre~ et d'un representant. suppIeant de chacun des
sentative of each Government to be represented Gouvernements representes a la commission
on the special committee on such basis and in speciale sur les bases et de la maniere qu'il
such form as he may determine most appropriate estimera convenir le mieux aux circonstances."
in the circumstances."
. .
i

Ninety~seventh Plenary Meeting

20 October 1947

360

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de lJanglais): Je
donne la parole au representant de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietique.

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Republiques 50cialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Vous
etes en train d'examiner un projet de resolution
sur la question grecque, lequel a ete adopte par
la Premiere Commission, a la majorite des voix,
avec un nombre considerable d'abstentions et
alors qu'un certain nombre de delegations ont
vote contre ce projet.
La delegation de l'Union des Republiques
The delegation of the Union of Socialist Soviet
Republics cannot agree to the proposals sub- socialistes sovietiques ne peut accepter les propomitted for your consideration on behalf of the sitions qui ont ete soumises a votre examen au
majority of the First Committee. It considers nom de la majorite de la Premiere Commission;
these propo.sals wrong, absolutely unwarranted elIe considere que ces propositions sont injustiand therefore quite unsuitable for settling the fiees; depourvues de tout fondement et que, par
Greek question and the relations which have consequent, eUes ne conviennent pas du tout
developed between Greece, on the one hand, and pour regler la question grecque ainsi que les
, its three northern neighbours, Yugoslavia, Bul- rapports qui se sont crees entre la Grece, d'une
part, et ses trois voisines du nord, la Yougslagaria and Albania, on the other.
vie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie, d'autre part.
The Greek question has already a history o{ ~ La question grecque a deja son histoire a 1'01'its own in the United Nations. Perhaps it may ganisation des Nations Unies. 11 n'est peut-etre
not be irrelevant to recall that, on 21 January pas inutile de rappeler que le 21 janvier 1945,
1946, the delegation of the USSR was instructed la delegation de l'URSS, sur les instructions de
by its Government to ask the Security Council . son Gouvernement, a propose au Conseil de
to consider the situation which had arisen in securite d'examiner la situation qui s'etait creee
Greece and tq take measures to remedy it in en Grece, et de prendre des mesures, conformeaccordance with Article 35 of the Charter of ment a l'Article 35 de la Charte des Nations
Unies, pour mettre fin a cette situation.
,the United Nations.
How and why did the Government of the , Comment et pourquoi le Gouvernement de
'USSR call the Security Council's attention to l'URSS a-toil, a l'epoque, attire l'attention du
the Greek question at that time? The United Conseil de securite sur la question grecque? A
Kingdom representative in the Security Council l'epoque, le representant du Gouvernement britried at the time to present the position in such tannique au Conseil desecurite a tente de pre- '
away as to suggest that, in raising the question senter l'affaire comme si, en soulevant devant le
of the Greek situation in the Security Council, Conseil de securite la question de la situation
the Government of the USSR was pursuing existant en Grece, le Gouvernement de l'URSS
other ends. At least, at the Council meeting on poursuivait d'autres desseins, C'est du moins ce
'1 February 1946, Mr. Bevin said outright: que M. Bevin a declare ouvertement a la seance
" . . . Whenever the problem of Greece has' du Conseil de securite du 1er £evrier 1946 :
arisen in any negotiations with the USSR, it cc. • • chaque fois que le probleme grec a ete
has always come about when we have been souleve dans des negociations avec l'URSS ce fut
discussing Roumania or Bulgaria or Poland", toujours au cours de discussions relativ.es a la
and further: ".. ~ there has always been a Roumanie, a la Bulgarie ou a la Pologne." Et
counter-attack 'on Great Britain whenever we plus loin: ". . . la Grande-Bretagne a ete en
have raised a matter affecting some other part toute occasion contre-attaquee, lorsqu'elle a voulu
of Europe. m
soulever une question interessant quelque autre
partie de l'Europe. w
Airisi, l'homme qui dirige la politique exteThus, the leader of British foreign policy attempted to depict the whole of this Greek ques- rieure britannique tentait de presenter toute cette
tion as a manoeuvre by the USSR and as a affaire grecque comme une manceuvre de l'URSS,
counter-attack against Great Britain to make comme une contre-attaque dirigee contre la
it appear that in itself the Greek question was Grande-Bretagne; il voulait presenter la chose
of no importance. That, of course, is completely' comme si la question grecque n'avait pas de
unfounded. There were no grounds whatever signification par elle-meme. Voila que est evifor such statements, since there was no question demment depourvu de tout fondement. De telles
then any more than there is a question now of declarations ne reposaient sur rien. En realite,
counter-attacks against Great Britain or the il ne s'agissait alors nullement de contre-attaques
United States of America. The question has its contre la Grande-Bretagne ou contre les Etatsown. independent and extremely grave signifi- Unis d'Amerique, pas plus qu'il n'est question
cance. It arose from the internal situation of aujourd'hui, dans cette affaire, de contre-attaques
Greece, which was a source of arpdety for the contre la Grande-Bretagne ou contre les Etatspeace and security of the nations and, primarily, urns d'Amerique. Cette affaire a une significaMr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): , You
have before you a draft resolution on the Greek
question, passed in the First Committee by a
majority vote, with a substantial group of delegations abstaining and sever~l voting against.

1 See Official Records of thtl Security Council, First
1 Voir lea Proces-verbaux officiels du' Conseil de secuYear, First Series, No. I, pages 79 and 80.
rittf, Premi~re Ann~e, Premiere Serie, pages 79 et 80.
'
I

S"

20 octobre 1947

361

for the fate of the three northern neighbours of
Greece: Yugoslavia, Bl,llgaria and Albania. Indeed, as early as July 1945, in connexion with
the Yalta declaration 0n liberated Europe, the
Government of the USSR submitted a memorandum at the Berlin Conference which described
the situation in Gre~ce· as one in which there
was no proper order, where laws were not respected, where a violent campaign of terror was
being waged against the democratic elements
who, as everybody knows, bore the mam brunt
of the struggle against the German forces of occupation in Europe and against the Hitlerite
hordes in Greece.

The Government of the USSR submitted another memorandum on the situation in Greece
to the first session of the' Council. of Foreign
Ministers in London. In this memorandum, it
pointed out that the Internal situation of the
country had reached a pitch of tension which
could be fraught with grave consequences for
both the Greek people and the peace and security of the neighbouring countries. But even
then this warning met with no response from
the United Kingdom and the United States of
America. However, the constantly deteriorating
political situation in Greece induced the Government of the USSR to raise the Greek question once more at the meeting of the three
Foreign Ministers in December 1945 in Moscow.. At that time, the question of the presence
of British forces in Greece had already assumed
great'importance.
In raising the question of the Greek situation
in the Security Council in January 1946,1 the
Government of the USSR based its attitude principally on the fact that the presence of British
forces in Greece had become a means of exerting pressure on the internal political situation,
a circumstance frequently exploited by Greek
reactionary elements against the democratic
forces of the country. Hence the proposal about
the need to .withdraw the British forces from
Greece, since this would certainly have introduced the peace and order that was needed in
the Greek situation.
The proposal was vehemently opposed at that
time by the British Government which claimed
that the British forces had remained in Greece
to restore order. However, the British have been
restoring order in Greece for two years past and
yet there is still no order. The restoration of
order in Greece is first and foremost the business of the Greeks themselves. They could handle
their own internal affairs even without the help
of foreign· troops. Moreover, the Greek people
ask for no such assistance. It is the Greek Government which is demanding and appealing for
help in order to maintain itself in power against
the heroic resistance of the overwhelming ma-

See

1
Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, First Series, Supplement No. 1, Annex 3, pages 73
and 74.
.

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance plenU~re

tion qui lui est propre et qui est tres grande.
Elle tient a la situation interieure de la Grece,
laquelle est devenue une source d'inquietude
pour la paix et la securite des peuples et en
premier lieu, pour l'avenir des trois voisins
septe[).trionaux de la' Grece:' la Yougoslavie, la
Bulgarie et l'Albanie. Or, des juillet 1945, a la
suite de la declaration de Yalta sur l'Europe liberee, le Gouvemement de l'URSS avait sounUs a
la Conference de Berlin un memorandum dans'
lequel il definissait' la situation de la Grece
comme celle d'un pays ou regnait le desordrc,
au les lois n'etaient pas respectees, ou la terreur
s'exerc;ait contre·les elements democratiques, lesguds on le sait, avaient porte le fardeau principal de la lutte contre les occupants allemands en
Europe et contre les hordes hitleriennes en Grece.
Au cours de la premiere session du Conseil des
Ministres des AfIaires etrangeres a Londres, le
Gouvernement de l'URSS a presente un nouveau memorandum sur la situation de la Grece,
dans lequel il signalait la grave tension qui se
manifestait dans ce pays et qui pouvait entratncr
des suites funestes taut pour le peuple grec que
pour la paix et la securite des pays voisins de la
Grece. Mais meme alors le Royaume-Unit et
les Etats-Unis d'Amerique n'ont pas prete attention a cet avertissement. Cependant, la situation
politique toujours plus critique de la Grece incitait le Gouvernement de l'URSS a soulever a
nouveau la question grecque lors de la reunion
des trois Ministres des Affaires etrangeres qui eut
lieu a Moscou en decembre 1945, au moment
ou la question du maintien des troupes britanniques en Grcce se posait dans toute son ampleur.
Si en janvier 1946 le Gouvernement de
l'URSS a souleve devant le Conseil de securite la
question de la situation de la Grecet, c'est surtout parce que la presence des troupes britanniques en Grece etait devenue un mayen de
pression politique et que les reactionnaires grecs
s'en servaient frequemment contre les forces democratiques du pays. De la, la proposition tendant au retrait des troupes britanniques de
Grece, ce qui aurait sans nul. doute ramene le
calme et l'ordre necessaires dans la vie de ce
pays.
A cette proposition, le Gouvernement britannique de l'epoque a manifeste la plus vive hostilite. Il a essaye de prouver que les troupes
britanniques restaient en Grece pour y retablir
l'ordre. Void deux ans que les Britanniques retablissent l'ordre en Grece, mais c'est toujours le
desordre qfli y regne. Le retablissement de 1'01'c1re en Grece est, en premier lieu, l'affaire des
Grecs eux-memes. Le peuple grec pourrait regIer
lui-meme ses affaires interieures, sans l'aide de
troupes etrangeres. D'ailleurs, le peuple grec ne
demande pas cette aide. C'est le Gouv~rnement
grec qui demande, qu~ implore cette ald~ pour
se maintenir au pouvOlr en face de.la reSlstance
'Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de sOcurite, Premiere Annce, Premiere Serie, Supplement No 1,
Annexe 3, pages 73 et 74.

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

362

20 October 1947

heroique de l'ecrasante majorite du peuplegrec,
et par consequent pour se maintenir au pouvoir
contre la volonte du peuple.
Les representants du Gouvernement TsaldarisThe representatives of the Tsaldaris-Sophoulis
Sophoulis
veulent nous faire croire que leur GouGovernment would 1ike to assure us that their
Government is a representative one and enjoys vemement est un gouvernement representatif,
the confidence of the Greek people. They in- investi de la confiance du peuple grec; ils invoke the results of the March 1946 elections, voquent les resultats des elections de mars 1946,
which brought Mr. Tsaldaris and his friends, grace auxquel~es MM. Tsaldaris et Cie sont
venus au pouvoir. I
into power.

jority of the Greek people, to maintain itself in
power, that is, against the will of the people.

I do not wish to dwell particularly on this
question, but I raise it now because it was discussed in the First Committee. I must point out
on this subiect that the present Prime Minister
of Greece, Mr. Sophoulis, declared at the time,
in March 1946, on the eve of the elections, that
"according to information from every part of
Greece, it was only the monarchists who were
free to put forward candidates and express their
opinions". Is it not a fact that the then Deputy
Prime Ministers, Kaphandaris and Tsouderos,
resigned because they could not and would not
put up with the electoral excesses and that
Kaphandaris declared: "We are rapidly approaching the point where th~ elections are
becoming a farce, and this will involve serious
danger ... ?" These statements were made pub.
lidy. And by whom? By the former and present
Prime Minister of Greece, Mr. Sophoulis, and
his two deputies, Kaphandaris and Tsouderos.
. Did not the then Minister of the Interior,
Havinis, say of the elections ill the Epirus, that
they were "nothing but the nomination of Zervas candidates by means of violence and terror"?
Again, was it not Sophoulis who stated, according to the Estia of 7 September 1946,
that is, a week after the puppet show of the
plebiscite, that "only people with a bad conscience can talk of a plebiscite, for there was no
plebiscite in Greece"-these are the words of
Sophoulis-"but only a manoeuvre planned
beforehand?"
Did not the British Press, or at least certain
organs of the British Press, including The Times
of London, state that "impartial observers doubt
the genuineness of the plebiscite~'; and is it not a
fact that three British eye-witnesses, Messrs.
Dodds, Tiffany and SoIley, members of the
Executive Committee of the British League for
Greek Democracy and Members of Parliament,
quote in their book The Tragedy of Greece innumerable instances of crude falsification of the
1946 elections in Greece?
.The book includes the following passage: 1

Je ne voudrais pas m'arreter specialement a
cette question, mais je l'aborde parce qu'elle a
ete discutee au sein de la Premiere Commission.
Je dois dire, a cc propos, que c'est precisement
le Premier Ministre ac~uel, M. Sophoulis, qui declarait en mars 1946, a la veille des elections:
"ll ressort des renseignements recueillis dans
toutes les parties de la Grece que personne en .
dehors des monarchistes n'a eu la liberte de presenter des candidats ni cel1e d'exprimer son opinion." Les Vice-presidents du Consei1 d'alors,
Kaphandaris et Tsouderos, n'ont-ils pas demis·
sionne alors Parce qu'ils ne pouvaient pas se
resigner aces abus electoraux et Kaphandaris,
n'a-t-il pas declare alors: "Nous sommes entralnes vel'S une situation ou ces elections ne seront
qu'une parodie, et ce1a creera un grave danger ..."? Cette declaration a ete faite publiquement. Et par qui? Par M. Sophoulis, Premier
Ministre d'alors et Premier Ministre actuel de
la Grece, ainsi que par ses deux adjoints, Kaphandaris et Tsouderos.
M. Havinis qui etait alors Ministre de I'Interieur, n'a-t-il pas declare au sujet des elections
dans l'Epire qu'el1es "consistaient simplement a
se servir de la violence et de la terreur, pour
designer les candidats de Zervas"?
M. Sophoulis n'a·t-il pas declare d'autre part,
ainsi que l'a rapporte le journal Estia le 7 septembre 1946, c'est-a-dire une semaine apres la
comedie du plebiscite, qu' "il faut vraiment etre
de mauvaise foi pour pader de plebiscite, car ce
n'est pas un plebiscite qui a eu lieu en Grece,
mais urie machination preparee a l' avance";
voila ce qu'a dit M. Sophoulis.
Les organes de la presse britannique, au moins
certains journaux et notamment le Times de
Londres, n'ont-ils pas affirme que "les observateurs impartiaux doutent de la regularite du
plebiscite"? Trois temoins oculaires britanniques,
MM. Dodds, Tiffany et Solley, membres du Comite executif de la Ligue britanniqlle pour la
democratie en Grece et membres du Parlement
britannique, I)'ont-iIs pas reIeve dans leur livre
intituIe La TragMie de la Grece de nombreux
faits indiquant que les elections qui avaient eu
lieu en Grece en 1946 avaient ete fiPsifiees?
Ce livre contient notamment le passage sui·
vane..

"We Socialists in Greece are compromised by
his (Bevin's) policy, for the people say to us:
'If you belong to Bevin's party we cannot join,
you' and they turn more to the Left. The victory
of the British Labour Party in the general elec·

"Nous, socialistes grecs, nous sommes compromis par sa politique (c'est-a-dire par la politique
de Bevin) car les gens nous disent: 'Si vous appartenez au parti de Bevin, nous ne pouvons pas
vous suivre.' Et iIs se rallient aux partis qui

1 This and subsequent quotations from The, Tragedy of
Greece are re.tran81at~d from the Russian.

1 Les citations qui 8uivent de La TragJdie de' la Grdc8
ont 6t6 retraduites du russe.

p
20 octobre 1947

363

tions was a day of jubilation to all of us in
Greece. But slowly, day by day, we have been
disappointed. The presence of British troops has
led to a deterioration of the· attitude of people
in Greece towards Great Britain and the
friendly feelings of the last two hundred years
are now at their lowest ebb."
This book, furthermore, contains the following passage: "Speaking of the elections, Prime
Minister Sophoulis said: 'Mr. Bevin knew from
the information that I gave him that the election would result in a victory for the extreme
Right. I also told him that the first action the
extreme Right would take would be to restore
the monarchy.' Throughout our visit we found
that, with the exception of the extreme Right
wing, everybody said that the election was carried through by me~ns of deceit, treachery, terrorism, assassination and every possible form of
corrupt practice."
In their book, The Tragedy of Greece, Dodds,
Tiffany and Solley cite an important conversation, also with the then Prime Minister of
Greece, Sophoulis, who as you know, is the
presen~ head of the Greek Government, and
who might profitably be reminded of this conversation.
The three authors quote Sophoulis as saying
that there ~vas an agreement between him and
Bevin to hold a plebiscite in two years time, in
1948, as otherwise reaction would triumph and
.
there would be "a reactionary State".
"'I hope', said Sophoulis-and I am now
quoting from the book of the three members of
the British Parliament-'that Mr. Bevin, who is
known to be a man of honour, will keep his
word and insist on the second part of the programme: the date fixed for the plebiscite. If
not, I fear there may be a danger of Civil war.
I should like to tell Bevin, if he remembers me
and loves Greece, that he must keep to the agreement as regards the plebiscite'." Those were the
words of Sophoulis. ;However, the agreement was
not fulfilled..
That is the history of the "elections" upon
which the present Greek G6vernment of Sophoulis and Tsaldaris bases its claim to be a
representative Government enjoying the confidence and support of the people. That is the
'history of those electiorls in which, according to
the report of the Greek Minister of the Interior,
1,117,000 out of 2,211 ,000 voters voted, and
1,094,000, that is, almost 50 percent of the
. voters abstained from voting, that is to say, boycotted the elections.
Such is the outcome of the order brought
about in Greece by British military authorities
with the help of their armed forces.
It is obvious that· the experience of these
"democratic" elections in Greece, under the
supervision of foreign forces, is now inspiring
Mr. Marshall with some ideas on Korea. It will
be seen from Mr. Austin's letter. to Mr. Trygve

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance plc~niere

sont plus a gauche. La victoire remportee au
cours des elections generales par le parti travailliste britannique a ete un jour d'allegresse
pour nous tous en Grece. Mais petit a petit noUs
·avons eU de<;us. A cause de la presence des
troupes britanniques, les bonnes dispositions du
peuple grec a. l'egard du Royaume-Uni ont disparu et les sentiments d'amitie deux fois centenaires se sont bien refroidis."
Ce livre contient d'autre part le passage suivant: "En parlant des elections, le Premier Ministre Sophoulis a dit: 'M. Bevin savait, grace
aux informations que je lui avais fournies, que
les extremistes de droite triompheraient a. la
suite des elections. Je lui ai dit egalement que
le premier soin des extrcmist~s de droite serait de
retablir la monarchie.' Pendant notre voyages
nous avons constate que tous, a l'exception des
extremistes de droite, affilmaient que ceux qui
ont organise les elections ont eu recours a. la
fraude, la trahison, la terreur, au meurtre et
a la corruption sous toutes ses formes."
Dans leur livre La TragMie de la Crece MM.
Dodds, Tiffany et SoIley reproduisent une conversation importante qu'ils ont eue avec ce meme
M. Sophoulis; ce1ui-ci, qui etait alors Premier
Ministre de la Grece et qui, on le sait, dirige
encore maintenant le Gouvernement grec, ferait
bien de se rappeler cette conversation.
Les trois auteurs affirment, en citant les paroles de Sophoulis, qu'il s'etait entendu avec Bevin pour proceder au plebiscite dans un delai de
deux ans, c'est-a-dire en 1948, car autrement la
reaction triompherait et la Grece deviendrait un
"Etat reactionnaire".
."J'espere", disait Sophoulis - et je cite ici le
livrc des trois parlementaires britanniques-"que
M. Bevin, qu'on considere comme un homme
'd'honneur, tiendra parole et qu'il insistera pour
qu'on applique la deuxieme partie du programme, c'est-a.-dire celle qui se rapporte a. la date
du plebiscite. Sinon je redoute une guerre civile.
Je voudrais vous demander de dire a. Bevin que,
s'il se souvient de moi et s'il aime la Grece, il
doit respecter l'accord relatif au plebiscite."
Ainsi, s'exprimait Sophoulis; pourtant cet accord
n'a pas ete respecte.
Tel est l'historique de ces "elections" clont
le Gouvernement grec actuel Sophoulis-Tsaldaris
invoque le verdict pour tenter de nous persuadeI'
qu'il est un gouvernement representatif et qu'il
jouit de la confiance et de l'appui des masses
populaires. Tel est l'historique de ces elections
auxqueIles, d'apres un rapport du Ministere de
I'Interieur grec, ont participe 1.117.000 per~
sonnes sur les 2.211.000 electeurs inscrits,alors
que 1.094.000·· personnes, c'est-a-dire pres de
50 pour 100 des electeurs, se ~ont abstenus, c'esta-~ire ont boycotte ces elections.
Voila les resultats de l'ordre que les autorites
militaires britanniques ont instaure en Grece,
avec l'appui de leurs forces armees.
L'experience acquise au cours de~ elections
"democratiques" en Grece, effectuees sous la
surveillance des troupes etangeres, semble inspirer
M. Marshall lorsqu'il s'agit de la Coree.En
effet, il ressort de la lettre adressee par M. Austin

a

a

Ninety-sevdnth Plenary Meeting

364

Lie on I<orea1 that the Government of the
United States of America proposes to withdraw
United States troops from Korea after the elections and the formation of a Korean national
Government. In other words, the United States
Government intends to organize elections in
Korea on the Greek model, under cover of its
armed forces. Truly, bad examples are contagious.

:",

20 October 1947

a M. Trygve Lie au sujet de la Coree que le
1

Gouvernement des Etats-Unis d'Amerique propose de retirer les troupes americaines de Coree
aussitot apres les elections dans ce pays et la
formation d'un Gouvernement national coreen.
Autrement dit, le Gouvernement americain se
propose d'organiser les elections en Coree suivant
l'exemple grec, c'est-a-dire sous la protection de
ses forces armees. Les mauvais exemples sont
vraiment contagieux.
Je'reviens a la question grecque: Comment
le representant de la Grece peut-il, dans tes
conditions, se referer imperturbablement ;\ ces
pretendues elections pour prouver la Iegitimite
et le caractere democratique du Gouvernement
grec actuel?
En revenant a l'historique de la question
grecque, je dois vous rappeler la declaration que
M. Bevin a faite au Conseil de securite en 1946:

I am speaking of Greece again. How can the
Grcek representative in such circumstances, now
with a straight face invoke these so-called
elections to prove the constitutional and democratic character of the present Greek Government?
Returning to the history of the Greek question,
let me remind you that, in 1946, Mr. Bevin
made the following statement in the Security
Council:
"In so far as Greece is concerned, as soon as
we have carried out our obligations that we
have undertaken with the Greek Government,
those troops will b~ withdrawn and we shall not
menace or cause any trouble to any other nation."2
Although the precise nature of these obligations was not explained, nevertheless, the USSR
delegation to the Security Council, in view of
this declaration, stated that, as it was actuated
by a desire for co-operation, it would, for its
part, agree to the discussion of the Greek question being closed with an informal statement by
the President, and to the question being regarded
as exhausted at that time without a formal resolution. The USSR delegation was prepared to
agree to the whole matter being confined to an
informal statement by the President of the Security Council-the Australian representative,
Mr. Makin, was in the Chair at the time-that,
in consideration of the British Government's
promise to withdraw its forces from Greece at
the earliest possible date, the subject could be
considered closed at that meeting. It was more
or less in this spirit that the discussion of the
Greek question ended at that time.
Nearly two years have now passed and the
British forces are still in Greece. Moreover, they
have been supplemented by American military
personnel: instructors, experts and others. As
you all know, and I think it unnecessary to
waste time proving the point, the situation in
Greece has not only not improved, but has still
further deteriorated. The civil war in Greece is
at its height.
Let me draw the attention of the General Assembly to a letter from the central committee 6f
the Greek National Solidarity Movement sent
to the United Nations Secretariat in August of
this year. This document is a cry from the tortured hearts of the Greek patriots. It is an appeal from these tormented fighters for their
country's independence and freedom, an appeal asking the United Nations to protect them
from the terror and the savage reprisals directed

J e dois attirer l'attention de l'AssembIee
generale sur la lettre que le Comite central de
la "Solidarite nationale grecque" a adressee au
Secretariat de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
au mois d'aout dernier. Ce document constitue
un appel dechirant de la part des patriotes grecs.
C'est un appe1 decombattants extenues, luttant
pour l'independance et la liberte de leur pays,
adresse a I'Organisation des Nations Unies pour
lui demander protection contre la terreur et la

See document A/C.l/218.
Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, First Series, No. 1, page 86.

I Voir document A/C.l/218.
• Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de slcurill, Premi~re Annee, Premi~re S6rie, No 1, pa6C 86.

1

t See

."En ce ,qui concerne la Grece, aussitot que
nous aurons execute les obligations que no.us
avons contractees envers le Gouvernement helUnique, nos troupes seront retirees; nous ne
menacerons aucune autre nation, et ne lui
occasionnerons aucune difficulte 2."
Bien qu'on n'ait pas precise au juste quels
etaient ces engagements, la delegation de l'URSS
a pris en consideration cette declaration et a
annonce a son tour au Conseil de securite que,
fidele ason desir de collaboration, elle consentait
a ce que la discussion de la question grecque £Ut
terminee par une declaration non officielle du
President et a ce qu'on la considerat comme
reglee sans qu'aucune resolution formelle ne £Ut
prise. La delegation de I'URSS a estime possible
d'accepter qu'on se bornat a une declaration non
officielle du President du Conseil de securite a cette epoque c'etait le represent.ant de l' Aus~
tralie, M. Makin - et qu'il £O.t dit dans cette
declaration que, compte tenu de la promesse du
Gouvernement britannique de retirer ses troupes
du territoire de la Grece dans le plus breI delai,
on considerait cette question comme reg16e. C'est
ainsi, grosso modo J que s'est terrnine, a l'epoque,
l'examen de la question grecque.
Pres de deux ans se sont ecoules depuis. Les
tro1,lpes britanniques continuent stationner en
Grece. En outre des instructeurs militaires et
des experts americains de toute sorte sont venus
les rejoindre. Loin de s'ameliorer, la situatio~
en Grece a empire, nous le savons tous, et je
crois qu'il et inutile de perdre du temps a le
demontrer. La guerre civile sevit en Grece.

a

20 QctQbre 1947

365

Quafre~vin9f~dix-sepfieme seance plenfere

.against the best sons of the Greek people. The repression barbare qui frappent les meillcurs
central committee of the Greek National Solidar- d'entre les Grccs. Le comite central de la
ity Movement declares that the Greek Govern- Solidarite nationale grecque af)1rme que le
ment recently ·arrested 25,000 persons and de- Gouvernement grec a arrete recemment 25.000
ported them to the rocky desert islands of the personncs qui ont ete deportees dans les iles
Aegean Sea, where there were already 7,000 rocheuses et desertes de la" mer Egee all se
exiles. The island of Ikaria and other islands t~ouva.ient. ~eja 7.000 autres dcportes. I'lle
such as LemllOs and Anaphi are full of exiles. d Ikana. amSl que celles de Lemnos et d'Anaphi
Those arrested are thrown on the bare rocks sont plemes de deportes. Les detcnus sont jetes .
of Psitalia, where they are doomed to perish of sur les roches desertes de Psitalia all Hs sont
starvation.
condamnes a mourir de faim.
It. can be inferred from this document that in
I1 rGssort de ce document que le total des
all there are in Greece, up to 50,000 people in detenus et des deportes atteint en Grece le chiffre
prison or in exile, half of whom have been de 50.000 environ. La maitied'entre eux
awaiting trial for more than two years. Prisoners attendent leur jugement depuis plus de deux ans.
. are frequently murdered by bandits. of the Right, Souvent .des bandits appartenant a la droite
.as has happened in Nigteta and a number of assassinentles detenus, comme cela s'est produit
towns in Crete and Macedonia.
a Nigreta et dans un certain nombre de villes
en Crete et en Macedoine.
The central committee's document tells of
Dans ce document, le Comite central mensystematic mass shootings, carried out in execu- tionne les executions en masse qui ont lieu systion of sentences passed by the military tribunals, tematiquen1ent ala suite des sentences prononcees
and asks the United Nations to intervene in the par·les tribunaux militaires et il demande. a
name of humanity.
l'Organisation des Nations Unies d'intervenir au
nom de l'humanite.
We cannot ignore this letter, which testifies '
On ne peut passer sous silence cette lettre qui
to the. indescribable horrors which are taking temoigne des atrocitcs indicibles qui ont lieu en
place in Greece under the present political Grece sous le regime politique actue!.
regime.
.
In the face of these facts, hQw could the
Comment dans ces conditions le representant
Greek representative in the First Committee de la Grece a la Premiere Commission a-t-il eu
, have the audacity to talk of Greece as a model l'audace d'affirmer que la Grece etait un pays
of democracy and as a country where democracy democratique modele, que la democratie y
flourishes? There you have a democracy: the fleurissait? Cette democratie la voila: cc sont
50,000 exiles and Greek patriots being systema- les 50.000 deportes, ce sont les patriotes grecs
tically exterminated who are referred to by the que 1'on decime d'une fa~on systematique et dont
central committee of the Greek National Solidar- parle le Comite central de la Solidarite nationale
grecque.
ity Movement.
En ce qui concerne la politique exterieure, la
The extern"al political situation of Greece is
growing more and more confused, and it must situation de la Grece· devient de plus en plus
be said quite frankly that it is the United States confuse et, i1 faut le dire ouvertement, ce sont les
of America and tne United Kingdom, the domin- Etats-Unis d'Amerique et le Royaume-Uni qui
ant factors in Greek politics, which bear the en portent la responsabilite principale,' car ces
main responsibility. We are again having to pays jouent un role essentiel dans la politique·
discuss the Greek question, on the initiative of grccque. Sur l'initiative du Gouvernement des
the United States Government, but not in the Etats-Unis, nous avons a nous occuper une fois
form in which it was originally raised in the de. plus de la question grecque. Mais, cette
Security Council by the Government, of the fois-ci, cette question nous a ete presentee sous
USSR. The· question is being presented in a un autre aspect que lorsqu'elle avait ete soumise
completely false and distorted form, I am sorry au Conseil de securite par le Gouvernement de
l'URSS. Malheureusement la question grecque
to say.
nous a ete presentee maintenant sous .un aspect
absolument deforme.
Malgre les promesses faites par le GouverneIn spite of the British Government's promises
ment
britannique de retirer ses troupes de la
to withdraw its forces f~om ,Greece as soon as
it had carried out its obligations, those forces Grece .des que le Royaume~ Uni aurait rempli·
are still in Greece, and the reference to Great ses obligations, ces troupes restent toujours en
Britain's obligations to Greece has proved to be Grece et quand il parle d'obligations assumees
nothing but a worthless bill of exchange which a l'eg~rd de la Grece, le Gouvemement britanthe drawee neither intended nor intends to nique ne fait que signer un billet a ordre qu'il
n'a nullement l'intention d'honorer.
honour.
~ntre temps, l'offensive menee contre les forces
Meanwhile, the campaign against democracy
en Gn~ce continue ase developpc r .
democratiques
in Greece has gained strength. The situation in
La
situation
a
l'interieur du pays est devenue
the country has reached a point of extreme
extremement
tendue.
M. Porter, l'ancien 'chef
tension. The fonner head of the United States
mission to Greece, Mr. Porter, recently stated de la mission americaine en Grece, a recemment

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

366 I

public1i that this tension was characterized by
a "deep sense of national hopelessness". The
reason, he declared, was that power was in the
hands of "a small mercantile and banking cabal
. . . deter,mined above all to protect its financial
prerogatives, at whatever expense to the economic health of the country". In this public
statement by an authoritative. American' on the
situation in Greece, we can find some indication
of the skill with which the British exploit these
characteristics of the present Greek Government
in their own interests. On this subject, let me
quote a further passage from Mr. ,Porter's article. He is speaking of British policy in Greece:

"The British formula in such cases was always collaboration with the native ruling classes,
buying their support by confirming them in
their power to exploit the masses, and relying
'on them to hold the people down with gendarmerie and whips." Mr. Porter's description, one
must certainly aamit, is not lacking in forcefulness. I shall not comment on his description;
it is enough, I think, to make it known and
leave denials or amendments to the interested
parties.
Such is British policy in Greece. It is a policy
which aims at destroying the democratic movement and strengthening the reactionary groups
which have thrust themselves into power in
Greece with the support of the Anglo-American
military authorities. This policy has. led, as it
was bound to lead; to such a situation that, to
quote once more the words of our esteemed
American friend, Mr. Porter, only, "a miracle"
can now save Greece..
I do not wish to comment at length on the
present Greek Government, or to argue whether
it is in fact constitutional or unconstitutional.
However, I cannot ignore all these circumstances, especially as in the opinion of the delegation of the USSR, the root cause of the external political complications which have led to
the discussion of the Greek question in the
General Assembly at the present time are to be
found precisely in the internal political activity
of the Sophoulis-Tsaldaris Government-not the
Sophoulis who was in power at the time of the
March elections, bu~ the Sophoulis who is now
exploiting the results of elections which he himself condemned to strengthen his position in the
Government.
'
This point was commented on in the First
Committee, and I myself must therefore pay
some attention to it here.
It can be concluded, at least, from the state~
ment made by the representative of Norway on
7 October, that internal antagonisms in Greece
are the main cause, of the present troubled situation in that country. In order to remove t,he
threat ~o peace in that part of Europe, the representative of Norway suggested that three condi-

20 October 1947

declare en public1 que cette tension etait caracterisee "par un profond sentiment de desespoir
national", Il a indique que cette situation etait
due a ce que le pouvoir se trouvait entre les
'mains "d'une petite clique de banquiers et de
marchands, fermement decides a defendre avant
tout leurs prerogatives financieres, fut-ce ,au prix
de la sante economique du pays". Cctte declaration qu'un homme politique americain aussi en
vue a faite en public a propos de la situation en
Grece fait egalement ressortir l'habilete avec
laquelle les Britanniques se servent, dans leur
propre interet, des particularites ci-dessus decrites
du Gouvernement grec actueI. A ce propos, je
voudrais citer encore le passage suivant, extrait
d'un article de M. Porter; il y est question de la
politique britannique en Grece. ,
"Dans les cas de ce genre, ecrit M. Porter, le
procede des Anglais a toujours ete de colIaborer
avec les classes dirigeantes locales dont ils
achetaient l'appui en confinuant leur droit
d'exploiter les masses, et de s'appuyer sur ces
classes pour contenir le peuple par des moyens
de police et de violence." On ne saurait nier que
la description de M. Porter est fort savoureuse. Je
me dispenserai de l'etudier davantage car je crois
qu'il suffit de la mentioJ).ner ici, en lais<;ant le
soin de la refuter .ou de la corriger ceux que
celapourrait interesser.
Telle est donc l'orientation de la politique
britannique' en Grece. Cette politique vise
detruire le mouvement democratique et a
renforcer les groupes reactionnaires, arrives au
.pouvoir en Grece avec Fappui des autorites
militaires anglo-americaines. Cette politique a
abouti, et il n'aurait pu en etre autrement, a
une situation teUe que seul un "miracle", comine
l'a. dit M. Porter, cet honorable representant
americain, pourrait desormais sauver la Grece.
Je me serais dispense de porter un jugement
sur le Gouvernement grec actuel ou de discuter
la question de savoir si ce Gouvernement est
legitime ou non. Mais je ne peme negliger toutes
ces circonstances, etant donne les activites
interieures du Gouvernernent Sophoulis-Tsaldaris'
(le Sophoulis dont je pade n' est pas celui qui.
etait au pouvoir au moment des elections de
mars, mais celui qui exploite maintenant le
resultat des elections, qu'il avait condamnees
lui-meme, et ce1a afin de renforcer sa position
dans le Gouvernement actuel), car ce· sont
precisement ces activites qui constituent, de l'avis
de la delegation de l'URSS, la cause prindpale
des complications exterieures qui ont provoque
un examen de la question grecque a la presente
'session de l'AssemblCe generale.
L' attention de l~ Premiere Commission a ete
attiree sur ce point, c'est pourquoi je dois m'y
arreter egalement. '
Il ressort, tout au moins de la declaration qu'a
faite le 7 octobre le representant de la Norvege,
que la situation tendue dans laquelle se trouve
la Grcce a pour cause prindpale les antagonismes
interi~urs qui existent dans ce pays. Le representant de la Norvege a declare qu'il faIlait remplir
trois conditions pour ecaiter la menace a la paix

a

a

'S ee Collier's Df 20 September 1947, Wanted: A
1 Voir, clans le numerD de Collier's du 20 septembre
Miracle in Greece, by Paul A. Porter.
1947, Wanted a Miracle in Greece, par Paul A. Porter.

20 octobre 1947

367

tions needed to be fulfilled, the first having to
do with the internal situation in Greece, and
the second with the withdrawal of foreign forces
from .Greece. Mr. Langhelle formulated the
latter condition in the· First Committee as follows:
"My delegation ·has no doubt that, in this
respect, the difficulties will be greatly lessened
if and when the Greek Government, in agreement with the Powers concerned, can see its
way to dispense with the presence of foreign
military .forces on Greek soil."l
Although Mr. Delbos, the representative of
France, supported the c4arges. of the United
States of America and of Greece against Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania in the First Committee, he had to declare in this connexion that
"the causeS of the disturbances which have led
to the present situation are to be sought in
Greece itself". 2
Even Mr. Spaak, that self-sacrificing advocate
and enthusiastic supporter of the American
charges, had reluctantly to make this admission
in his. statement on 3 October 1947 in the First
Committee. (I am quoting from the Russian
translation of the verbatim report of this statement) :
"I am convinced that the situation inside
Greece i'i caused by internal difficulties resulting
from the political, social and economic opposition which exists between two important groups
of the Greek people. Therefore, as I have said,
this accusation seems to me to be excessive. m

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance plfmiere

dans. cette partie de l'Europe. La premiere de
ces conditions avait trait la situation interieure
en Grece; la deuxieme, au retrait des troupes
etrangeres de Ce pays. La derniere condition a
ete formulee par M. Langhelle a la Premiere
Commission de la fa~on suivante:
"Ma delegation, a-t-il dit, ne doute pas que
les difTicultes auxquelles on se heurte dans cette
question pourraient etre ecartees dans une grande
mesure, si le Gouvernement grec pouvaits'entendre avec les Puissances interessees pour trouver
un moyen de retirer les troupes etrangeres du
territoire grecl,"
M. Delbos, le representant de la France, en
depit de la position qu'il avait prise la Premiere
Commission en faveur des accusations formulees par les Etats-Unis d'Amerique et par la
Grece contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'AIbanie, a dfi admettre, en parlant de cette question, que "c'est d'abord en Grece meme qu'on
doit rechercher l'origine des troubles qui ont
conduit a la presente situation ... 2"
M. Spaak lui-meme, qui soutient et admire
avec enthousiasme les accusations americaines, a
du faire l'aveu suivant dans sa declaration du 3
octobre 1947 a la Premiere Commission (je cite
d' apres la traduction russe du compte-rendu stenographique de cette declaration):

a

a

"Je suis convaincu que la situation interieure
de la Grece provient de ses difficultes internes,
de l'opposition politique, sociale et economique
qui existe entre deux groupes importants du peupIe grec et par consequent cette accusation-la,
si elle etait portee, me paraitrait tout a fait excessive. S"
Voila ce que dit M. Spaak et pourtant on ne
These are the words of Mr. Spaak, whom
noboay could possibly suspect of having too saurait le soupc;onner de sympathies excessives
much sympathy for Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and pour la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie, ni
. Albania, or of being excessively critical of Greece, d'une attitude trop critique al'egard de la Grece,
much less of the United Kingdom, and much encore moins al'egard du Royaume-Uni, ni surtout, l'egard des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
less still of the United States of America.
On pourrait completer cette declaration de
To the above might be added another remark
of Mr. Spaak himself, to the effect that the M. Spaak en citant ses propres paroles sur la
situation in Greece is caused not only by internal situation en Grece. Il a dit en effet que cette situdifficulties, but also, to use his own florid and ation etait due non seulement aux difficultes
.very timid expression, "by an undeniable degree interieures, mais enCOre "pour une part inconof American intervention in the internal politics testable, a l'intervention am~ricaine dans la pollof Greece". These statements are sufficient to tique interieure de la Grece4". C'est en ces,
cast some light on the real ·causes which have termes a la fois prudents et pretentieux que s'est
given rise to the so-called "Greek question", exprime M. Spaak. Il suffit de citer ces declarawhich has become such an acute issue at the tions pour faire la lumiere sur les causes veripresent time, and which has attracted so much tables de ce qu'on appelle la "question grecque",
~erious attention from the United Nations.
• qui est devenue tellement aigue et qui preoccupe
tellement 1'0rganisation des Nations U:qies.
Pourtant, comme je l'ai deja dit, les d8egaHowever, the American and British delegations, as I have said, have done everything pos- . tions americaine et britannique ont tout fait
sible to give this question a false character and pour deformer cette question et pour en fausser
present it here in a distorted light. That was id la presentation. Cela a ete rendu particulieremade particularly clear by all that went on in ment clair par ce qui s'est passe a la Premiere
the First Committee during the discussion of Commission pendant l'examen de la question

a

1 Sixty-eighth meeting of the First Committee. The
speaker is quoting from an interpretation from English
into Russian.
• Sixty-third meeting of the First Committee.
S Sixty-fifth meeting of the First Committee.

1 Soixante-huiti~me seance de la Premiere Commission.
Cette citation est tirt~e de l'interpretation de l'anglais en
russe.
,
• Soixante-troisieme seance de la Premiere Commission.
S Soixante-cinquieme seance de la Premiere Commission.
• Retraduit du russe.

Ninefy~seventh

'"

Plenary Meeting

368

the Greek question. That could not but convince any person who was at all objective or
impartial of the false and artificial characterI venture to say this frankly and publicly-of
this whole business. I affirm-and it will need
no great effort to prove my point-that this
whole scheme to raise the Greek question before
the General Assembly and to accuse Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Albania of allegedly threatening
the political independence and territorial integrity of Greece, is a puppet show, a piece of
crudely concocted political buffoonery, which
must bring the blush of shame to the cheek of
every unbiased person..
Everything we witnessed in the First Committee's discussion of the Greek question: the arguments, considerations and proofs advanced by
the United States delegation against Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Albania; the suspicious spectacle
of one American draft resolution being replaced
by another, literally on the spur of the moment;
the trade, a real bit of horse-trading, which the
United States representatives in the First Coni- mittee attempted to put through with the representatives of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania;
the completely inadmissible methods of coercion
and pressure on these three countries in order
to obtain their agreement to a control commission; the manoeuvres of every kind to which the
United States representative resorted in order to
achieve his aim, the establishment of a control
commission; the going even so far as the use of
such an absolutely abnormal voting method as
voting on a resolution not consecutively from beginning to end, but in separate sections, arbitrarily lifted from the middle of the resolution,
followed by the end and returning then, and only
then, after having made sure of the end of the
resolution, to the very beginning of the resolution (this procedure caused one representative
to declare quite rightly that it was a headless
resolution)-do not all these manoeuvres, tricks
and machinations reveal the true ends pursued
by the Government of the United States of
America in placing the .Greek question on the
.agenda of the General Assembly at the present
time? We answer tlus question in the affirmative. The idea, obviously, is that of making a
political attack on Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania" of accusing them of-without the slightest
juridical or moral foundation for such an accusation-violating the standards of international law and threatening the politicalindependence and territorial integrity of Greece, in
order to justify thereby the intervention of the
United States in Greek affairs, to fortify even
more strongly the basis for sw:h intervention in
the future, to justify in the eyes of world publIc
opinion the "assistance" which the United States
of America has given Greece and to transform
Greece--under cover of this assistance-into its
strategic military base.

r shall attempt hereafter to quote as briefly
as possible facts which will, I hope, be sufficient
to show ho~ artific~al, unjust, fictitious and unsubstantial are these accusations against Yugo-

20 Odobea' 1947

grecque. En dIet, ce qui s'y est passe ne peut
manquer de convaincre tous ceux qui posscdent
un minimum d'objectivite et d'impartialite
que toute cette affaire est artificielle et
falsifiee. J e me permets de le declarer
ouvertement et publiquement. Nous affirmons,
et il n'est pas bien difficile de le prouver, que
toute cette entreprise qui consiste a soulever a-'
I'Assemblee generale la question grecque en accusant la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et I'Albanie de
menacer l'independance territoriale de la Grece
n'est rien d'autre qu'une comedie, qu'une mauvaise farce politique, qui devrait faire rougir de
honte tout homme capable de penser objectivement et impartialement.
Tout ce que nous avons observe ala Premiere
Commission au COUl'S de l'examen de la question
grecque: les arguments, les considerations, les
preuves que la delegation des Etats-Unis a presentees contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et
I'Albanie; cette histoire suspecte d'un texte ame..:
ricain remplace par un autre, litteralement en un
clin d'reil; le marehandage, un veritable maquignonnage que les representants des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique ala Premiere Commission ont entrepris avec les representants de la Yo'ugoslavie, de
la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie; les procedes absolument inadmissibles de contrainte et de pression
qu'on deploie a l'egard de ces trois pays pour
leur faire accepter une commission de controle;
toutes les manreuvres auxquelles le representant
des Etats-Unis a eu recours pour obtenir ce qu'il
veut avant tout, c'est-a-dire la creation d'une
commission de controle; cette procedure de vote
vraiment. insolite par laquelle on a mis aux voix
les parties d'une resolution non pas dans leur
ordre normal, du debut a la fin, mais en faisant
voter des passages isoles pris au milieu de la
resolution, en mettant ensuite aux voix la fin de
celle-ci et en ne faisant voter sur le debut de la
resolution que lorsque le vote de la partie finale
a ete acq].Iis (ce qui a amene un representant a
declarer, a juste titre, qu'ils s'agissait d'une resolution decapitee); toutes ces manrevures, .ces
trucs, ces machinations, tout cela ne" dcvoile-t-il
pas les buts reels que vise dans cette affaire le
Gouvernement des Etats-Unis d'Amerique en
soumettant en ce moment la question grecque aI'AssembIee generale? A cette question, nous
repondrons par l'affirrnative. Le dessein des
Etats-Unis est apparemment le suivant: en declenchant sur le terrain politique line attaque
contre ,la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l' Albanie,
en les accusant, sans aucune base juridique ou
morale, de violer les regles du droit international
et de menacer l'independance politique et l'integrite territoriale de la Grece, les Etats-Unis
veulent justifier leur intervention dans les afIaires
grecques, donner une ·base encore plus solide a
leur intervention future et rchabiliter devant
l'opinion publique l"'assistance" que les EtatsUnis d'Amerique apportent a la Grece, et qui
n'est qu'un pretexte pour transformer ce pays
en une base strategique americaine.
le vais maintenant, aussi brievement que possible, citer des faits qui, je l'espcre, suffiront a
demontrer le caractere artificiel et injuste, outre
et factice des accusations que 1'0n porte contre

20 octobre 1947

369-

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pleniere

slavia, Bulgaria and Albania, and which will, on la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l' Albanie; des faits
the other hand, show sufficient grounds for the qui dcmontreront, au contraire, le bien-fonde des
demands made upon Greece in the draft reso- exigences que le projet de resolution de I'URSS
lution of the USSR. I hope that these facts formule a l'egard de la Grece; des faits qui monwill be sufficient, finally, to show the real mo- trent enfin, quels sont les motifs reels des Etatstives and actual plans for Greece which are be- Unis d'Amerique et quds sont, regard de la
ing pursued by the United States of America in Grece, les desseins qU'ils poursuivent, de concert
agreement with the United Kingdom and those avec le Royaume-Uni et avec ces memes milieux
reactionary Greek groups which are represented reactionnaires de Grece que represente id le
here by the Greek Government, and upon which Gouvernement grec et sur lesquels il s'appuie a
that Government bases its support in its own l'interieur.
country.
Ainsi done, le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis.
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, then, are
accused by the Governments of the United d'Amerique et celui de la Grcce accusent la YouStates of America and of Greece of threatening goslavie, la Bulga,rie et l'Albanie de menacer
the political independence and territorial in- l'independance politique et l'intt~grite territoriale
. tegrity of Greece. What evidence has been pro- de la Grece. QueUes preuves nmis a-t-on fourduced to support these accusations? In the first nies pour etayer ces accusations? En premier
,place, eye-witness depositions; in the second lieu, des depositions de temoins; en second lieu,
place, certain circumstantial evidence, as lawyers on nous a presente ce que les juristes appellent
call it; that is, newspaper articles, newspaper des pieces conviction: des articles de journaux,
reports of speeches of certain Yugoslav, Bulgarian des comptes rendus de la presse sur les declaraand Albanian politicians, and also an inter- tions de certains hommes d'Etat yougoslaves,
view which Marshal Tito gave on 16 October, bulgares et albanais, ainsi qu'une interview que
on the Macedonian question.
le marechal Tho a donnee le 16 octobre sur la
question macedonienne.
Nous avons deja releve la Premiere ComWe demonstrated in the First Committee the
mission
que ces preuves n'avaient aucune valeur,
unsoundness of this evidence, its artificiality and,
what is worse, the fact that it was falsified. We qu'elles etaient artificielles, et pis encore, qu'elles
pointed out, for example, a fact which nobody- avaient ete fal~i£iees. Nous avons ,plOntre, par
even the accusers themselves, the representatives exemplc, un fait que personne n'a ose nier, que
of the United States, the United Kingdom and les accusateurs eux-memes, les representants des
Greece-ventured to deny, that the mostimpor- Etats-Unis, du Royaume-Uni et de la Grece,
tant documents are forged and the depositions n'ont pas Ose 'contester. Je veux parler de la
of the most important witnesses are false. It was falsification des documents les plus importants,
established quite definitely, recorded i~ the docu- des depositions mensongeres faites par les prinmentation of the Commission of Investigation cipaux tcmoins,' comme cela a ete clairement
submitted to the First Committee, and must be demontre, comme ce1a figure dans les documents
known to everybody, that this false evidence was de la Commission d'enquete qui ont ete presenextracted from the witnesses by torture and vio- tes a la Premiere Commission et comme tout le
lence and bought from them at the price of their monde devrait le savoir; je veux parler des temoins auxquels on a arrache de fausses deposilives.
tions par la torture et la violence ou dont on a
achcte le temoignage en leur promettant la vie
sauve.
Il serait evidemment trap long et trop fatiOf course it would be very wearying and take
guant
de nous arreter
l'analyse de tous ces .
a great deal of time to analyze all these depositions and other evidence at length, and to re- tcmoignages et des autre~ preuves alleguees, en
peat what has already been said in the First repetant tout cc qui a deja ete dit a la Premiere
Committee. Yet, I would remind those who were Commission. Je rappelIerai cependant a ceux
not present that the First Committee studied the qui n'ont pas assiste aux travaux de la Premiere
Greek question for three weeks, that during those Commission, que cette derniere a examine la
three weeks we of the delegation of the USSR question grecque pendant trois semaines et qu'au
and those who supported us in everyone of our cours de cette periode les' representants de
speeches, quoted the first names, surnames and l'URSS et ceux qui lesont appuyes ont donne
addresses of those perjurers, agents provocateurs, dans chacune de leurs interventions, les noms,
criminals and traitors to their country, like prenoms et adresses de faux temoins, de provoKologanov, an ex-president of a Bulgarian court cateurs, de crirninels de droit commun, de traitres
who fled to Greece and there gave evidence a leur patrie tcls que ce Kologanov, ancien preagainst Bulgaria. We pointed to persons' who sident de tribunal bulgare qui s'est enfui en
had been bought at the price of their lives (I Grece et qui a depose contre la ~ulgarie. Nous
call them witnesses released from the hangman's avons parle d'hommcs que 1'0n a achetes en leur
noose). We demonstrated the unreliability of promettant la vie sauve et j'ai dit que c'etaient la
those false witnesses, and then called on the, des temoins qui depcisaient la corde au cou. Nous
accusers in their turn to give us the names of a avons montre que les depositions de ces faux
dozen or so honest witnesses who would corro- tcmoins etaient sans valeur, et notre tour, nous
borate the accusations against Yugoslavia, Bul- avons dit aux accusateurs: citez-nous une dizaine
garia and. Albania, to name ~hem, to show us de tcmoins de bonne foi qui soutiennent vos accu-

a

a

a

a

a

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

370

the living testimony of people who honestly accuse Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania. And
we received no answer.
Mr. McNeil preferred to say that there was
really no point in plunging into this "fog of detail". Of course, it is much better not to plunge
into this "fog of detail" because this detail
would present you with the risk of exposing to
public opinion the falsification of testimony and
the monstrous deception which is concealed here
because many representatives are not familiar
with the actual documents and have not studied
those 20,000 pages; and because many, perhaps,
hold different opinions in their heart of hearts
from those which they have expressed in their
votes on particular points of the United States
resolution. That is their private matter and a
matter for their conscience. I neither venture
nor desire to deal with that point.
However, I am in duty bound to say this:
Today you are about to pronounce a decision.
It will be a court sentence. You are now formed
here into a supreme court of justice and you
must be familiar with the documents and the
data, to know what weight can be attached to
these data, how pure the sources from which
, they have been drawn, if you are to pronounce
witl1 a clear conscience a decision which accuses
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania of crimes
which they have not committed. As I shall try
to show hereafter, even the majority of the First
Committee did not venture to accept the responsibility of accusing them of these crimes, for
the resolution which has been submitted does
not refer to the opinion of the First Committee.
In this resolution the truth-seekers turn from
Pontius and appeal to Pilate. The resolution
says whereas the majority of the Commission of
Investigation established the existence of such
and such breaches of the law on the part of
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, the First
Committee recommends setting up a committee,
recommends meddling in the internal affairs of
these three States and "putting one's feet on the
table" in other people's houses. But the majority
of the Committee did not accept the responsibility of saying: we, the majority of the Committee, have seen all this evidence, and on the
basis of all these data, declare the accusations
to be legitimate and well-founded. You will not
find that in the resolut~on, but I intend' to .deal
with it later. I declare that the documents were
forged and that the witnesses were specially
picked out and successfully played their part in
this business as perjurers. If you want facts, I
shall supply them. You ask me to realize my
responsibility for what I say in this August Ass~mbly. I am aware of that responsibility and
accept it without qualification. Here, are the
facts:
THE WITNESSES

The General Assembly must know that the
Greek Government submitted a varie.ty of material to the Commission of Investigation and the

20 October 1947

sations contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et I'Albanie;' nommez-les, montrez-nous les depositions
de temoins veritables qui accuseraient sincerement la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie.
Nous n'avons pas re~u de reponse.
M.McNeil a prefere declarer qu'il ne fallait
pas se perdre dans un "nuage de details". Bien
entendu, il vaut mieux ne pas s'y perdre, car ces
Mtails presenteraient pour vous le risque de reveler a 1'opinion publique la falsification des
temoignages et la duperie monstrueuse que 1'0n
dissimule id pa,rce que de nombreux representants ne connaissent pas les veritables documents
et ~'ont pas etudie ces 20.000 pages. n se peut
d'ailleurs que dans leur for interieur, ils aient
une opinion toute differente de celle qu'ils ont
exprimee en votant sur tel ou tel point de la
resolution des Etats-Unis. C'est la une question
qui les regarde, qui regarde lem conscience. Je
n'ai pas l'intention de ,l'aborder.
Je suis pourtant oblige de dire ce qui suit:
vous vous appretez a prendre, aujourd'hui, une
decision, a rendre un verdict; vous constituez id
le plus grand des areopages et il faut que ,vous
sachiez sur quels documents, sur queUes donnees
vous pouvez vous fonder, dans quelle mesure ces
donnees sont dignes de foi, dans quelle mesure
on peut se fier aux sources d'informations d'ou.
provienncnt ces donnees, afin que vous puissiez
pr~ndre en toute conscience une decision qui
accuse la YougoSlavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie de
crimes qu'elles n'ont pas commis. Comme je
m'efi'orcera;i de le demontrer plus loin, la majorite de la Premiere Commission n'a pas ose
prendre la responsabilite de ces accusations; en
effet, la resolution qui nous a ete presentee ne
mentionne pas 1'0pinion de la Premiere Commission.
Dans cette resolution, on renvoie de Caiphe a
Pilate ceux qui cherchent la verite. La resolution
dit: etant donne que la majorite de la Commission d'enquete a reconnu l'existence de telles
et telles infractions commises par la Yougoslavie,
la Bulgarie et l'Albanie, la Premiere Commission
recommande de creer une commission, de
s'ingerer dans les affaires interieuers de ces trois
pays et de s'installer chez autrui, les pieds sur
la table. Mais la majorite de la Commission n'a
pas pris sur elle de declarer: nous, qui sommes
la majorite de la' Commission, reconnaissons, sur
le vu des preuves et des donnees qui nous ont
ete fournies, que ces accusations sont justes et
fondees. Vous ne trouverez pas de te1les declara~
tfons dans la resolution; d'ailleurs, je parlerai de
ceIa plus tard. j'affirme que les documents ont
ete fasilifies, que les temoins ont ete specialement
choisis et ont joue avec succes leur role de faux
temoins. Vous voulez des faits, je vais en citer.
Vous demandez que je prenne pleine 'et entiere
responsabilite pour les paroles que je prononce
ici, de cette noble tribune; j'ai conscience de mes
responsabilites et je les assume entierement. Voici
les faits:
'
LES TEMoINS
L'AssembIee generale doit savoir que le
Gouvernement grec a remis a la Commission et
au Groupe subsidiaire divers documents au

20 octobre 1947

371

Subsidiary Group. This material included a
"White Book". The "White Book" is a collection
of sworn depositions by sixty witnesses. 'Of these
sixty witnesses, the Commission heard twenty-six.

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pleniere

nombre desquels figure le "Livre blanc". Dans
ce "Livre blanc", on a recueilli'des depositions
faites sous la foi du serment par soixante temoins.
Sur ces soixante temoins, la Commission en a
entendu vingt-six.
I have studied the depositions of these twentyJ' ai examine tres attentivement toutes les
six witnesses very carefully. I could give you all depositions de ces vingt-six temoins. Je pourrais
their names, and I assure you that these are the aujourd'hui vous donner leurs noms, et faffirme
very witnesses whom I am about to have the que ces temoins sont precisement ceux que j'aurai
honour of introducing to you life-size. It appears 1'honneur de vous faire connaitre aujourd'hui
that of these twenty-six witnesses, ten were found sous leur vrai visage. Il a ete etabli que sur ces
to be perjurers, exposed as such in the course of vingt-six individus, dix etaient de faux temoins
the, investigation by their own contradictory and qui, ati cours de l'enquete, ont ete demasques par
lying testimony. Some of them admitted having leurs propres contradictions et leurs propres
received money from the Greek authorities in depositions mensongeres. Un certain nombre
payment for false evidence (for example, the d'entre eux ont reconnu avoir re<;u de l'argent
witness Zaphiris). Some of them are' like the des autorites grecques en recompense de leurs
witness Bobtsis, whom the Commission, at the faux temoignages (le temoin Zaphiris par
suggestion of Mr. Urrutia, representative of Co- exemple). 11 y en a d'autres, tels que le temoin
lombia, refused to hear out because he talked Bobtsis, que la Commission, sur la proposition
such rubbish that it contradicted all the obvious de M. Urrutia, representant de la Colombie, a
facts, with which even the Commission was fa- refuse d'entendre, car ses racontars etaient en
miliar; or the witness Velianidis, who was un- contradiction avec des faits qui etaient evidents
able, when asked by the members of the Com- et que meme la .commission connaissait bien;
mission, even to say in what year he was born, tel encore le temoin Velianidis qui, au moment
and who made so dubious an impression that the Oll il etait interroge par les membres de la ComCommission of Investigation took a special de- mission,. n'a meme pas pu dire en quelle annee
cision to make further inquiries as to his identity. il etait ne et a fait sur la Commission d'enquete
une impression tellemeilt douteuse que celle-ci a
fait expressement savoir qu'il convenait de faire
des reeherches pour etablir' plus nettement
l'identite de cet individu.
Voila donc quel etait ce groupe de dix temoins
So much for the first group of ten witnesses,
who declared that a certain railway line running qui ont pretendu qu'une certaine voie ferree
in a particular direction was aimed directly at avait ete construite de telle manihe qu'elle etait
Greece and had a strategic significance, whereas dirigce contre la Grece et presentait un interet
that railway was situated in the interior of Yugo- strategique, alors qu'en fait cette voie ferree etait
slavia, led in exactly the opposite direction and, ~ituee au centre de la Yougoslavie et ne se
dirigeait nullement vel'S la Greee, et bien entendu
of course, had no strategic significance.
ne presentait aucune inlportimce stratcgique.
I could quote an abundance of facts to characJ e pourrais vous citeI' encore de nombreux
terize everyone of these witnesses, but I have not faits qui etabliraient le caractere de chacun de
yet heard a single fact adduced by the accusers ces temoins, mais les accusateurs de la Yougoof Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania to show slavie, de la Bulgarie et de l' Albanie n'ont pu,
that their accusations have a really sound basis. autant que je sache, citeI' le moindre fait qui
tendrait a prouver que ces accusations reposent
veritablement sur un terrain solide.
Sur ces vingt-six personnes interrogees par la
Of the twenty-six persons interrogated by the
Commission of Investigation, six were common Commission d'enquete, six individus sont des
criminals and agents provocateurs. Here are their criminels de droit commun et des agents provocanames: Vlahos, the murderer of ex-minister 'teurs. Void leurs noms: Vlahos, assassin de
Zevgos, and his fellow conspirators, Partoulas, .1'ex-Ministre Zevgos; Partoulas, Tsaoussis et
Tsaoussis and Sidiropoulos. Moreover, Sidiro- Sidiropoulos, ses complices. Sidiropoulos a d'ailpoulos admitted in a letter 'published in the leurs reconnu clans une lettre publiee dans la
Greek Press that he had received money from the presse grecque qu'il avait re~u de 1'argent des
Greek authorities for his false testimony against autorites grecques pour ses faux temoignages
,Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania. His letter contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie.
was publisped not in the Yugoslav, Bulgarian or Cette lettre de Sidiropoulos, ce n'est pas dans la
Albanian Press, nor was it sent from a Yugoslav, presse yougoslave, bulgare ou albanaise qu'elle a
Bulgarian or Albanian prison; it was sent from ete publiee, ce n'est pas d'une prison yougoslave,
a Greek prison, when he was in· Greece, and in bulgare ou albanaise qu'elle a ete envoyee, mais
it Sidiropoulos accused the Greek authorities of bien d'uneprison grecque, situee en territoire
having paid him money to bear, false witness, grec; dans cette lettre, Sidiropoulos accuse les '
which he admits that he did.
autorites grecques' de lui avoir verse unesomme
d'argent pour qu'il rende de faux temoignages,
et il reconnait qu'il a effcctivement rendu des
faux temoignages.

-t'

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

372

There is onc of the six. But that is not all.
The sextet includes a well-known Kontopanos,
who was exposed by his own brother as an agent

provocateur.
Finally, we have the Kologanov already mentioned, the president of a military court in Bulgaria during the German occupation, who fled to
Greece and there gave false testimony against
Bulgaria, his own country.
An impressive sextet, indeed. Take ten, add
these six and add five more persons. I shall give
you their names: Valtadoros, Pitas, Zahos, Ikonomov and Serbakov. These five person~, who
had been sentenced to death, were then pardoned and brought. before the Commission of
Investigation to expose their own comrades. On
that occasion Valtadoros, when he was asked
why his four comrades had been executed while
he was still alive, answered: "1 don't know;
probably s() that I could come before the Commission and give evidence against those four."
There are your ten, six and five-twenty-<;me
out of the twenty-six witnesses brought by the
Greek Government.
And now it is for you-on the basis of these
depositions made by agents provocateurs, by
common criminals snatched from the hangman's
noose, who plead for their lives, redeemed at
such a frightful cost in slander and-treachery,
and supply the evidence needed by the Greek
authorities who offered them as witnesses-it
is for you now to pledge your honour and repu..t:ation on the truth and reliability of these witnesses who have come forward as the accusers
of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania. Can you
do such a thing? Is there one amongst you to
raise his hand, on the basis of such evidence, to
vote in favour of the resolution so hurriedly and
injudiciously submitted to the General Assembly
by that section of the First Committee which
secured a majority only because very many of
the members of the Committee are not familiar
with the actual. documents, or because they approached this question with the political and preconceived intention of doing everything possible to put through this frontier commission?
For, indeed, if the accusations are unfounded,
why have the commission? If the accusations
are unfounded, what is the point of saying, in
the resolution, that we call upon Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Albania not to repeat in the future
the crimes alleged by the false witnesses, which
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania have never in
fact committed?
But if it is unnecessary to address these appeals and requests to these three countries not to
do in the future what was never done in the past
-although they are alleged to have Clone itwhy establish such a commission? What will
they do with the commission?· Of cO~lfSe, the
whole thing collapses.
We assert that this is all a trumped-up business, or as we say in Russian, "all this porridge

20 October 1947

Tel est l'un de ces six individus. Mais ce n'est
pas tout. Parmi ces six faux temoins, se trouve
cgalement le fameux Kontopanos, que son propre
frere a qualifie ouvertement d'agent provocateur.
Enfin, il y a Kologanov, dont j'ai deja parle,
qui etait president d'un tribunal militaire en
Bulgarie pendant l'occupation allemande et qui
se refugia en Grece ou il porta de fame
temoignages contre la Bulgarie, sa patrie.
.Voila ces six brillants individus. Ajoutez-y
les autres dix temoins dont j'ai deja parle, et
joignez-y encore cinq individus dont voici Ies
noms: Valtadoros, Pitas, Zahos, ikonomov, Serbakov. Ces cinq individus, condamnes a la peine
capitale, ont ete gracies et amenes devant la
Commission d'enquete afin d'accuser.leurs propres camarades. Lorsque 1'0n demanda a Valtadoros pourquoi ses quatre camarades avaient
ete executes alors qu'il avait eu la vie sauve, il
repondit: "le ne sais pas, c'est sans doute pour
que faie la" possibilite de paraltre devant la
Commission et de temoigner contre -eux."
Void donc dix, plus six, plus cinq temoins,
soit vingt et l,Ill temoins sur les vingt-six qu'a
presentes le Gouvernement grec.
Et maintenant, en vous fondant sur les temoignages d'agents provocateurs, de crimine1s
de droit commun auxqueIs on vient d'epargner
la potence, d'individus qui rachetent d'une.
fag on si ignominieuse leur vie en calomniant et
en trahissant leur patrie et font les depositions
dont ont besoin Ies autorites gn;cques qui les
presentent en qualite de temoins, et maintenant,
dis-je, vous devez engager votre honneur et
certifier de votre nom la veracite et l'authenticite de leurs temoignages, des accusations qu'iIs
portent contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et
I'Albanie. Se peut-il que vous agissiez ainsi?
Sur la base de telles depositions, pourrez-vous
lever la main et voter en faveur d'une resolution
si hativement et inconsiderement soumise a l'Assemblee generale par la majorite de la Premiere
Commission, majorite qui n'existe que parce que
bien des membres de cette Comm.ission n'ont
pas eu connaissance des documents authentiques,
ou qu'ils ont aborde le probleme avec une
opinion politique precon9ue qui etait d'obtenir .
coute que coute la creation de cette commission
de frontiercs? Mais en fait, siI'accusation n'est
pas fondee, a quoi bon creer la commission?
Si l'accusation n'est pas fondee, pourquoi declarer dans la resolution que nous nous adressons a la Yougoslavie, ala Bulgarie et al'Albanie
en Ieur demandant de ne pas rcpeter, a l'avenir,
Ies crimes dont parlent Ies faux temoins, et qu'en
realite la Yougoslavie, la BuIgarie et l'Albanie
n'ont jamais commis?
Mais, s'il ne faut pas s'adresser a ces trois
pays pour leur demander de ne pas poursuivre
a l'avenir une action qu'iIs n'ont pas entreprise
dans le passe - et que l'on veut pourtant leur
attribue,r quoi bon creer une commission?
Que fera cette commission? En: d'autres termes,
toute cette theorie s'ecroule.
Quant a nous, nous affirmons que toute cette
affaire a ete. preparce ou, comme nous disons

a

20 octobre 1947

'j.

t.
l~

t·

373

Quatre-vingf-dix-septieme seance pleniere

has been stirred up" in order to justify the neces- en russe, que toute cette sauce a ete preparee
sity, possibility, desirability and legality of setting afinde pouvoir justifier l'etablissement d'une
up a frontier commission, whose business it commission de frontieres, de faire croire qu'il
would be to cover up the dirty deals of the reac- s'agit d'une mesure realisable et indispensable,
tionary Greek groups described by Mr. Porter in opportune et legitime, alors que cette commission
his article in Collier's as that "mercantile and a pour objet de cacher les machinations malprobanking cabal . . • determined above all to pres des groupements reactionnaires grecs que
protect its financial prerogatives, at whatever M. Porter, ecrivant dans la revue Collier's,
expense to the economic health of the country". nomme "cette clique de banquiers et de marThose are not my words, but Mr. Porter's; and chands qui place ses propres interets financiers
nobody has been able to refute them. Mr. Porter avant les interets et le bien-etre de la patrie".
has not been summoned for libel. Generally Ces paroles ne sont pas de moi, elles sont de
speaking, it is well known that terrible things M. Porter, et dIes ne peuvent etre dementies:
have recently been published about the Greek M. Porter n'a pas ete poursuivi pour calomnie.
Government, and that they are left unanswered Nous savons de fa~on gerierale que des choses
even by Mr. Tsaldaris, the ex-Prime Minister atroces ont ete revelees dernierement dans la
of Greece.
presse au sujet du Gouvernement grec, et meme
l'ancien President du Conseil grec, M. Tsaldaris,
n'a donne aucun dementi a leur sujet.
All this runs off, as the saying goes, like water
Tout cela passe inaper~u: comme on dit, (Ja
from a duck's back. Yet, at some point or other, ne produit pas plus d'effet qu'un emplatre sur
the question must finally be cleared up. Since une jambe de bois. Mais il faut bien, en fin de
it has been raised here, in the General Assembly, compte, tirer les choses au clair. Puisque
we must settle it. How does the case stand with l'Assemblee generale a ete saisie de cette affaire,
these witnesses?
c'est notre devoir de faire toute la lumiere a ce
sujet. Ou en sommes-nous avec les temoins en
question?
The Commission heard not only these twentyLa Commission n'a pas seulement entendu ces
six witnesses but many more. It heard witnesses vingt-six temoins, elle en a entendu d'autres. Ce
selected by the Commission itself from the sont des temoins que la Commission elle-meme
Greek concentration camps and prisons, from a choisis dans les camps de concentration grecs,
Zervas torture chambers of every kind. Amongst dans les prisons grecques, dans les chambres de
them were a large number of leading figures in torture de Zervas. Parmi ces temoins, on trouve
politics and social affairs, thrown into jail by non seulement de simples particuliers, mais aussi
the Greek authorities and the Greek Govern- tin certain nombre de personnalites et d'hommes
ment, and of ordinary rank and file people. For politiques eminents, jetes en prison par les
example, we find amongst them General Greg- autorites grecques et le Gouvernement grec.
oriadis, the leader of the leftist Liberal Party; On trouve, par exemple, le general Gregoriadis,
Mr.Paparigas, the President of the General chef du parti liberal de gauche, M. Paparigas, '
Confederation of Greek Trade Unions; Gen- president de la Confederation generale du travail
eral Bakirdzis, and Hercules Petsimetsas, Presi- de Grc~ce; le general Bakirdzis, M. Heracles
dent of the All-Greek Federation of Democratic Petsimetsas, president de la Federation des assoAssociations. These are all persons' of unim- ciations democratiques grecques. Ces gens n'ont
peachable character and of undoubted moral rien a se reproche et il ne peut y avoir de doute
standing, and their political honour is proved by sur leur valeur morale. Quant a leur honnetete
their courage and inflexibility in the struggle politique, elle a ete demontree par le courage et
against fascism and against the continued fascist- la tenacite qu'ils ont manifestes dans la lutte
monarchist terror in Greece. They all testified contre le fascisme et contre la terreur fascistethat neither Yugoslavia nor Bulgaria nor Al- monarchique qui continue a sevir en Grece. LIs
bania was guilty of the crimes ascribed to them; ont tous temoigne que ni la Yougoslavie, ni la
that responsibility for everything that is hap- Bulgarie, ni l'Albanie ne sont coupables des
pening on the Greca-Albanian, Greco-Bulgarian crimes qu'on leur attribue, que la responsabilit6
and Greco-Yugoslav frontiers devolves on the de la situation aUK frontieres greco-albanaise,
Greek Government itself, which has failed to, greco-bulgare et greco-yougoslave incombe au "
and is unable to, come to terms with its own Gouvernement grec, Gouvernement incapable de
people who have taken up arms to fight that se concilier son propre peuple, lequel resiste les
Government. They testified that the whole re- armes a la main. Ils ont egalement temoigne
sponsibility lay with the United States Govern- que toute la responsabilite incombe au Gouvernement, of which Mr. Porter wrote: "The United ment des Etats-Unis, et a ce sujet M. Porter a
States .of America is the dominant factor in dit que "les Etats-Unis d'Amerique sont le
Greek politics." They testified that the whole facteur principal dans la politique grecque".
responsibility lay with the British Government, Enfin, Us ont temoigne que toute la responsawhich has its divisions in Greece. Mr. McNeil bilite incombre au Gouvernement britannique,
says that he does not know how many of these qui maintient ses divisions en Grece. M. McNeil
divisions there are. It makes no difference a dit qu'il ne connaissait pas exactement le nomwhether there is one division or more; in any bre de ces divisions. Mais il importe peu qu'il y
case there are enough of them to be able to." ait une division ou plusieurs. En tous cas," elles
take an active part' in the repression of the sont en nombre suffisant pour pouvoir participer

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

374

20 October 1947

d'une fagon active a la repression des elements
democratiques, dont le sang inonde aujourd'hui
le sol de la Grece.
. These people told a different story. Amongst
Ainsi, ces gens parlent un autre langage.
them were a number who told how the Greek Parmi eux il y en a qui ont affirme que les
. authorities had given them arms and sent them autorites grecques leur donnaient des armes et
back to Bulgaria, Albania and Yugoslavia to les renvoyaient en Bulgarie, en Albanie, en
fight in their own country against the lawful Yougoslavie, afin qu'ils luttent, sur leur terre
Yugoslav, Bulgarian and Albanian Governmeilts. natale, contre les Gouvernements Iegitimes de la
Here are the names of these witnesses: Serba- Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie. Je
kov, Mustafov, Uruchev, Vairkhtari, Nazmi vais vous citer les noms de ces temoins: Serbakov,
Emini Azemi, Teshkov} Ikonomov, Kosta Tessi Moustafov, Uruchev, Vairkhtari, Nazmi Emini
and many others. I have given their names; but Azemi, Techkov, Ikonomov} Kosta Tessi et
none of us, myself included, has ever heard our d'autres encore. Nous avons deja cite ces noms;
opponents or accusers-those who so inexorably mais aucun d'entre nous, pas plus que moiaccuse Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania of meme, n'a encore entendu nos adversaires ou nos
every mortal sin-give the names of any trust- accusateurs -:- ceux qui accusent impitoyableworthy persons whose testimony can really be ment la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie de
used to justify t:J1e accusations directed against tous les peches possibles - citer les noms de
personnes dignes de confiance et dont les
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria or Albania.·
temoignages pourraient servir de fondement aux
accusations portees contre la Yougoslavie, la
Bulgarie et l'Albanie.
'
Que s'est-il donc passe a la Premiere CommisWhat happened in the First Committee? Quite
obviously, the First Committee could not remain sion? La Premiere Commission n'a evidemment
indifferent to all these facts. These facts could pas pu rester indifferente a tous ces faits. Ces
not remain unnoticed, even though everything faits ne pouvaient passer inaper~us, encore que
had been decided in advance by a firmly com- tout eut ete decide al'avance par un groupe compacted group-I shall be frank and call it-the pact, que je me permettrai de nommer ouverteBritish-American-French bloc. ADd here is what ment id: le bloc anglo-franco-americain. Le
happened. The representative of the Norwegian resultat, le voici. C'est le representant de la
delegation made a statement. I quote from the delegation norvegienne qui parle. Je cite un passage de sa declaration:
relevant part of his speech:
"In my judgment} the evidence before the
"A mon avis, les preuves qui ont ete apportees
Committee is not sufficient to entitle us conclu- a la Commission ne suffisent pas pour que nous
sively to lay down that the Governments of Al- puissions etablir en toute certitude que les Goubania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia have given aid vernements de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la
and assistance to Greek guerrillas in contraven- Yougoslavie ont prete aide et assistance aux partion of the Charter. m
tisans grecs, commettant ainsi une infraCtion a
la Chartel ."
I shall take as an example another group,
Je passe maintenant a l'autre groupe qui avait '
which had already decided that, in one form or decide par avance qu'il faudrait, sous une forme
another, with this or that wording, under one ou sous ane autre, d'une fa~on ou d'une autre,
pretext or another, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and accuser directement ou indirectement la YougoAlbania must be directly or indirectly accused. slavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie. J'en viens a M.
I shall take as an example. Mr. Spaak, man Spaak, que nous connaissons tous et qui est
whom we all know, who is considered to be an considere comme un juriste eminent et comme
eminent jurist and a rather intrepid expert on a un expert assez sur de lui dans toute une serie de
number of questions about which he makes q,uestions Sur lesquelles il prend la parole, a compronouncements, beginning with national sov- mencer par celle de la souverainete des Etats.
ereignty. After everything which had been said 1--p;es que. tout cela ait ete dit et repete pendant
and repeated for three weeks in the First trOIS semames a la Premiere Commission, est-ce
Committee, did Mr. Spaak hurl his ridiculous que M. Spaak a repris sa caricature d'accusation
accusation rutWessly at the three Governments, pour la lancer sans pitie a la tete de ces trois
the three small northern neighbours? No; when Gouvernements, de ces trois petits pays situes au
he spoke of the witnesses, he was obliged to ac- nord de la Grece? Et bien non au sujet des
knowledge that they did not appear to be pillars :e1?0ins il a du reconnaltre qu'ils d'appartenaient
of society. These perjurers, these common crim- eVldemment pas a l'elite de la societe. Ces faux
inals are, for Mr. Spaak, not altogether pillars temoins, ces criminels de droit commun
of society. If they had fewer crimes and mur- M. Spaak se borne adire d'eux qu'ils n'appartien:
ders on their consciences, they might perhaps nent pas a 1'elite sociale. S'ils avaient sur la
even belong to the category of pillars of society. conscience un peu moins de crimes et d'homiHe is prepared to admit that they are not pillars cides, on les rangerait peut-etre dans l'elite de la
of society and that their testimony cannot, there~ societe. Quoi qu'il en soit, M. Spaak est pret a
fore, be entirely believed. But with regard to reconnaitre qu'ils n'appartiennent pas a l'elite
certain witnesses, although Mr. Spaalt has not' de la societe et que, par consequent, on ne peut
democratic forces which have drenched the soil
of Greece with their blood.

1

Sixty-eighth meeting of the First Committee.

1 Soixante-huitieme seance de
la Premiere Commission.

•
20 odobre 1947

375

named them, apparently because he does not
know their names and surnames; judging from
all that' he saw, it is a terrible picture, a kind
of phantasmagoria, a kind of witches' revelling
in false testimony-he thought that the depositions of certain witnesses should not be given
credence.
It is not surprising that even those representatives who thought it essential at all costs to support the American charges against Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Albania, were unable to say more
than, for instance, did Mr. Delbos, the representative of France. I would remind you that,
after analyzing all the proofs submitted by the
United States and United Kingdom delegations
against Greece's three northern neighbours, Mr.
Delbos said word for word the following: "It
would seem to us that Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and
Albania have taken some part in the Greek civil
war, rendering some aid to the guerrillas, because without their aid the guerrillas would, of
course, not have been able to cross the frontier."l
Observe the language used by Mr. Delbos. He
thinks, "it would seem to us" that Yugoslavia
rendered assistance, took "some" part in the civil
war. But wait, you must say what part. "Some
part" means some not exactly defined part. Mr.
Delbos does not take it upon himself to prove
what part, because he does not know. "Rendering some aid": the guerrillas were aided by Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, which threw
open their territories out of respect for the principle of asylum, gave them medical assistance,
bound up their wounds, fed the hungry and
exhausted guerrillas who had been cornered at
the frontier by Greek monarchist troops. Does
Mr. Delbos think it is a breach of international
law to give such assistance? It is the sacred duty
of every State to give asylum on its territory to
the political opponents of a Government against
which they are fighting in their own country,
to bind up their wounds if they are bleeding, to
give them bread if they are hungry and water
if they are thirsty. By using these words: "it
would seem to us", "taken some part", "rendering some aid", Mr. Delbos indicates that he has
doubts, that he has hesitations ~bout this matter,
that he is not convinced that all these slanders
and wicked calumnies uttered by the political
opponents of Greece's neighbours are indeed
well-founded; but he cannot act otherwise. It is
said that ((volentem fata ducunt, nolentem trahunt"-"the unwilling are dragged along by
fate, but the willing are led". He is obliged to
say: "Since we are in for a ride, let's have a
ride." There is a story about a parrot which
was grabbed by a cat and dragged away. All
that the parrot could do was to say: "Since we
are in for a ride, let's have a ride:' In the same
way, Mr. Delbos realizes that it merely seems
to him that there are some disconnected facts
which merely enable him to assume that there
have been some violations. What can you do
1 Seventy-second meeting of the First Committee. The
speaker is quoting from an interpretation from French
into Russian.

Quafre-vingt-dix-septi~me seance pleniere

se fier entierement a leurs depositions. Pour
certains temoins done, encore que
Spaak neles ait pas nommes, £aute sans doute de connaitre
leurs noms et prenoms, i1 a admis, en pensant a
tout ce qu'il avait vu - a cet horrible tableau, a
toute cette fantasmagorie, a ce veritable sabbat
de faux-temoins - il a declare, dis-je, qu'il fallait
se mefier des declarations de certains temoins.
11 n'est pas etonnant que meme ceux des
representants qui ont cru devoir appuyer a tout
prix les accusations americaines contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie, n'aient pu en dire
plus que ce qu'a dit, par exemp1e', M. Delbos,
au nom de la delegation de la Frahce. Je vous
rappellerai qu'apres avoir examine toutes les
preuves alleguces contre les trois voisins septentrionaux de la Grece par la delegation des EtatsUnis et celle du Royaume-Uni, M. Delbos a dit
litteralement: "D nous semble que la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie ont pris une certaine part a la guerre civile en Grece, en fournissant une certaine aide aux guerillas, car sans
cette aide les partisans ne pourraient evidemment
passeI' la frontiere\"
Voyez ce langage de M. Delbos. D a l'impression, "il nous semble" que la Yougoslavie a prete
son assistance, qu'elle a pris "une certaine part"
a la guerre civile. Eh bien, il faut nous dire
quelle part elle y a prise. "Une certaine part",
cela veut dire qu'on ne sait pas quelle part elle
y a prise. M. Delbos ne prend pas sur lui de
preciseI', parce qu'il ne sait pas. "Fournissant
une certaine aide": certes, les partisans ont ete
aides par la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie;
ces pays.leur ont ouvert leur'territoire en vertu
du droit'd'asile, ils leur ant donne des secours
medicaux, ils ont panse leurs blessures, ils ant
nourri les partisans affames et epuises que les
troupes monarchistes grecques acculaient a la
frontiere. M. Delbos estime-t-il qu'une aide de
ce genre constitue une violation des regles du
droit international? C'est le droit sacre de tout
Etat de donner asile sur son territoire aux dissidents politiques qui luttent dans leur propre pays
contre leur Gouvernement, de panser leurs blessures lorsqu'ils saignent, de leur donner du pain
s'ils ont faim et de leur douner a boire s'ils ont
soi£. En employant des e~pressions telles que:
"il nous semble", "une certaine part", "une certaine aide", M. Delbos a montre qu'il gardait des
doutes, qu'il avait des hesitations sur cc point,
qu'il n'etait pas convaincu du bien-fonde de
toutes ces accusations, de ces viles calomnies profCrees par les adversaires politiques des pays
voisins de la Grece; mais il n'a pu agir autrernent. Volentem fata ducuntJ nolentem trahuntJ
dit-on: le destin guide celui qui s'y confie, il
entraJ:ne de force celui qui s'y oppose. M. Delbos
est oblige de dire: "Puisqu'il faut y alIer,
alIons-y." Cela me rappelle l'histoire du perroquet pris par un chat qui l'emportait de force.
ne lui restait rien d'autre faire que de crier:
"Allons-y, puisqu'il faut y aIler." M. Debos se
rend bien compte qU'il n'a qu'une impression,
qu'il y a seulement des fragments de donnees,

M:

n

a

1 Soixante-douzieme seance de la Premiere Commission.
Cette citation est tide de l'interpretation du fran~ais
en russe.

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

376

20 October 1947

when someone grabs you by the scruff of the lesquels permettent tout au plus de supposeI'
l'existence de violations. Mais quand le chat
" ; so h"
g91
a ong
~ goes along"
neck, you have to "
and votes for the American resolutiOn. Not con- vous tient au cou, on est bien oblige de marcher,
et M. Delbos marche en votant pour la resolution
tent with that, he submits a coy amendment
.
which is not really very different from saymg: americaine. Bien mieux, il presente un amende"On the one hand, you can't bilt confess and on ment gentiment ambigu, qui au fond correspond
the other hand you can't but avow", or there au sentiment qu'exprime la locution rIisse bien
is still another way of putting it: "To acquire connue: "il faut reconnaltre la chose, mais il faut
aussi admettre le contraire"; il voudrait, comme
a fortune and maintain one's innocence."
on dit, "faire fortune mais rester honnete."
Voila a quoi aboutit la Premiere Commission.
That is the situation in the First Committee.
. Le representant de la Norvege nous dit: "on nous
The representative of Norway says: "The ~v~:
apporte d'etranges preuves et je ne vois pas comdence is queer; I cannot base my charges on It.
je pourrais fonder une accusation la-dessus."
ment
Mr. Spaak said the witnesses v:er.e, of course,
bandits, cutthroats, common cflmmals, agents M. Spaak declare: les temoins etaient en realite
provocateurs, perjurers, of whose character ten- des bandits, des brigands, des criminels de droit
fold evidence had been given, in fact, they were commun, des agents provocateurs, de faux
what Mr. Spaak described as "not pillars of so- temoins, dont la valeur morale a ete revelee a
ciety" and could not be regarded as trustworthy. maintes reprises; bref, ce n'est pas "l'elite de la
societe", pour reprendre les termes de M. Spaak,
et on ne peut leur faire confiance.
M. Delbos dit ouvertement qu'il n'y a rien de
. Mr. Delbos says outright that there is no concrete evidence but only that "it would seem", "it solide et qu'il semble simplement, qu'on suppose,
would appear", or "it is possible that". Th.at qu'il est possible que ...Mais en depit de tout
being the position, a solution is, nevertheless, dIS- cela, on trouve neanmoins une solution, qui serait
covered, that proposed in the qraft resolution celle que propose le projet de resolution dont
submitted by the First Committee of the General l'Assemblee generale a ete saisie par la Premiere
Commission.
Assembly.
..'
La majo~ite de la Premiere Commission a reThe majority ohhe Firsf CommIttee, as I Said,
admitted that they were not really familiar with connu, comme je l'ai deja indique, qu'au fond
the documentation. That is the supreme tragedy e11e n'avait pas pris connaissance des documents.
of the situation. Mr. McNeil, for instance, said: C"est la une situation vraiment tragique. M. Mc"Do you mean to say you want everyone to know Neil, par exemple, nous adit: "Peut-on vraiment
and study these documents? It would be better demander a chacun de connaItre et d'avoir etudie
not to delve into a fog of deta.il. We should rely ces documents? Il vaut mieux ne pas se perdre
on the Commission, because it is a very good dans un nuage de details. Nous devons nous fier
Commission." Mr. McNeil assured us that it was a la Commission parce que c'est une excellente
a very good Commission, because there was a Commission." M. McNeil a voulu nous perfriend of his on it, a very good friend and a suadeI' que cette Commission est excellente parce
splendid chap. I am quite willing to believe that qu'e11e compte parmi ses membres un ami a lui,
he is a splendid chap, that he is a very good un excellent ami et une excellent homme. Je crois
friend of Mr. McNeil's and that it all amounts bien volontiers que c'est un homme excellent et
to this: "Tell me who your friends are, and I un tres ban ami de M. McNell; comme dit le
shall tell you who you are." Nevertheless, I proverbe: "Dis-moi qui tu hantes, je te dirai
should like to see the proofs; I should like to qui tu es." Neanmoins, je voudrais voir des faits,
have the facts; I should like to read the deposi- des donnees precises, je voudrais lire les depositions of witnesses; and I should like to be con- tions des temoins et je vOIidrais etre sCir que ce
.vinced that these were honest witnesses who were sont des temoins honnetes et incorruptibles, que
not bribed or tortured by the Greek police or a ce ne sont pas de pauvres etres que la police
military tribunal. But there are no such proofs. grecque ou un tribunal militaire ont tortures.
Mais ces preuves.la n'existent pas.
,
On nous dit: Permettez, le Conseil de securite
We are told: Just a minute, the Security
Council set up a Commission of Investigation; a designe une Commission d'enquete; la Comthe Commission of Investigation nominated a mission d'enquete a constitue un Groupe subsi'Subsidiary Group; the Subsidiary Group has diaire, et le Groupe subsidiaire a fait telle chose
been doing something or other; it saw something et a vu telle. chose. Ce Groupe merite confiance
or other. It should be trusted; the Commission et, comme la Commission lui fait confiance, la
trusts it. The Commission submitted a report. Commission d'enquete a presente un rapport, il
We should trust this Commission and so the faut faire confiance a la Commission. C'est
First Committee should, without going into de- pourquoi la Premiere Commission doit accepter
tail, without delving into this fog of detail, take ce rapport, de confiance, et sans entrer dans ce
all this on trust and submit it to the Assembly. nuage de details, et le presenter a l'Assemblee.
Of course, the Assembly will affix its rubber Bien ente:r;tdu, l'Assemblee approuvera automastamp. How can such a large number of people tiquement. Comment une reunion aussi nomstudy everything we say here? But I am giving breuse pourrait-elle entrer dans le detail de tous
you names and surnames and I am telling you nos debats ici? Mais moi je vous cite des noms et
that these are false witnesses and criminals. Let des prenoms, je vous dis que ce sont la des faux
someone get up and say: "No, they are not temoins et des criminels. Que que1qu'un se leve et

20 octobre 1947

377

criminals." At this twelfth hour, I am still waiting for the accusers to say: "Such and such witnesses, made such and such depositions, which
show Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania to be
guilty, and on that basis we can with a clear conscience vote against Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and
Albania." They have not done this yet, and they
will not do it, if course, later, because if this
course were open to them, they would have
pressed their charges to the end; they would not
have withdrawn them; they would not have
glosssed over them, as Mr. Johnson did in the
First Committee and as the United States, British
and French delegations pave done.
At an earlier stage, they submitted a document1
reading as follows: "The General.Assembly ...
finds that Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, in
contravention of principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, have given assistance and support to the guerillas fighting against the Greek
Government". In the resolution submitted to us
now 2, however, we find the following: "Taking
account of the report of the Commission of Investigation which found by a majority vote"that is, neither we, nor the Committee, nor the
majority of the Committee but the majority of
the Commission and the Commission must bear
responsibility for this-"that Albania, Bulgaria
and Yugoslavia had given assistance" and the
Assembly calls upon them to abstain therefrom
in future. Compare these two resolutions. Do
they coincide? Does the substitution of the second
resolution for the first not bear witness to the fact
that the accusers themselves do not believe in
their accusations, that they are withdrawing these
accusations, that they do not wish to be held
responsible and are sheltering behind the fact
that this has been recognized by the Commission
-and I shall have more to say about this Commission.

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pltlniere

me dise: Non, ce ne sont pas des criminels. Quant
a moi j'attends encore, a la derniere minute, que
les accusateurs precisent: "un tel et un tel ont fait
telle et telle deposition qui accuse la Yougoslavie,
la Bulgarie et l'Albanie et, sur la base de ces
depositions nous pouvons de bonne foi voter
contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie."
lIs ne I'ont pas fait jusqu'a present et ils ne le
feront pas a l'avenir, car s'ils en avaient la possibilite, ils maintiendraient leurs accusations jusqu'au bout, ils ne les auraient pas retirees, ils
ne les auraient pas attenuees comme l'a fait
M. Johnson a la Premiere Commission et
comme I'ont fait toutes les delegations, I'americaine, la britanniqu~ et la fran~aise.
En effet, on nous avait presente d'abord un
documene qui disait: "L'Assemblee generale .••
conclut que I'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie ont, contrairement aux principes qu'enonce
la Charte des Nations Unies, prete leur assistance ou leur soutien aux francs-tireurs qui
combattent le Gouvernement hellenique." Or,
dans la resolution qui nous est soumise2" il est
dit: "Prenant acte du rapport de la Commission
d'enquete qui a conclu a la majorite •.. " .......
Donc ce n'est pas notre Commission, ce n'est
pas la majorite de la Premiere Commission, c'est
la majorite de la Commission d'enquete qui a
conclu, et cUe portcra la responsabilite de cette
conclusion - que: "1'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la
Yougoslavie ont prete leur assis~ance et leur soutien", et l'Assemblee invite ces pays a ne plus
le faire a I'avenir. Comparez ces deux textes de
resolution. COIncident-ils? La substitution du
second texte de resolution au premier ne demontre-t-eUe pas que les accusateurs necroient pas
a leur propres accusations, qu'ils les retirent,
qu'ils ne veulent pas en prendre la responsabilite
et qu'ils se retranchent derriere les conclusions
de la Commission d'enquete - une Commission
dont nous reparlerons.

Voila pour .les temoins. Voyons maintenant
That was the position with regard to the witnesses. How did matters starid with regard to la question des documents. Le 12 decembre 1946,
documents? Mr. Tsaldaris spoke in the Security M. Tsaldaris a fait une declaration au Conseil
Council on 12 December 1946. 8 As a proof that de securite 2 • Pour prouver que la Yougoslavie
Yugoslavia had designs against the territorial in- voulait porter atteinte a l'integrite territoriale de
violability and integrity of Greece, he referred to la Grece, il s'est refere a l'interview que le marean interview given by Marshal Tito, the Prime chal Tito, Premier Ministre de Yougoslavie,
Minister of Yugoslavia, on 16 October 1946. avait donne le 16 octobre 1946. Or, il a ete
But it was proved at the time that this interview prouve a l'epoque que cette interview a ete
was falsified, or at any rate, the part of it which falsifiee, tout au moins dans la partie qui contewas most offensive and which constituted the nait le passage le plus odieux et qui devait
gravest charge against the Yugoslav Government. constituer l'accusation la plus grave contre le
Gouvernement de Yougoslavie.
. Tsaldaris had done a very simple thing. He
M. Tsaldaris a procede a une operation fort
took one sentence out of the interview given by simple. Il a e111eve une phrase de l'interview
Marshal Tito of 16 October 1946 and substi- donnee le 16 octobre 1946 par le marechal Tito
tuted for it another sentence which Marshal Tito et ill'a remplacee par une autre, par une phrase
did not use but which did indeed make the inter- que le marechal Tito n'avait pas prononcee et
view offensive. Marshal Tito said, more or less, qui donnait a cette interview un caractere verithat Yugoslavia, which sympathized with her tablement adieux. Le marechal Tito avait dit
Macedonian brethren, would take measures in a peu pres ceci: la Yougoslavie, qui eprouve de
'Document A/C.l/191.
• See documents A/409 and A/409/Corr.1.
I See Official Records of the Securit, Council, First
Year, Second Series, No. 2.5.

'Document A/C.l/191.
• Voirles documents A/409 et A/409/Corr.l.
I Voir les Proces-verbaux officicls du Conseil dB slcuriel, Premi~re Annee, Seconde serie, No 25.

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

378

20 October 1947

la sympathie a l'egard de ses freres macCdoniens,
prendra aupres de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies les mesures necessaires pour satisfaire les
aspirations legitimes du peuple macedonien. Or,
dans l'interview te11e qu'elle a ete lue par le
representant de la Grece devant le Conseil de
securite, les mots: "aupres de 1'0rganisation des
Nation Unies" ont ete supprimes et remplaces
par le membre de phrase suiva,nt: "prendra des
mesures allant jusqu'a la terreur". C'etait la
une falsification, et cette falsification a ete demontree. Pourtant, c'est sur ce document falsifie que reposent toutes les accusations formuIees
contre le Gouvernement yougoslave.
On accuse le Gouvernement yougoslave d'avoir
The Yugoslav Government is, accused of having organized on its territory the Buljkes camp, cree, sur son territoire, le camp de Buljkes;
in which there were Greek guerrillas who were on affinne que, dans ce camp, des partisans grec8
given military instruction. For this purpose, even auraient re~u une instruction militaire, et qu'il
a special book was published-a manual, a book y aurait m8me un livre specialement publie a
of instructions or textbook. This is an interest- cet efIet, un manuel, un reglement, un guide.
ing matter, one which should be gone into. Un- Voila qui est interessant. Nous devrions tirer
fortunately, the First Committee was unable to cela au clair. Malheureusement, la Premiere
go into this question. Apparently, the existence Commission n'a pas ete capable de le faire.
of a military school in the Buljkes camp is cor- Nous apprenons maintenant que l'existence
roborated by those same witnesses of whom I d'une ecole militaire a Buljkes a ete confirmee
have already spoken. When the Commission it- par ces m8mes temoins dont j'ai deja parle.
self came to Buljkes, however, "no traces of a Mais lorsque la Commission elle-m8me s'est renmilitary school were found", as we see from the due a Buljkes, eUe "n'a pas trouve trace d'une
records of that Commission. In Part Ill, con- ecole militaire", ainsi qu'il ressort de son rapclusions, of document 8/360 entitled "Report of port. Dans la troisieme partie, conclusions, du
the Commission, of Investigation concerning document 8/360 intituIe, "Rapport'de la ComGreek frontier incidents", it is stated that "at mission d'enqu8te sur les incidents survenus le
the time of its visit to the camp at Buljkes on 2 long de la frontiere grecque", i1 est dit que,
April 1947, the Commission was unable to find "lors de sa visite au camp de Buljkes; le 2 avril
evidence of military activities or of military 1947, la Commission n'a pu trouver aucune
preuve qu'on s'y, livrat a une activite militaire
training ..."
ou qu'on y donnat une instruction militaire •.."
En ce qui concerne les preuves relatives a
There is yet another noteworthy point in the
report of the majority of the Commission which l'existence d'une ecole militaire a Buljkes, il faut
is by way of proof of the existence of a military relever un autre point dans le rapport de la
school at Buljkes. Apparently, the Commission majorite de la Commission. 11 apparait mainwas given a copy of a military manual of instruc- tenant qu'on a remis a la Commission un exemtion in guerrilla tactics. Certain witnesses have plaire d'une instruction pour l'enseignement de
testified that this manual was used' as a textbook la tactique de guerilla. Certains temoins ont
in BuIjkes. A witness was even found, a certain declare que cette instruction etait utilisee
Greek refugee, who testified he was one of the l'ecole de Buljkes, et qu'elle servait de manuel.
authors of this manual when it}Vas corp.piled in 11 s'est meme trouve un refugie grec, pour dethe summer of 1945 at another camp, Rubiga, clarer qu'il etait l'un des auteurs de ce manuel,
by a whole group of officers, forty-five in num- lequel a ete compose duraint l'ete 1945, dans
ber.
.
un autre camp, celui de Roubiga, par tout un
groupe d'officiers: quarante-cinq officier auraient pris part a la redaction de ce manuel.
The Commission of Investigation and the First
La Commission d'enquete et la Premiere
Committee have one copy of this manual, in Commission possedent un exemplaire de ce maGreek; it is in their archiveS, along' with 20,000 nuel, en langue grecque; cet exemplaire se
pages of various documents. Incidentally, this trouve aux archives parmi 20.000 pages de dqbook has no title-page, so it is not known where cuments divers. Entre parentheses, il y manque
it was published, where, when, and by whom. la page qui portait le titre et par consequent on
We do not know. There is, however, one inter- ignore ou l'ouvrage a ete publie; ou a-t-il 6te
esting thing: a list of the problems which the publie, quand, par qui? On n'en sait rien. En
guerrillas studied when they took this course of revanche on peut y trouver une chose tres interesmilitary instruction. There are sixty-four such sante: la liste des questions etudiees par les
problems. Furthermore, the manual has an in- partisans durant ce cours d'instruction militaire•.
troduction about which I must tell you, because ees questions sont au nombre de soixanteit so clearly exposes the false and provocative quatre. De plus, nous avons l'introduction de ce
nature of this manual, this document, this for- manuel, et il faut que je vous en parle, parce
gery. What problems were the guerrillas study- qu'elle revele que ce manuel, ce document tru..
ing in those troubled times? Here they are. The que, est un faux et constitue' une provocation.

the United Nations to satisfy the legitimate aspirations of the Macedonian people. In the interview which was quoted to the Security Council
by the representative of Greece, the words "in
the United Nations" were deleted and the following words were substituted: "would take
measures, even using terrorism if necessary".
This is falsifying the facts and the falsification
was proved. Nevertheless, the whole charge
against the Yugoslav Government is based on
such a forgery.

a

20 octobre 1947

379

handbook' begins with part one: "The historical
development of the army".

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pleniere

Quelles etaient donc les questions dont s'occupaient les partisans en cette periode critique?
Void: La premiere partie du manuel s'appe1le
"L'evolution historique de l'annee".
Ainsi donc, au moment ou se' deroulait cette
- So, while this desperate struggle was going on,
the guerrillas were to study the historical devel- lutte a vie ou', a mort, les partisans devaient
opment of the army. But why should guerrillas etudier l'evo~ution historique de l'armee. Mais
study this question at all? During the German pourquoi des partisans devraient-ils etudier
occupation, there were many guerrilla detach- cette question? Pendant l'occupation allemande,
ments in our country which did considerable nous avons eu sur notre territoire de tres nomdamage to the German occupation forces; breux detachements de partisans, qui ont cause
they trounced them soundly, wiped them out or des pertes considerables aux occupants allemands,
drove them across the borders of our country. qui les ont fort bien battus, -decimes, chasses
They certainly had no time to study, for instance, hors de notre pays. Et ces partisans n'avaient
the history or development of the German army. pas le loisir d'etudier l'histoire ou l'evolution de
Instead of studying the history of the develop- l'arn1ee allemande par exemple. Au lieu d'etu..
ment of the German army, the guerrillas pre- dier l'evolution historique de l'armee allemande,
ferred to fight against that army. It appears, les partisans preferaient battre cette armee. Or
however, that the first thing these Greek guer- il apparalt maintenant que les partisans grecs
rillas in Yugoslavia had to do was to study the qui se trouvaient en territoire yougoslave devaient avant toute chose etudier l'histoire de
history of the army.
l'armee.
Voyons la seconde partie: Strategie et tacTake part two: Strategy and tactics.
tique.
On sait, evidemment, que 'c'est en luttant
You all know, of course, that guerrillas learn
the strategy and tactics of modern armies by ac- contre les armees modernes que les partisans
tually-fighting these armies.
apprennent a connaitre leur strategie et leur
tactique.
,
Voyons les chapitres suivants:, 3. L'annement
Other parts are entitled as follows: 3. The
equipment of modern armies; 4. The air fprcesj des armees modernes; 4. Les forces aeriennes;
6. Aspects of infantry warfare; 7. Firing, march. 6. L'infanterie au combat; 7. Les feux, la
ing, terrain; 8. Missions, etc.; 11. Mobilized de- marche, le champ de bataille; 8. Les missions,
tachments.
.
etc.; 11. Les unites mobilisees.
Puis il yale chapitre 17, intituIe: Les devoirs
Then we have part 17, which is entitled: The
tasks of the soldier in actionj then there is part du soldat au combat; le chapitre 51: Les
51: Movement of the supply train during action mouvements du train au combat, et le chapitre
58: L'artillerie, etc.
.
and part 58: Artillery, etc.,
Cette
simple
enumeration
doit
suffire
a quiconFrom this list alone, is it not clear to anyone
who is in the least acquainted with the habits, que connmt, si peu que ce soit, la vie des partiorganization, living conditions, activities and op- sans, leur organisation, leurs conditions de vie,
erations of guerrillas, is it not clear that this leur action et leurs operations, pour voir clairemanual can be of no value to guerrillas, that it ment que ce manuel ne peut avoir aucun interet
is, rather, a handbook adapted for the command- pour eux, que ce manuel repond plut6t aux
ing officers of regular armies and that probably besoins des cadres de l'armee reguliere, et que
this "handbook" was brought into the Buljkes ce "manuel" a ete vraisemblablement irnporte
camp from Greek territory by a soldier who had au camp de Buljkes par quelqu'un qui avait
been in the Greek Army and was now in Yugo- servi dans l'armee grecqueet qui etait passe de
slav territory? Finally, if the manual really had la Grece en territoire yougoslave. Au surplus, en
been writte~ in Y~goslavia by forty-five authors, admettant que ce manuel ait ete vraiment redige
what can thIS pOSSIbly have to do with the Yugo-' en Yougoslavie, par quarante-cinq auteurs, en
slav Government? Is it not a well-known fact quoi ceIa mettrait il en cause le Gouvernement
~hat in prisons w~ich are most vigilantly guarded, yougoslave? Ne sait-on pas que dans les prisons
m all concentration camps, fortresses and other les plus severement gardees, que dans tous les
places of incarceration, enterprising people can camps de concentration, forteresses et autres lieux
always manage to read, to obtain the necessary de detention, il Se trouve toujours des hommesbooks, to study and to teach others without the energiques qui reussissent a lire, a se procurer
knowledge of those in charge of these places of des livres d'etude, a etudier et a enseigner sans
incarceration?
que les gardiens en aient connaissance?
Il n'empeche que ce pretendu "manuel" nous I
And yet this so-called manual appears as one
of the weightiest proofs that the Yugoslav Gov- est presente ici comme l'une des preuves les plus
er~~ent w~s giving ~reek guerrillas military importantes qui etablissent que le Gouvemement
trarnmg on Its own terntory to fight against the yougoslave a donne sur son territoire une
Greek Government.
instruction militaire aux partisans grecs, pour les
preparer a la lutte contre le Gouvernement grec.
This so-called handbook, this tattered volume,
En tete de ce pretendu manuel, tout dechire,
which has not even a title page, is prefaced by a prive de la page qui portait le titre, i1 y toutefois
sort 'of introduction. If you were to read this une introduction. Si vous lisiez cette introducintroduction, you would understand at once what tion, vous verriez tout de suite de quoi il s'agit.

Nlnety~seventh Plenary Meeting

380

the whole business is about. This introduction
states that the handbook was compiled by a
group of forty-five lieutenants-comrades, and
that they were chosen from amongst a number
of officers at the suggestion of some training and
strategy bureau for "comrades". This introduction frequently introduces the wo~d "comrades"
in inverted commas. Is it not absolutely clear
that they were trying to give to this so-called
handbook the character of a communist docu~
ment in which, of course, everyone calls everyone
else comrade, but they forgot that when Communists call anyone comrade, they do not put the
word in inverted commas?

20 October 1947

11 est dit dans cette introduction que le manuel
a ete redige par un groupe de quarante-cinq
officiers de camarades-lieutenants; que ces camarades avaient ete choisis parmi les ofliciers, sur
la proposition d'un bureau pour l'enseignement
de lastrategie aux "camarades". Le mot de
"camarade" entre guillemets revient a plusieurs
reprises dans cette introduction. 11 est parfaitement clait: qu'on s'est efforce de donner a tout
Ce pretendu manuel le caractere d'un document
communiste, car c'est entre communistes qu'on
se donne le nom de camarade. Mais ce faisant,
on a oublie qu'en employant l'appellation de
camarade, les communistes ne mettent pas ce
mot entre guillemets.
D'autre part, il est dit dans cette introduction:
Apart from that, the introduction contains
the following statement: "The aforementioned "Le cours en question a ete suivi, et continue
course was given and is still 'being given to the d'etre suivi, par les 'camarades' (entre guillemets)
'comrades' (in inverted commas) who belong to qui appartiennent au groupe communiste gree
de Roubiga."
the Greek Communist group of Rubiga."
Je vous le demande: n'est-il pas grossier,
I would ask you: Is this fraud, which was to
have served as evidence of Yugoslav-Bulgarian- n'est-il pas trop flagrant, ce faux des autorites
Albanian assistance to the guerrillas in their grecques, destine a prouver que les Yougoslaves,
struggle against the Greek Government, not too les Bulgares et les Albanais aidaient les partisans
crude and clumsy an invention of the latter? a lutter contre le Gouvernement grec? Lea
Clearly, the Greek accusers have tried to do too accusateurs grecs ont evidemment voulu trop
prouver.
much.
Des accusations sont formulees selon lesquelles
Charges are brought regarding Yugoslav and
Bulgarian designs against the territorial inviola- la Yougoslavie et la Bulgarie attenteraient a
bility of Greece. I shall not dwell on this in l'integrite territoriale de la Greee. J e ne veux
detail, since I wish to save time. In the text of pas m'arreter longuement sur cette question afin
my speech which has been distributed to repre- de ne pas vous faire perdre du temps. Le texte
sentatives and to the Press, I explained this as- que j'ai fait distribuer ai.Ix representants et ala
pect in detail. I am bound to say, however, that presse contient une explication detaillee a ce
all the grounds for such charges are based on two sujet. Mais je dois dire que toutes ces accusations
or three statements by certain Yugoslav and Bul- sont fondees uniquement sur deux ou trois
garian politicians, who said that the Bulgarian declarations d'hommes politiques yougoslaves et
and Yugoslav peoples were bound by ties of bulgares, lesque1s ont affirme que les peuples
blood, by fraternal ties with the Macedonian bulgare et yougoslave sont unis au peuple macepeople and hoped that in the future the Mace- donien par les liens du sang et qu'ils souhaitent
donian people would be united under the aegis ardemment. qu'un jour le rassemblement du
of the Yugoslav Republic. But what importance peuple macedonien se fasse sous l' egide de la
has this imaginary aspiration to violate the terri· Republique yougoslave. Mais que representent
torial integrity of Greece compared with the ces pretendues visees qui menaceraient l'integrite
utterances of Mr. Tsaldaris or certain members territoriale de la Grece, a cote des declarations
of the Greek Parliament, who assert very definite de M. TsaIdaris ou de certains membres du
claims to almost a quarter of Bulgarian territory Parlement grec qui revendiquent pres du quart
and make outright proposals, as they did during du territoire bulgare et font des propositions non
the Paris Conference, for instance, when the ambigues? .A la conference de Paris, par
Greek representative suggested to Mr. Bebler and exemple, le representant de la Grece a propose
Mr. Vilfan that they come to an amicable agree- a M. Bebler et Vilfan de liquider a l'amiable
ment and finish with Albania by dividing her l'affaire albanaise et de partager par moitie
equally between Greece and Yugoslavia?
l' Albanie entre la Grece et la Yougoslavie.
Of what importance are the innocent stateQue peut-on tirer des declarations bien innoments of a communist newspaper like Rabot- centes d'un journal communiste, le Rabotnitnichesko Delo or of some individual politician chesko Delo ou de quelque homme politique
that the Macedonian people should in future be isole, selon lesquelles le peuple macedonien devra
united with other sections of its population which s'unir un jour a celles de ses fractions qui lui
have been torn from it and are located in the ont ete arrachees et qui se trouvent actuellement
territories of other States? This is the only charge sur le territoire d'autres Etats? Cette accusation
made of designs against the territorial integrity d'attel1ter. a l'integrite territoriale de la Grece,
of Greece, and is so laughable that even the qui est la seule qu'on ait formulee, est tellement
accusers themselves did not dare to include it in ridicule que les accusateurs eux-memes n'ont pas
the draft resolution they are submitting to you ose l'inclure dans le projet de resolution qu'ils
on behalf of the majority of the First Committee. nous presentent au nom de la majorite de la
Premiere Commission.
In these circumstances, in view of the numerDans ces circonstances, devant ces nombreux
ous false witnesses, machinations, forged docu- faux temoins, ces tours de passe-passe, ces falsi-

20 octobre 1947

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance plenh\re

381

ments, crude misinterpretations, distortions, false fications de documents, ces deformations grosand ungrounded exaggerations-in view of these sieres, ces exagerations mensongeres et qui ne
so-called charges so thinly substantiated-is it reposent sur rien, devant toutes ces pretendues
surprising that many representatives, even some accusations cousues de fil blanc, faut-il s'etonner
of those who meekly followed the United States que beaucoup de representants, meme panni
delegation, had to pause in: bewilderment and ceux qui s'etaient resignes a suivre la delegation
refuse to support the drafts proposed by the des Etats-Unis, soient devenus indecis et aient
United States, United Kingdom and Greek dele- renonce a appuyer les textes proposes par les
gations. I shall again quote the representative delegations americaine, britannique et grecque?
of Norway, who said, " ... the evidence before Je cite encore le representant norvegien qui a .
the Committee is not sufficient to entitle us con- declare: "... les preuves qui ont ete apportees
clusively to lay down that the Govemments of a la Commission ne suffisent pas pour que nous
Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia have given aid puissions1etablir en toute certitude que les Gouand assistance to Greek guerrillas in contraven- vemements de l' Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de
la Yougoslavie ont prete aide et assistance aux
tion ofthe Charter."l
partisans grecs, commettant ainsi une infraction
a la Chartel . "
Avec une tres gran&: prudence, mais non sans
Mr. Nils Langhelle made a very guarded but
quite definite protest against the United States nettete, M. Nils Langhelle a presente des objecresolution, which lays the responsibility for the tions a la resolution des Etats-Unis qui rend les
present troubles at the door of Greece's three trois voisins septentrionaux de la Grece responnorthern neighbours. Mr. Langhelle said: "We sables des troubles qui se produisent. M. Langhave some doubts as to whether the evidence helle a declare: "Les donll(~es foumies par la
produced by the Commission of Investigation Commission d'enquete et par son Groupe suband its Subsidiary Group justifies such a definite sidiaire justifient-elles une conclusion aussi·
conclusion, especially in the case of Bulgaria. m categorique, surtout en ce qui conceme la Bulgarie? Nous avons quelques doutes a ce sujet 2."
Mr. Delbos, the French representative, whom
Le representant franc;ais, M. Delbos, que j'ai
I have already mentioned, declared: "I do not deja cite, a declare: "Je ne veux T)as dire,
want to say, because this does not seem to have parce que cela ne nous parait pas juridiquement
been proved legally-since presumption is not etabli - car presomption n'est pas preuve proof-that the Govermnents of Albania, Bul- que les Gouvemements albanais, yougoslave et
garia and Yugoslavia lend assistance to these bulgare apportent leur aide aces guerillasB. "
guerrillas." 2
In spite of his aggressive attitude towards
Tout en se montrant fort agressif a 1'egard de
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, Mr. Spaak la Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie,
had no option but to give way in face of the un- M Spaak a du reeuler devant les preuves irrefudeniable evidence of the falsity of these accusa- tables qui etablissent la faussete de ces accusations. Mr. Spaak had every reason for saying ID tions. C'est ainsi que M. Spaak a declare a la
the First Committee: "I do not think that any Premiere Commission: "Je ne crois pas qu'on
one can even hope to maintain that the northern puisse nourrir l'espoir d'etablir que les voisins
neighbours of Greece are the inciters of the civil septentrionaux de la Grece soient les instigateurs
war which is taking place in that country, I per- de la guerre civile qui se deroule dans ee pays.
sonally do not believe that they are, and if any Personnellement, je ne crois pas qu'ils le soient
one says otherwise, I think it is excessive and et si quelqu'un affirme le contraire, je pense que
hyperbolical."3
c'est une exageration, une hyperbole4 ."
If these were the opinions of representatives
Venant de representants qui se sont rallies a
who supported the Anglo-American position and la these anglo-americaine qui se sont efforces de
who made every attempt to reinforce that posi- soutenir eette these par tous les moyens et de
tion and to justify the policy pursued by the justifier la ligne de conduite tracee par les deleBritish and American delegations in this matter, gations britannique et americaine, un tellangage
does this not prove the complete collapse of the ne temoigne-t-il pas de l'ecroulement total des
charges brought against Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and accusations portees contre la Yougosla;vie, la.
Albania? The British and American accusers Bulgarie et l'Albanie? Les accusateurs britanrealized this very quickly and hastened to accept niques americains l'ont tres vite senti; iIsse sont
~onditionally the French amendment, grabbing empresses d'aceepter eonditionnel1ement l'amenIt as they would at a sheet anchor to save them dement franc;ais, iIs s'y sont accroehCs comme a
from the grave moral defeat which they would uhe bouee de sauvetage, afin d'eviter la defaite
have sustained had they ~sisted further. Indeed, morale qui les cut attendus s'ils s'etaient obswhen Mr. Johnson submItted, on behalf of the tines. En dIet, M. Johnson en presentant au
Govemment of the United States of America, the nom du Gouvemement des Etats-Unis d'Ameincriminatory text contained in document rique son acte d'accusation, tel qu'il figure dans
Sixty-eighth meeting' of the First Committee.
Sixty-third meeting of the First Committee.
• Sixty-fifth meeting of the First Committee. The
speaker is quoting from an interpretation from French
into Russian.
'
1

S

Soixante-huitieme seance de la Premiere Commission.
• Soixante·troisieme seance de la Premiere Commission.
a Soixante-cinquieme seance de la Premiere Commission. Cette citation est tiree de l'interpretation du fran"ais en russe.
1

Ninety~seventh Plenary Meeting

382

20 October 1947

A/C.l/191, he asserted that the majority of the le document A/C.l/191, nous a annonce que
members of the Commission were convinced of la majorite des membres de la Commission etait
the guilt of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, persuadee de la culpabilite de la Yougoslavie,
but that the United States Government was pre- de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie, mais que le Goupared to withdraw this charge and to accept the vernement americain etait pret a retirer son
French amendment, if only the Governments of accusation et a accepter l'amendement fran~ais
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania would state si les Gouvernements yougoslave, bulgare et althat they were prepared to co-operate with the banais, se declaraient prets a collaborer avec la
Commission which would be responsible for su- Commission qui serait chargee de veiller a l'exe'pervising the implementation of the General .As- cution des resolutions de l'Assemblee generale.
sembly's resolutions.
n etait clair des le debut que cette declaration
It was clear from the outset that this declaration was a trick, an attempt to exercise"pressure constituait une manreuvre, une ruse, que c'etait
on the three Governments referred to, to extort un moyen de pression sur ces trois Gouvernetheir agreement to establish a frontier commis- ments pour les obliger a accepter la creation
sion on which, apparently, the Governments of d'une commission de frontieres dans laquelle les
the United States of America and the United Gouvernements du Royaume-Uni et des EtatsKingdom are reposing all their hopes. It was Unis d'Amerique semblent mettre tous leurs esclear from the very beginning that the original poirs. Il etait clair, des le debut, que les precharges-which I have already spoken of in such mieres accusations, que j'ai deja examinees de
detail, and which were advanced in the United fal$on detaillee et qui etaient contenues dans la '
States resolution, which proposed that the Gen- resolution americaine, par laquelle I'Assemb16e
eral Assembly should take it as proved that generale etait invitee a reconnaltre comme etabli
Yugoslavia, Albania and Bulgaria had com- que la Yougoslavie, l'Albanie et la Bulgarie
mitted a breach of international. law by giving, avaient viole les regles du droit international en
as alleged, assistance to the Greek guerrillas in pretant assistance aux partisans grecs dans leur
their struggle against the Tsaldaris regime-:-were lutte contre le regime Tsaldaris; il etait clair,
nothing other than an exaggerated demand de- dis-je, que ces accusations n'etaient autre chose
signed, on the one hand, to intimidate, and on qu'une intimidation doubIee de marchandage;
the other hand, to serve as a bargaining counter on se reservait la possibilite de baisser le ton,
so that they could later lower the tone, cut the d'en rabattre sur le prix et, en cedant sur la
price and by giving way in the matter of their question de l'accusation formulee contre les trois
charges against the three Governments, attract Gouvernements, de rallier ceux des representants
to their side those representatives who had pro- qui avaient proteste contre ces accusations mais
tested against these charges but were prepared to qui neanmoins jugeaient possible de ereer la
consider setting up the commission proposed by Commission proposee par les Britanniques et les
the British and Americans.
Americains.
It is evident from the behaviour of the United
Qu'il s'agit d'un marchandage, d'un moyen
Kingdom delegation that this was a bargaining de pression, l'attitude de la delegation du
measure, a means of exerting pressure and coer- Royaume-Uni le montre bien. A la veille meme
cion. Only the day Defore the settlement of this du jour ou la question devait etre tranchee,
problem, Mr. McNeil submitted a resolution M. McNeil presentait une resolution (le docu(document A/Col /207) which contained no ment A/C.l/207) qui ne contenait aucune accharges against Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Al- cusation contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et
bania, but merely referred in this respect to the l'Albanie, mais qui, sur ce point, se referait simopinion of the majority of the Commission. He plement a l'avis de la majorite de la Commission.
suggested that this amendment replace the in- Il proposait de substituer son· amendemcnt aux
criminatory paragraphs of the American resolu- paragraphes de la resolution americaine, qui
tion, if Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania would contenaient ces accusations, si la Yougoslavie, la
accept the conditions laid down by Mr. Johnson. Bulgarie et l'Albanie acceptaient les conditions
On the following day, however, even without dictees par M. Johnson. Or le lendemain, sans
waiting for a reply from Bulgaria or Albania he avoir meme rec;u de reponse de la Bulgarie ou
urgently distributed to members of the First de,I'Albanie, iI s'est emprcsse de faire distribuer
Committee a new resolution, in which his origi- aux membres de la Premiere Commission une
nal proposal was replaced by a harsher formula; nouvelle resolution plus severe que la premiere;
he had nq scruples about contradicting himself il n'a pas craint a que1ques heures d'intervalle
in principle within such a short space oftime.
de se contredire lui-m@me d'une fal$on formel1e
et flagrante.
In the First Committee, the USSR delegation
La delegation de l'URSS a dit a la Premiere
pointed' out that such a bargain was inadmissible Commission que ce marchandage etait inadmisand that it was inadmissible to use all possible sible, qu'il etait inadmissible d'avoir recours a
means of pressure, to threaten, intimidate, and des moyens de pression de toute sorte, de mena.insist, in order to obtain from Yugoslavia, Bul- cer, d'intimider, de revenir a la charge, pour
garia and Albania an admission of something extorquer de la Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie, et
they cannot admit, a confession of having done de l'Albanie l'aveu de crimes qu'clIes n'ont pas
something they have not done, promising them in commis et que par consequent elles ne sauraient
return for this a milder and more lenient reso- avouer, en leut promettant en echange de sou~
lution, which would he submitted for the consid- mettre une resolution moins severe, moins dure

r,
~,

,,

.

20 octobre 1947

383

eration of the General Assembly. I asked at the
time: Are the accusers themselves sure that their
charges are just and well~founded, if they adopt
such a method of discussing this question in the
First Committee? It is enough to say that in the
First Committee the American resolution was
voted in a rather unusual manner; the voting
began not with the beginning, but with the middle; then the end was voted on, and then the
beginning. All this was done quite nakeCUy and
rudely. Things reached such a pitch that Mr.
Spaak, that well-known authority on procedural
matters, said that, of course, the procedure that
. was being followed was not the best kind of procedural system, not the best way to vote. He
even agreed that it was an abnormal method, as
we had pointed out in our criticism ~f those w~o
had adopted this procedure. He saId: Well, It
can't be helped. If we cannot get the decision
we need by using the normal methods established
by the rules of procedure, then we can employ
methods which are here called abnormal and
which certainly do not conform to the rules of
procedure.

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pleniere

a l'examen de l'AssembIee generale. J'ai
demande alors: les accusateurs sont-ils convainClls eux~memes de la justice et du bien-fonde de

leurs accusations si pour l'examen de cette question a la Premiere Commission ils ont recours a
une pareille methode? Qu'il me suffise de dire
que pour le vote de la resolution americaine a.
la Premiere Commission, on a suivi une procedure qui n'est pas tout 11. fait habituelle: on a
commence non pas par le debut, mais. par le
milieu, puis on a mis aux voix la fin et enfin le
debut. Tout cela a ete fait avec sans-gene et
grossierete, au point que M. Spaak, qui fait
autorite en matiere de procedure, a dil declarer
que, evidemment, la procedure de vote adoptee
est loin d'etre la meilleure. 11 a meme admis que
c'etait une procedure anormale, comme nous le
reprochions a ceux qui y ont eu recours. Mais
que voulez-vous, a-toil declare, si nollS ne pouvons
pas trouver la solution qui nous convient en
employant les moyens ordinaires prevus par le
reglement interieur, il nous est alors loisible d'appliquer une methode qu'on considere ici corome
anormale, et qui, en fait, n'est pas conforme au
reglement.
En ernployant tous les moyens possibles et imThus, the United States delegation finally
managed by sundry machinations to obtain a possibles, la delegation des Etats-Unis a pu ainsi
majority of votes; the various paragraphs of the s'asurer une majorite de voix; certains paraAmerican resolution, after being watered down graphes de la resolution am€ricaine, fortern:ent
considerably by the French and United Kingdom attenues d'ailleurs par les amendements fran9ais
amendments,. were adopted, with six to eight et britannique, ont CU; adoptes alors que six a.
delegations voting against and a considerable huit delegations votaient contre et qu'un nombre .
number of delegations, sometimes as many as considerable de delegations, allant jusqu'a dix
ten to fifteen abstaining. Here it should be ou quinze s'abstenaient. n faut noter ici que lors
pointed out that in the subsequent voting on the des scrutins suivants, portant sur d'autres resoluother resolutions, the number of abstentions rose tions, le nombre des abstentions s'est parfois eleve
to twenty~six, with six to eight delegations voting 11. vingt~six; alors que six a huit delegations voin favour of the resolutions, but when a vote was taient en faveur de ces resolutions; enfin', lorstaken on the draft resolution of the Union of qu'on a vote sur la proposition de l'Union des
Soviet Socialist Republics, some paragraphs of Republiques socialistes sovietiques, quelques~uns
that resolution were rejected by an insignificant des paragraphes ont ete rejetes par la tres petite
majority of seventeen delegations to eleven, with majorite de dix-sept voix contre onze, avec vingt~
twenty-five to twenty~seven abstentions.
cinq ou vingt-sept abstentions.
It is only when such monstrous rules of proEn effet, c'est seulement en appliquant une .
cedure are used as in this case, when delegatiOns regIe de procedure aussi grotesque que celle qui
abstaining are not reckoned as present and vot~ a ete adoptee ici, et en vertu de laquelle les deleing, that you get such a situation as this: eleven gues qui s'abstiemlent ne sont pas consideres
delegations vote against, and twenty-seven ab- comme presents et votants, que l'on peut aboutir
stain (Le. do not agree with either resolution), a pareille situation: onze voix contre; vingt-sept
making a total of thirty-eight; and yet the resolu- abstentions de la part de representants qui ne
tion is considered to be adopted because seven- sont pas d'accord avec telle ou telle resolution;
teen votes have been cast for it. The trick is so cela fait trente-huit, mais la resolution n'en est
glaring that it can be performed only on some- pas moins declaree adoptee, parce qu'elle a
one who has been blind from birth.
obtenu dix-sept voix. C'est la une manceuvre si
evidente qu'e11e ne saurait tromper que les aveugles de naissance.
Do not these undeniable facts serve as a proof
Ces faits indeniables ne temoignent-ilspas de
of the moral and political defeat of the Anglo- la defaite morale et politique subie par le bloc
American bloc, which saw itself compelled by the anglo~americain? Il adtl abandonner ses precriticisms expressed by many delegations to with- mieres accusations devant les critiques vigoudraw its original accusations and be satisfied with reuses que lui ont adressees de nombreuses deleresolutions in which no trace really remains of gations, et i1 d0it se contenter de resolutions ou,
the Greek-British-American accusations?
en somme, il ne reste pas trace des accusations
greco-anglo-americaines.
Of course, we should be satisfied with this, but
Nous devrionsevidemment etre satisfaits de
We cannot be satisfied, because this is not all. The cette constatation, mais nous ne pouvons l'etre,
accusers beat a retreat from the original, abso- parce que cela n'est pas tout. Les Anglo-Amenlutely unjustified positions to others which are cains abandonnent leur position de depart, qui

Ninety.seventhPlenary Meeting

384

masked behind a thin veil of fine words; but,
in actual fact, the same incrimihatory provisions
are introduced, or in other words, as I have already said in the First Committee, a dose of
castor oil is diluted with something sweet so as
to make it taste less unpleasant. That is not satis·
factory. The United States resolution must be rejected in its present amended American-BritishFrench form as well, because it is unjust and
because you cannot refer to the opinion of the
majority of the Commission, based on those
same false witnesses who do not even deserve to
be mentioned in the august Assembly where we
are now gathered, the General Assembly of the
United Nations.

We cannot adopt a resolution which is in any
way based upon the testimony of these perjurers,
agents prouocateurs and criminals, for whom no
one wants to take responsibility, as was shown by
the First Committee which placed the responsibility entirely upon the Commission of Investigation. You are asked to approve in this form
a decision which cannot bring peace, order or
tranquillity but which, .on the contrary, may become a source of fresh difficulties and complications, fresh grievances and insults, which may
become a source of new complications in the
various foreign policy questions which for two
years past have been constantly on the agenda
of one or another organ of the United Nations
and for which no solution has yet been found.
If the work of the Commission of Investigation
which was sent at the time to the Greek frontiers by the Security Council is to result finally in
what is contained in the majority resolution,
there will be every justification for saying that
"the mountain has given birth to a mouse".
There was, of course, no point in sending this
Commission merely for this purpose. There was
no point· in setting it up. But the Commission
was set up. The Commission was sent. The
Commission has given us worthless material
which cannot serve as a basis for our decisions.
And now, in spite of the obvious failure of the
work of this Commission and its Subsidiary
Group, it is proposed that we set up a new commission, which will again be sent to the same
place, to Salonika or to some other place, so that
. it may observe what is happening on the frontiers, so that it may be able to control the activities of the Yugoslav, Albanian and Bulgarian
Governments, so that it can interfere in their
internal affairs, tackling once again its task in
an irresponsible manner and failing to act as it
should in an unbiased and objective manner, just
as did the first Commission. It is impossible to
agree to set up such a commission, the functions
of which, moreover, directly contravene the fundamental principles of our Charter, namely, the
sovereign equality of peoples. That is why the
USSR delegation voted against setting up this
Commission, . and, a fortiori, against sending it

20 October 1947

etait absolument indefendable et se retirent sur
d'autres positions en se couvrant d'un rideau
d'arguments d'ordre litteraire; mais, au fond, ils
s'obstinent toujours a maintenir les memes accusations. En d'autres termes, comme je l'ai deja
dit a la Premiere Commission, on dilue l'huile
de ricin dans un verre d'eau sucree afin que le
goilt en soit moins desagreable. Nous ne pouvons
nous contenter de cela. La resolution americaine
doit ~tre egalement rejetee sous sa forme actuelle
telle qu'elle se presente a la suite des amendements fran~ais et britannique, parce qu'elle est
injuste, parce qu'on ne saurait faire valoir
l'opinion de la majorite de la Commission,'
laquelle se fonde sur les depositions de temoins
qui ne sont pas dignes de foi et'dont les noms ne
meritent meme pas d'etre mentionnes devant
cette haute Assemblee, devant l'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies.
Nous ne pouvons adopter une resolution qui se
fonde, dans quelque mesureque ce soit, sur les
depositions de ces fauxt moins, de ces provocateurs, de ces criminels, que personne ne se soucie
de couvrir: ainsi, la Premiere Commission, loin
d'accepter des responsabilites, les rejette entierement sur la Commission d'enqu~te. On vOllS
demande donc d'approuver, sous cette forme,
une decision qui ne peut ramentr ni la paix, ni
l'ordre, ni le calme, mais qui menace au contrarre
de devenir la source de nouveUes difficultes, de
nouvelles complications, de nouveaux outrages
et de nouvelles offenses en provoquant de nouvelles complications dans ces relations politiques
qui, depuis deux ans deja, figurent a l'ordre du
jour de l'un ou de l'autre des organes de rOrganisation des Nations Unies et pour lesquelles
on continue a ne pas trouver de solution.
Si la tache de la Commission d'enquete que le
Conseil de securite aen son temps envoyee aux
frontieres de la Grece doit aboutir, en fin de
compte, a ce que contient la resolution de la
majorite, on peut dire, a juste titre, que "la montagne a accouche d'une souris". Pour un tel
resultat, ce n'etait evidemment pas la peine d'envoyer cette Commission. Ce n'etait pas la peine
de la creer. Mais, la Commission a ete erc~ee;
elle a ete envoyee. EUe nous rapporte une documentation sans valeur et qui ne peut servir de
fondement a nos decisions. Et maintenant,
malgre l'echec evident des travaux de cette Commission et de son Groupe subsidiaire, void qu'on
nous propose de creer une nouvelle commission,
qui serait de nouveau envoyee au m~me endroit,
a Salonique ou ailleurs, pour observer ce qui se
passe aux frontieres; cette commission aurait la
possibilite de contr8ler l'activite des Gouvemements yougoslave, albanais et bulgare et d'intervenir dans leurs affaires interieures en proc6dant
avec la meme absence de scrupules que la Commission originale 'et sans remplir son devoir d'impartialite et d'objectivite. La creation de cette
commission, dont les fonctions seraient, en outre,
en contradiction flagrante avec un principe essentiel de notre Charte, celui de l'egalite de souverainete des peuples, la creation de cette commissIon est inacceptable. Voila pourquoi la
delegation de l'URSS a vote contre la creation
de cette commission et, a fortiori, contre l'envoi

20 octobre 1947

385

out and against its continuing to exercise the
functions which are being foisted upon it by the
First Cornmittee.
The establishment of such ~ commission constitutes an obvious breach of "the most important
principle of our Charter, as was pointed out by
the USSR delegation in a detailed statement in
the First Committee. I consider that I need only
remind you of this and so be absolved from expatiating on this question in detail.
The Greek question is causing anxiety to the
peoples of all democratic, peace-loving States,
and the decision proposed by the First Committee cannot possibly relieve this anxiety. Peaceloving peoples cannot condone attempts to conceal the real source of. the evils and sufferings
which have descended upon the Greek people
and which are threatening the peace and security
of Greece's neighbours and, ultimately, the security of the whole world. Only by removing
this real source of evil can we ensure peace on
the Greek frontiers, can we liquidate the complications in foreign policy which are threatening
. peaceful co-operation in the Balkans.

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pJeniere

en Grcce et contre l'activite ultcrieure de cette
commission dans le role que lui impose la Premiere Commission.
La creation d'une commission de ce genre constituerait une. violation flagrante du principe le
plus important de notre Charte et la delegation
de l'URSS a deja eu l'occasion d'en parler
longuement a la Premiere Commission. Je crois
qu'il suffit de le rappeler et que je puis me dispenser d'exposer les details de cette question.
La question grecque remplit d'inquietude
l'opinion publique dans les pays pacifiques et
democratiques, et la solution que nous propose
la Premiere Commission ne peut aucunement
apaiser cette inquietude. Les peuples pacifiques
ne peuvent accepter les tentatives qu'on fait pour
dissimuler la cause veritable des malheurs et des
rniseres qui aceabIent le peuple grec et qui cons·'
titue une menace pour la paix et le securite des
pays limitrophes de la Grece, ainsi qu'en fin de
compte pour la securite du monde entier. C'est
seulement en eliminant cette cause veritable du
mal qu'on pourrait assurer la paiX le long des
frontieres grecques et faire cesser les complications d'ordre international qui mettenten danger
la collaboration pacifique dans les Balkans.
La delegation de l'URSS a attire l'attention
The USSR delegation drew the attention of
the First Committee, and before that the atten- de la Premiere Commission, et precedemment
tion of the Security Council, to numerous facts celle du Conseil de securite, sur de nombreux
which confirm that the Greek Government itself faits qui confirment que c'est le Gouvernement
is responsible for this internal political situation grec lui-meme qui est responsable de la situation
and the foreign political situation resulting there- politique interieure de la Grece, et de la situation
from. These facts were pointed out to the exterieure qui en resulte. Ces faits ont ete egaleCommission of Investigation, which showed a ment mentionnes a la Commission d'enquete,
complete disregard for impartiality and for its mais cette Commission a failli a son devoir qui
duty of thoroughly and impartially investigating etait d'enqueter d'une maniere impartiale sur les
the facts which, in the interests of truth were faits que lui avaient soumis les autorites youpointed out by the Yugoslav, Bulgarian ~d Al- goslaves, bulgares et albanaises desireuses
banian authorities.
d'etablir la verite.
N'ai-je pas le droit de vous faire observer, du
Do I not have the right to point out, from
this distinguished platform, that this Commis- haut de cette augustc tribune, que la Commissi?n, incidentally, acted in such a provocatively sion a agi avec une partialite revoltante? En
bIased manner that, when, for instance, the effet, lorsque les Grecs lui ont propose de faire
Greeks suggested that fourteen incidents on une enquete sur quatorze incidents qui s'etaient
the Greek-Yugoslav frontier should be investi- produits a la frontiere greco-yougoslave, la Comgated, all these incidents except one, ·that at mission a enquete sur tous ces incidents sauf un,
Agnos. Germanos, were investigated? When the celui de Agnos Germanos. Mais lorsque le repreYugoslav representative proposed that three in- sentant yougoslave a demande a la Commission
cidents-those at Pericleia, Chrissi and Lake d'enqueter sur trois incidents: celui de Periclia,
Doiran, which took place in September, Octo- de Crissi et du lac Doiran, qui s'etaient produits
ber. and November 1946 respectively-be in- en septembre, octobre et novembre 1946, la
vestigated, not one of these incidents was in- Commission n'a enquete sur aucun d'entre eux.
vestigated by the Commission., When the Al- Lorsque le Gouvernement albanais a demaride
banian Government recommended that eight in- une enquete sur huit incidents, trois seulement
cidents be investigated, only three were inves- ont fait l'objet d'un examen. Lorsqu'il a
tigated. When it asked for thirty-two witnesses demande qu'on interrogeat trente-deux temoins,
to be given a hearing, only eight were heard. la Commission en a entendu seulement huit.
The demands of the Greek Government were, Quant aux demandes du Gouvernement grec,
e11es ont et(: satisfaites presque integralement.
however, given almost complete satisfaction.
Telle a ete l'attitude de la Commission dans
That is how the Commission operated in the
past. We have no guarantee that a commission ,le passe. Nous ne sommes pas silrs qu'il n'en
will act differently in the future, because there sera pas de meme a l'avenir, car la seule raison
is no justification for the activities of such a d'etre de cette Commission est de se conformer
commission except the political .plan which has au plan politique qui a ete congu dans les trebeen worked out in the labyrinths of the State fonds du Departement d'Etat et du Foreign
Department. and the British Foreign Office, and Office britannique; plan qui consiste a mettre la
which consists in placing Greece under tutelage Grece en tutelle et a la transformer en une base
and . turning her into a strategic base, under militaire et strategique, sous pretexte de la pre-

I

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

386

cover of the economic assistance purportedly
being given or which it is intended·to give to
Greece.
We say: You want to render assistance; then
let us set up a commission which will ensure
that this assistance is indeed used for the needs
of the Greek people and not for building strategic
roads, not for building all kinds of aerodromes,
not for training new corps of gendarmes and
police to clear up the guerrillas and not for
fighting the vanguard of the democratic forces
in Greece, the Greek people as a whole.
We say: if the Commission had done its
work objectively and impartially, the First Committee would have had sufficient data exposing
the intrigues of the Greek authorities against
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania. But for us
to be able to establish this reliably and to raise
the question of the Greek Government's responsibility for all that is happening on the
Greek-Yugoslav, the Greek-Bulgarian and
Greek-Albanian frontiers, there is quite enough
information even in that wretched documentation.. in those rubbishy 20,000 pages, which were
collected in the territories where the Commission worked in Greece and around Greece.
That is why the USSR delegation proposes
in its resolution (document AI AC.1 1199) that
the Greek Government be held responsible and
that the appropriate conclusions be drawn from
this. The most important conclusion reached by
the USSR. delegation, on the basis of numerous
factS and of a thorough study of the situation
which has arisen in Greece, is that the responsibility for this situation must be borne by the
banking and commercial cliques which wield
power in Greece and by the Governments of
States which are the main motive forces of
Greek policy as a whole.
The support given by the Governments of the
United States and the United Kingdom to the
present Greek Government, which serves the interests of Greek reactionaries, is the main reason
for the political and economic crisis Greece is
undergoing. All these facts leave no room for
doubt that the entire guilt and responsibility
for the various events and incidents in the relations between Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, on the one hand, and Greece on the
other, must be borne by the Greek Government
and must also be borne by those foreign States
. which, by their interference in Greek internal
affairs and their support of the· anti-democratic
and reactionary forces within Greece, are creating and increasing the numerous difficulties and
abnormalities, such as the clashes and complications which have given rise to the tense situation in Greece and in that part of Europe as
a whole. We are convinced that the presence in
Greece of British troops and the presence ID
Greece of many military instructors and experts
complicates the matter still further.
That 'is why the Government of the USSR
has been insisting, for more than a year, on the
withdrawal of British troops from Greece, and
on the recall of the United States military missions, instructors and experts. Satisfaction of

20 October 1947

tendue aide economique qu'on lui apporte ou
qu'on se propose de lui apporter.
Nous disons: vous voulez aider la Grece;
formons donc une commission chargee de veiller
a ce que cette aide serve uniquement a satisfaire
les besoins du peuple grec et non pas a construire
des routes strategiques, des terrains d'atterrissage
ou a former de nouveaux corps de gendarmerie
et de police pour ecraser le mouvement des
partisans, pour lutter contre l'avant-garde des
forces democratiques en Grece, pour combattre
le peuple grec tout entier.
Nous disons: si la Commission d'enquete avait
agi avec objectivite et impartialite eIle aurait
fourni a la Premiere Commission un nombre
suffisant de documents devoilant les intrigues des
autorites grecques contre la Yougoslavie, la
Bulgarie et l'Albanie. Mais, meme ces documents
si peu sa~isfaisants qu'ils soient, ce fatras de vingt
mille pages qu'a reuni la Commission chargee
d'enqu€ter en Grece et aux frontieres grecques,
suffisent pleinement a demontrer ces intrigues et
nous permettent de poser la question de la
responsabilite du Gouvernement grec pour tout
ce qui s'est produit aux frontieres greco-yougoslave,. greco-bulgare et greco-albanaise.
C'est pour cette raison que la delegation de
l'URSS propose, dans sa resolution (document
A/C.l/199), de reconnaitre la culpabilite du
Gouvernement grec et d'en tirer les conclusions
qui s'imposent. La conclusion principale que la
delegation de l'URSS tire d'un grand nombre
de faits ainsi que d'un examen soigneux de la
situation qui s'est creee en Grece est que la
responsabilite de cette situation incombe a la
clique de banquiers et de marchands qui est au
pouvoir en Grece, ainsi qu'aux Gouvernements
des pays qui sont le moteur principal de la
politique grecque.
L'appui accorde par les Gouvernements des
Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni au Gouvernement grec actuel, qui sert les interets des milieux
reactionnaires grecs, est la cause principale de la
crise economique et politique actuelle dans ce
pays. Tout cela ne laisse aUCun doute que toute
la responsabilite des evenements affectant les
relations entre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et
l'Albanie d'une part, et la Grece d'autre part,
incombe au Gouvernement grec lui-meme, ainsi
qu'a ceux des pays etrangers qui, par leur
intervention dans les affaires interieures de la
Grece et par l'assistance qu'ils pretent aux forces
antidemocratiques et reactionnaires dans ce pays,
creent ou aggravent les nombreuses anomalies et
difficultes, les nombreux conflits et complications
dont provient la tension qui existe en Grece et
dans toute cette partie de I'Europe. La presence
en Grece de troupes britanniques ainsi que de
nombreux instructeurs et experts ne fait, nous
en sommes convaincus, qu'aggraver la situation.
C'est pour cette raison que, depuis plus d'un
an, le Gouvernement de l'URSS dernande avec
insistance que les troupes britanniques soient
retirees de Grece et que les missions militaires,
les instructeurs et les experts americains soient

20 octobre 1947

387

Quatre-vingt-dix-septifllne seance phiniere

,
this legitimate demand is the essential pre-re- rappeIes. Satisfaire cette demande legitime est la
quisite for the re-establishment of order and condition essentielle du retablissement de l'ordre
social tranquillity in Greece, and is also the main et de la paix en Grece ainsi que de l'etablissement
condition for the establishment of normal rela~ de relations normales entre la Grece et ses voisins
tions between Greece and the States which are du nord.
her northern neighbors.
The Government of 'the USSR considers it
Le Gouvernement de l'URSS estime qu'il est
important to ensure that the materials sent to indispensable d'assurer que les ressources qu'on
Greece under the pretext of giving it economic envoie en Grece, sous pretexte d'aide economique
assistance are actually used for this purpose, that a ce pays, soient effectivement utilisces a cette
is to say, as economic assistance. To this end, fin, c'est-a-dire'aux fins d'aide economique. C'est
the Government of the USSR insists that a pourquoi le Gouvernement de I'URSS insiste
special commission be established to supervise pour qu'on cree une commission speciale chargee
and ensure the utilization of such aid solely in de veillera ce que l'aide fournie a la Grece soit
utilisee uniquement dans l'interet du peuple grec.
the interests of the Greek people. '
Je termine par ou j'ai commence. La question
I shall conclude my statement as I began.
The most important question, the fundamental veritable, le point essentiel dans tout ce probleme
basis of this whole Greek problem, is the with- grec, c'est le retrait des troupes etrangeres stationdrawal of foreign troops from Greece. No one nees en Grece. Personne ne saurait mer que la
can deny that the presence of British troops in presence des troupes britanniques en Grece est
Greece is 'having not a positive, but, 011 the con- loin d'etre bienfaisante; son influence sur la
trary, a negative influence, and is giving rise situation est en effet defavorable, puisqu'eUe
est la cause de complications sans nombre.
to very many complications.
Nous avons deja mentionne a la Premiere
I have already referred in the First Committee
to a statement by Major Willis, a member of Commission, une declaration du commandant
the Labour Party, who pointed out two years Willis, membre du parti travailliste, qui avait
ago that the Greek crisis would not be settled dit, i1 y a deux ans, qu'on ne pourrait regler la
so long as the existing state of affairs continued, crise grecque tant que se prolongerait la situation
so long as the best elements of the Greek people qui existait alors et tant qu'on continuerait, sous
were considered as criminals and treat((d. as le nez de l'armee britannique et des fonctioncriminals under the very noses of the British naires politiques anglais, a traiter les meilleurs
flls du peuple grec comme des criminels.
Army and of British political officials.
Nous avons mentionne une declaration faite
I drew attention to the statement made at
the same time by another British Labour Mem- au meme moment par M. Greenwood, membre
ber of Parliament, Mr. Greenwood, who said, du PaJ:lement britannique, qui avait dit: "Il est
"It is intolerable that British troops should be intolerable que les troupes britanniques soient
used in a way, which has led to international utilisees d'une fa~on qui a deja provoque un
differend international en Grece."
strife in Greece. m
Je vous rappellerai une lettre qu'un aviateur
I would remind you of a letter from a British
airman stationed in Salonika, which was read britannique avait envoyee de Salonique et qui
in the British House of Commons. In describing a ete lue a la Chambre des Communes. En
a peaceful demonstration by Greek patriots, the decrivant une manifestation pacifique des pawriter of this letter who declared that if the triotes grecs, l'auteur de cette lettre disait que si
British authorities would only abstain from les autorites britanniques n'envoyaient pas dans
bringing troops hostile ~v the people into these ces regions des troupes hostiles aux masses popuregions, there would be no civil war. It is after . laires, aucune guerre civile ne pourrait se proall no mere chance that right~wing leaders in duire. Ce n'est pas un 'hasard que les chefs des
Greece openly justify their acts of banditry by partis de droite en Grece justifient ouvertement
saying that nothing will happen to them, because leurs actes de brigandage en declarant que, de
the British support them and, since they enjoy toute fa~on, ils ne risquent rien puisque les
the support of British arms, they do not need Britanniques les soutiennent et que, forts de
to make any compromise with any political l'appui des troupes britanniques, il n'ont pas
besoin de chercher un compromis avec les autres
Parties within the cout;J-try.
partis politiques du pays.
People talk of the difficult position of Greece.
On nous pade de la situation difficile ou se
There are enough new and fresh forces in that trouve la Grece. Mais il y a dans ce pays assez
country, however, which can find a solution for de forces neuves et jeunes capables de trouver
the difficult situation which has arisen there une solution aux difficuItes sans l'assistance de
without outside help, without the help of foreign personne, sans l'assistance de troupes etrangeres,
troops, the more so as this help actually pro- d'autant plus que l'aide apportee par celles-ci
duces results from which the Greek people are aboutit en realite a des resultats dont le peuple
the greatest sufferers.
grec est le premier a. souffrir.
That is why the USSR delegation insists upon
C'est pdur toutes ces raisons que la delegation
its proposal regarding the immediate withdrawal de l'URSS insist<; sur sa proposition concernant
from Greece of British armed forces and also of le retrait des forces armees britanniques station~
o

0

1

Re-translated from the Russian.

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

388

American military instructors, experts, inspectors, and similar specialists.
The USSR delegation is convinced that the
withdrawal of foreign troops from Greece will
prove to be an ,effective and powerful way of
helping to solve the Greek question finally and
permanently to the benefit of the Balkan peoples
and the peoples of ,the whole world.

I

20 October 1947

nees en Grece et le rappel des instructeurs
militaires, des experts, des inspecteurs et des
autres spccialistes americains.
La delegation de l'URSS est convaincue que
le retrait des troupes etrangeres stationnees en
Grece constituera un moyen efficace et puissant
pour resoudre la question grecque d'une fa~on
durable et definitive, pour le bien des peuples
balkaniques et pour celui des peuples du monde
entier.

Mr. Belt (Cuba) took over the Chair from
Mr. Aranha (Brazil).

M. Belt (Cuba) remplace au fauteuil presidentiel M. Aranha (Bresil)

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of Poland.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Je
donne la parole au representant de la Pologne.

M. LANGE (Pologne)( traduit de l' anglais) :
On vous demande aujourd'hui de porter un
jugement sur une question qui a ete un sujet de
preoccupation pour les Nations Unies depuis la
creation meme de l'Organisation. Le probleme
grec a ete porte a la tribune de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies des le mois de janvier 1946
et aujourd'hui nous ne sommes pas plus pres
d'une solution qu'il y a bientot deux ans. Tout
au contraire, la situation s'est aggravee progressivement et actuellement la question grecque provoque une scission profonde dans les rangs des
Nations Unies. Ildoit certainement y avoir
quelque chose de defectueux dans la maniere
dont ce probleme a ete traite dans le cadre de
notre Organisation.
The Greek question was brought pefore the
La question grecque a ete portee devant le
Security Council in January 1946 by the repre- Conseil de securite en janvier 1946 par le representative of the Soviet Union.1 At that time, sentant de l'URSS\ A cette epoque, le reprethe representative of the USSR drew the atten- sentant del'Union sovietique a attire l'attention
tion of the Security Council to the fact that the du Conseil de securite sur le fait que la presence
presence of British troops in Greece is "fraught des troupes britanniqucs en Grece etait "grosse
with serious consequences, both for the Greek de consequence graves pour le peuple grec ainsi
people and for the maintenance of peace and que pour le maintien de la paix et de la secusecurity".2 The majority of the members of the rite 2 ". La majorite des membres du Conseil de
Security Council 'did not share this view and sccurite ne partagerent pas cette opinion et la
denied it. Finally, the problem was considered reIuterent. Finalement, le probleme a ete consias solved after a statement had been made by dere comme regIe apres que le representant du
the representative of the United Kingdom that' Royaume-Uni ellt declare que les troupes bd·
British troops would be withdrawn from Greece tanniques seraient retir~es de Grece des que
as soon as possible. Indeed Mr. Bevin, who then possible. En efIet, M. Bevin qui representait
represented the United Kingdom in the Security alors le Royaume-Uni au Conseil de securite a
Council, declared on 1 February 1946-and I fait, le 1er fevrier 1946, la declaration. suivante:
quote Mr. Bcvin's statement: Cl• • • I have been c'. . . j'avais insiste aupres du Gouvernement
pressing the Greek Government to get on with helIenique pour qu'il entreprit de retablir le
the task of establishing tranquillity in the coun- calme dans le pays, de proceder aux elections,
try, to get the elections over with, and let the et de permettre ainsi a nos troupes de regagner
British troops come home. As anybody knows la Grande-Bretagne. Comme aucun de ceux qui
who knows our country, after six years of war nous connaissent ne l'ignore, chacun, dans notre
everybody in this country is anxious for our pays, a,pres six ans de guerre, est impatient de
troops to return home."3 ,
voir nos soldats regagner leurs foyers 8 ."
Again on 4 February 1946 Mr. Bevin stated:
Le 4 fevrier 1946, M. Bevin declarait a nou". . . it is the policy of the British Government veau que la politique du Gouvernement britanto try to get a stable government out of that nique est: cc • • • tenter de faire surgir un gouelection and to carry out what we have promised vernement stable des elections grecques, et . . .
the Greek Government. As soon as the Greeks executer les engagements que nous avons pris
have got that over and have their government, envers le Gouvernement grec. Aussitot que les
they should by tllat time have the IJolice or- elections ~eront terminees et que la Grece aura
Mr. LANGE (Poland): You are called upon
today to pass judgment upon a question which
has vexed the United Nations almost since the
very beginning of the Organization's existence.
The Greek problem has been before the forum
of the United Nations since January 1946 and
it is no closer to a solution today than it was
nearly two years ago. On the contrary, the situation has become progressively worse, and today the Greek question has caused a deep split
in the ranks of the United Nations. There certainly must be something wrong with the way
in which this problem has been handled within
the framework of our Organization.

• See Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, First Series, Supplement No. I, Annex 3, pages
73 and 74.
• Ibid., No. t, page 74.
'Ibid., page 84.

1 Voir lea Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de sscurite Premi~re Annee, Premiere Sene, Supplemen~ No 1,
Annexe 3, pages 73 et 74.
• Ibid., No 1, page 74.
• Ibid., page 84.

p
20 octobre 1947

389

ganized and such army as they need, within a
very short time anyway, and we want to withdraw. I have repeated this over and over again
to the USSR Government which has always accepted it .. .'H
After these declarations, the Security Council
considered the matter closed. Indeed, the Greek
question might have been closed forever if the
promise made by the Government of the United
Kingdom had been carried out. But one year
passed, and another is nearing its end, and foreign troops and foreign military personnel are
still stationed in Greece. They are stationed there
with the explicit purpose of supporting the Greek
regime which was brought into power in December 1944 with the aid of British troops.
However, the Greek regime, a child of foreign
intervention, maintained in power through foreign military aid, proved itself unable to win the
support of the Greek people. In order to organize
its political machine, this regime had to rely
strongly on extreme right-wing elements, organizations and armed bands, definitely of a
fascist character. It staffed its army, police and
administration with people who collaborated
with the nazis at the time when the Greek nation
suffered under German occupation and carried
on a heroic struggle of resistance agaiJtSt the
Germans. Those elements embarked upon a war
of revenge against all democratic forces among
the Greek people which had fought for democracy and the reconstruction of the country
under· thepre-war right-wing dictatorship as
well as during the period of German occupation.
The forces of Greek democracy organized in
the EAM and other democratic groups were
suppressed and persecuted. All this took place
under the benevolent eye and with the active
aid of foreign troops. But, although suppressed
and persecuted,· these democratic forces refused
to give up their struggle for the· freedom of the
Greek nation and for a democratic reconstruction of their country. Deprived of the means of
legal and normal political activity, some of them
went underground and took up their activity as
guerrillas.
At the same time the Greek regime, in order
to divert the attention of the Greek people, embarked upon an aggressive campaign against
the country's northern neighbours. The first step
in the campaign was a systematic persecution of
the Slav-speaking and Albanian-speaking national minorities in northern Greece. Then the
campaign was extended to Albania. In an attempt to enlist the support of the Greek people,
the Greek Government brought forth territorial
claims for the southern part of Albania and declared that it was in a state of war with Albania.
This attitude on the part of the Greek Government towards Albania still persits today and,
during the last debate on the Greek question in
1

Ibid., page 105.

QU(llre~vingt-dix-sepfiemeseance pleniere

son gouvernement, eUe organisera sa police et
l'armee dont elle a besoin, et cela dans un delai
tres bref, et alors nous comptons bien nous retirer. J'ai renouvele ces assurances au Gouvernement de l'URSS a maintes reprises et i1 les a
toujours accueillies avec satisfaction!".
Apres ces declarations, le Conseil de securite
a considere que la question etait close. En realite, la question aurait pu etre close a jamais si
la promesse faite par le Gouvemement du
Royaume-Uni avait ete tcnue. Mais une annee,
passa, puis une autre, et cependant les troupes
etrangeres et le personnel militaire etranger sont
toujours stationnes en Grece. lIs s'y trouvent
dans le dessein formel de soutenir le Gouvernement grec qui a ete porte au pouvoir en dec~mbre 1944 avec l'appui des troupes britanlllqUes. .
Cependant, le regime grec, ne de l'interven~
tion etrangere et maintenu au p~lUvoir grace a
l'aide militaire etrangcre, s'est avere incapable
de gagner l'appui du peuple grec. Pour organiser ses cadres politiques, ce regime a dil compter
en grande partie sur des elements d' extreme
droite, sur des organisations et des bandes armees dont le caractere fasciste ne laisse aucun
doute. Son armee, sa police et les fonctionnaires
de son administration ont ete recrutes parmis des
gens qui avaient colIabore avec les nazis a une
epoque ou la nation grecque souffrait de l'occupation allemande et menait une resistance heroi'que contre les Allemands. Ces elements se sont
lances'dans une guerre de revanchc contre toutes
les forces democratiques du peuple grec qui
avaient combattu pour la democratie et la restauration de leur pays, sou~ la periode de dictature d'extreme droite d'avant-gucrre, comme au
cours de la periode d'occupation allemande.
Les forces democratiques grecques groupees
dans l'organisation EAM, et dans.. d'autres
groupements democratiques ont ete aneanties et
persecutees. Tout cela eut lieu sous le regard
bienveillant et avec l'aide active des troupes
etrangeres. Mais, bien que decimes et persecutes,
ces elements democratiques se refuserent a abandonner leur lutte pour la liberte de la Grece et
pour la reconstruction democratique de leur
pays. Prives des moyens d'activite politique 1egale et normale, certains de ces elements organiserent une resistance clandestine et poursuivirent leur activite sous forme de guerilla.
En meme temps, le Gouvernement grec,aiin
de detoumer l'attention du peuple grec, entreprit une campagne agressiye contre les voisins
septentrionaux de la Grece. Il comment;a par
une persecution systematique des minorites na~
tionales de langt!e slave et de langue albanaise
du nord de la Grece. Puis la carnpagne se developpa et fut dirigee contre l' Albanie. Pour
essayer de s'assurer l'appui du peuple grec, le.
Gouvemement grec fit valoir des revendications
territoriales sur la partie sud de l'Albanie et se
dec1ara en etat de guerre avec ce pays.
Actuellement, cette attitude du Gouvernement
grec envers l'Albanie n'a pas change et, au cours
des derniers debats qui se sont deroules au
1 Voir les Proces-vcrbau;c du Conscii de sacuriU, Premiere Annee, Premiere Serie, Supplement No I, Annexe
3, page 105.

.

Ninety"seventh Plenary Meeting

390

the Security Council, when the proposal was
made that diplomatic relations be established
between Greece a~d Albania, the representative
of Greece on 23 July 194:7-you can read it in
, the verbatim record of that meeting1-reiterated
the view of the Greek Government that Greece
considers itself to be in a state of war with Albania.

ti:
lZ

On 4: October 1947, in my speech before the
Political and Security Committee of this As~
sembly,2 I invited Mr. Tsaldaris, the Greek
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who was present
in the committee room, to explain to the Committee whether his Government still maintained
that position. I repeated the same question on
13 October, but no answer was ever given. Mr.
Tsaldaris is in this room, and I would ask him
with all respect to give us a straightforward
answer to this question, an answer 'of "yes" or
"no".

sI
Cl

(

.

g

f
r·
(

..........-...
~
"".......,,
..

~II

This attitude of the Greek Government to~
wards Albania led to a number of frontier incidents which qlarmed the Government of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, a close
neighbour of the Balkan countries. Accordingly
the Ukrainian Government brought the problem
of the incidents between Greece and Albania to
the attention of the' Security Council on 24
August 1946. In his telegram to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Manuilsky, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, stated the following:

'

HI ask you to place on the agenda for the
next meeting of the Security Council the situation in the Balkans which has resulted from the
policy of the Greek Government, and which endangers the maintenance of international peace
and security, as well as the question of measures
to be adopted by the Security Council without
delay in order to eliminate this threat to peace. m
.

,

Thus, Mr. Manuilsky pointed out the international dangers inherent in the attitude of the
Greek Government towards its northern neighbour. Unfortunately, at that time the majority
of the Security Council refused to recognize these
dangers and dismissed the request of the Ukraine
-and this was said by some members quite
clearly and can be found in the verbatim records
-as "a mere piece of propaganda". At the request of the representative of Australia, the
Greek question was removed from the agenda.
Thus, the Security Council went on record as
stating that it did not consider relations between
. Greece and her northern neighbour as endangering the peace.
1 See document SjP.V.j164 to be published in the
Official Records of the Security Council, Second Year,
No. 62.
• See document AjC.1jSR.66 to be published in the
Official Records of the second session of the Genoral
Assembly, First Committee.
• See OfJietal Records of the Security Council, First
Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 5, Annex 8.

,:

20 October 1947

Conseil de securite sur la question grecque, lors·
qu'on a propose l'etablissement de relations
diplomatiques entre la Grece et l'Albanie, le
representant de la Grece a confirme, le 23 juillet
1947 - comme vous pourrez le voir dans le
compte rendu stenographique1 de cette seancele point de vue du Gouvemement grec selon
lequella Grece se considere comme etant en etat
de gucrre avec l'Albanie.
Le 4: octobre 1947, dans le discours que j'ai
prononce devant la CommisSion des questions
politiques et de securite, j'ai invite M. Tsaldaris,
Ministre des Affaires etrangeres de Grece, qui
se trouvait dans la salle de conferences, a pre·
ciser aux membres de la Commission si son Gouvernement maintenait toujours la meme attitude.
J'ai pose anouveau cette question le 13 octobre,
mais je n'ai jamais re~u de reponse. M. Tsal·
daris est present aujourd'hui dans cette salle et
je lui demande, avec tout le respect que je lui
dais, de repondre cl'une fa~on categorique "oui"
ou "non" a cette question.
Cette attitude du Gouvernement grec envers
l'Albaniy a provoque un certain nombre' d'inci·
dents de frontiere qui ont alarme le Gouvernement de la Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, voisine des pays balkaniques. En
consequence, le Gouvernement de I'Ukraine a
signaIe, le 24 aout 1946, a l'attention du Conseil
de securite la question des incidents survenus
entre la Grece et l'Albanie. Dans son teIegramme adresse aN Secretaire general, M. Manuilsky, Ministre des Affaires etrangeres de la
Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine declare ce qui suit:
Je vous demande " . . . d'inscrire a 1'0rdre
du jour de la prochaine seance du Conseil de
securite la situation qui a ete provoquee dans
les Balkans par la politique du Gouvernement
hellenique et qui met en danger le maintien de
la paix et de la securite internationales, et d'y
inscrire egalement la question des mesures que
le Conseilde securite devra prendre sans delai
afin d'eliminer ce dang~r pour la paix3".
M. Manuilsky soulignait ainsi le danger qui
resultait sur le plan international de l'attitude
du Gouvemement grec a l'egard de son voisin
du nord. Malheureusement, la majorite des
membres du Conseil de securite s'est refusee
alors a reconnaitre l'existence de ce danger et a
rejete la demande de l'Ukraine en la qualifiant
de "simple geste de propagande"; c'est ce qui
a ete dit par certains membres, comme on peut le
verifier dans le compte rendu. A la demande du
representant de l' Australie,. la question grecque
fut rayee de l'ordre du jour. Ainsi, le Conseil
de securite a declare, et il en a ete pris acte
officiellement, qu'il ne considerait pas les rela~
tions entre la Grece et son voisin septentrional
comme susceptibles de mettre la paix en danger.
1 Voir le document S/P.V.j164 qui sera publi6 dans
les Proces-verbaux oDiciels du Conseil de slcuritl,
Deuxieme Ann6e, No 62.
• Voir le document A/C.ljSR.66 qui sera publi6 danll
les Documents oDiciels de la deuxieme session de l'As.
semblee glnirale, Premiere Commission.
8 Voir lcs Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de slcll·
ritl, Premiere Annee, Seconde Sene, Supp16ment No 5,
Annexe 8.

20 octobre 1947

391

Quafre-vingf-dix-septieme seance pleniere

It seemed that the Greek problem had been
disposed of. However, the internal difficulties in
Greece were growing. The restoration of the
monarchy, carried out with British aid, and the
elections, in which a substantial part of the
population-I think fifty-one per cent-refused
to take part, failed to restore the internal peace
of the country. It was after this election that,
according to the statement of Mr. Bevin, the
British armies were to withdraw.

Il semblait alors que le probleme grec etait
regIe. Cependant, les difficultes interieures de la
Grece augmentaient. La restauration de la monarchie qui s'etait faite avec l'appui britannique,
et les elections auxquelles une partie notable de
la population-51 pour 100, je crois-refusa de
participer, n'arriverent pas a retablir la paix
interieure du pays. C'est apres ces elections que,
sel6n la declaration de M. Bevin, le retrait des
armees britanniques devait etre effectue.

It has been pretty long since then. At the
same time, although Greece had received more
per capita foreign aid than any other country
in Europe-the total aid given to Greece up to
31 March 1947 was 870 million dollars-the
Greek regime still proved unable to restore the
Greek economy. Unrest grew and so did the
terror used against the Greek democratic forces.
With it grew the resistance of the Greek people.
Driven in part to armed resistance, they organized the Greek democratic army. The Greek
Government, unable to cope with this growing
resistance, looked for increased foreign interven.
tion. A way to achieve it was discovered in December 1946.

Dne longue periode s'est ecouIee depuis. En
meme temps, bien que la Grece ait r~u pat
tete d'habitant une aide plus importante que
n'importe que! autre pays europeen -la valeur
totale de l'aide apportee a la Grece jusqu'au 31
mars 1947 a ete de 870 millions de dollars -le
regime grec s'averait toujours incapable de remettre .sur pieds l' economie nationale. L'instabilite et aussi la terreur exercee contre les forces
democratiques grecques allerent croissant. En
meme temps la resistance du peuple grec augmenta. Pousse a la resistance armee, ce peuple
organisa l'armee democratique grecque. Le Gouvernement grec, incapable de venir a bout de
cette resistance croissante, rechercha dans une
plus large mesure l'intervention de l'etranger.
Il trouva le moyen de l'obtenir en decembre
1946.

In that month the Greek Government came
to the Security Council with the charge that
the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria and
Yugoslavia gave aid and support to the Greek
democratic army. 1 During the entire year of
1946, when the Greek problem was twice discussed before the Security Council, this charge
was not brought forward.

Au cours de ce mois, le Gouvernement grec
s'adressa au Conseilde securite en accusant les
Gouvernements de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et
de la Yougoslavie de preter leur aide et leur
appui a l'armee democratique grecquet. Jamais
au cours de l'annee 1946, alois que le probleme
grec avait fait deux fois 1'0bjet de discussions
au Conseil de securite, cette accusation n'avait
ete portee.
Cette accusation n'avait pas non plus ete.
portee en septembre 1946, epQque laquelle la
question des relations entre la Grece et l'Albanie
avait ete formellement discutee au Conseil de
securit6 pendant pres de quatre semaines. En
realite, la majorite des membres du Conseil pensait alors que rien dans les evenements n'etait
susceptible de mettre en danger le maintien de
la paix et de la securite internationales. C'est
en decembre 1946 que l'on decouvrit soudainement les faits en question.
.
Cette aide pretendue des voisins septentrionaux de la Grece a l'armee democratique
grecque fut, comme je l'ai dit, decouverte soudainement en decembre 1946 au moment ou.
le Gouvernement grec eprouva le besoin de faire
appel a nouveau a l'interventionetrangere. Mais
ces allegations etaient si nouvelles que le Conseil
de secur~te d6cida de ne prendre alors d'autre
.mesure que d'enqueter sur les faits. C'est ainsi
que fut creee la Commission chargee d'enqueter
sur les incidents le long de la frontiere grecque.
Cette Commission fut instituee par une decision
unanime des membres du Conseil de securite. A
cette decision la delegation polonaise s'associa
en toute sincerite, estimant qu'un tel organisme

It was not brought forward in September
1946, when relations between Greece and Albania were explicitly considered in the Security
Council for nearly four weeks. Actually, the
majority of the Council believed that nothing
was going on which would endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. Suddenly it was discovered in December 1946.

The alleged aid given by Greece's northern
neighbours to the Greek democratic army was
discovered suddenly in December 1946, as I
said, when the Greek Government felt the need
for a new instalment of foreign intervention.
But so new were the allegations that the Council decided· for the time being to take no other
action than to investigate them. In this way, the
Commission of Investigation concerning Greek
frontier incidents was created. It was agreed
upon by a unanimous decision of the Council,
a decision in which the Polish delegation wholeheartedly concurred. It seemed to us then that
such a Commission might prove to be a valuable
instrument for finding out the truth and estab1 See Official Records of the Secllrity COllncil, First
Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 10, Annex 16.

a

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux ofJiciels tIll Conseil tIll slcurite, Premi&-e Annee, Seconde Serie, Supplement No 10,
Annexe 16.

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

392

20 October 1947

lishing the facts of the situation. Our delega- pourrait servir utilement a decouvrir la verite
tion voted for the establishment of this Commis- et a etablir les faits. Notre delegation vota pour
sion, took active part in forming its terms of la creation de la Commission, prit une part acreference and took part in the work of the Com- tive a l'elaboration de son mandat et participa
a ses travaux.
mission.
La Commission se mit a I'ceuvre en Grece et
The Commission went to work in Greece and
the other Balkan countries. It seemed that its dans les autres pays balkaniques. Se:s travaux
work had started under good auspices. But sud- semblaient debuter sous d'heureux auspices.
denly, in April 1947, the whole world was Mais soudain, en avril 1947, le monde entier
startled by a declaration that the independence eut la stupefaction d'entendre declarer que I'in·
and integrity of the Greek state were threatened, dependance et l'integrite de l'Etat grec etaient
and a loan of 300 million dollars was called for menacees et qu'un pret de 300 millions de dollars
to bolster Greek independence against alleged etait necessaire pour proteger l'independance de
foreign threats. Half of the loan was to be used la Grece contre de pretendues menaces etranfor military purposes to aid the Greek Govern- geres. La moitie de ce pret devait etre utilisee
ment.in its civil war against the forces of the a des fins militaires pour aider le Gouvernement
democratic army. At the same time, we learned grec dans sa guerre civile contre les forces de
that British military commitments in Greece l'armee democratique. En meme temps, nous
were to be diminished and that they were to be apprenions que I'intervention militaire britanreplaced by United States military equipment, nique en Grece devait etre reduite et faire place
personnel and advisers. Thus, the new instal- a du materiel, des effectifs et des conseillers
ment of intervention in Greek affairs came into militaires americains. Ainsi se realisait une nouvelle phase de l'intervention dans les affaires
effect.
grecques.
Alors que la Commision chargee d'enqueter
The Commission of Investigation concerning
Greek frontier incidents was still at work, but sur les incidents le long de la frontiere grecque
the Government of the United States already poursuivait encore ses travaux, le Gouvernement
had decided upon its own conclusions and its des Etats-Unis avait deja tire ses propres concluown programme of action, in complete disregard sions de l'afIaire et dresse son propre programme
of the United Nations. However, the criticism d'action, en negligeant completement 1'0rganiwhich this method of action evoked caused the sation des Nations Unies. Cependent, les criGovernment of the United States to come to the tiques elevees cqntre cette maniere d'agir arneSecurity Council to justify its action. During the nerent le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis a venir
debate which took place, the representative of la justifier devant le Conseil de securite. Au
the tlSSR proposed the creation of a commis- cours des debats, le representant de l'URSS prosion which, through proper supervision, would posa la creation d'une commission qui, au moyen
guarantee that foreign economic aid given to d'un contr6le approprie, veillerait' a ce que
Greece would be utilized for the reconstruction l'aide etrangere economique apportee a la Grece
of the Greek economy. The acceptance of such flit utilisee pour la restauration, de l'economie
a commission would have put an end to private grecque. En acceptant l'institution d'une telle
unilateral action by Member States with regard commission on aurait mis fin a toute action
to Greece, and would also have been an assur- particuliere et unilaterale de certains Etats
ance that foreign economic aid to Greece would Membres concernant la Grece et l'on aurait eu
not be distorted into a means of interfering in l'assurance que l'aide economique etrangere ap·
that country's internal affairs. For this reason, portee .a la Grece ne servirait pas de pretexte athe Polish delegation supported it, and even une ingerence dans les affaires interieures du
proposed an amendment. The proposal was re- pays. C'est pour cette raison, que la delegation
jected, and thus the Government of the United polonaise appuya la proposition et presenta
States was given full freedom to continue its meme un projet d'amendement a celle-ci. La
unilateral intervention in the internal affairs of proposition fut rejetee et ainsi le Gouvernement
des Etats-Unis eut toute liberte pour poursuivre
Greece.
son intervention unilaterale dans les affaires in·
terieures de la Greee.
L'histoire de cette intervention est bien con·
The history of that intervention is well known.
You can read it in the newspapers, and I shall nne: vous pouvez la lire dans les journaux et
not take up your attention by going into it. This je n'abuserai pas de votre attention en en rap·
new policy of the United States with regard to pelant les details. Cette nouvelle politique des
Greece was bound to have an effect upon the Etats-Unis a l'egard de la Grece devait necesCommission of Investigation, for it was laid sairement influer sur la Commission d'enquete,
down before the Commission had finished its car elle fut instituee avant que cette Commission
ait acheve ses travaux et soit arrivee a des
work and reached its conclusions.
conclusions.
J'aimerais dire maintenant quelques mots au
Now a few words about the work of the·
Commission. A good characterization is found sujet des travaux de la Commission. On ne peut
in a statement of the French representative on mieux les caracteriser que par la declaration
the Commission. The French representative faite par le membre frangais de cette Commisstated in his reservations to the report of the. sion. En formulant ses reserves sur le rapport

. 1

20 octobre 1947

393

Quafre-vingf-dix-septieme seance pllSniere

majority (tllls statement on pages 241 and 242
of Volume 1 of the report) 1:

de la majorite, le representant de la France a
declare (cette declaration figure au -volume I
du rapport, page 250 1 ) :
"Conditions under which the inquiry was car"Les conditions de l'enquete n'ont probableried out were not, probably, such as to allow us ment pas ete telles qu'e1les pennettent de tirer
to draw from it any conclusions based on sound des conclusions fondees sur une base juridique
juridical principles. Even if some delegations solide. Meme si certaines delegations considerent
feel that it is possible to reach conclusions deal- que, sur des points isoles, il est possible de reing with isolated facts, this method involves con- diger des conclusions, quel ne serait pas le dansiderable risks. For indeed, by throwing a bright ger de cette redaction partielle? Elle risquerait,
light on one particular aspect of the question, en eclairant vivement un aspect particulier et
while leaving others in the shade, the perspective en laissant dans l'ombre d'autres problemes, de
of the investigation might be distorted. Partial fausser la perspective de l'enquete. Or, des
conclusions, therefore, would of necessity be un- conclusions, incompletes seraient necessairement
just to the parties concerned, and misleading to injustes pour les parties en cause et trompeuses
pour le Conseil de securite."
the Security Council."
Dans ces conditions, la Commission aboutit a
Under such conditions, the Commission established its conclusion. that Albania, Bulgaria and la conclusion que l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la
Yugoslavia had given assistance and support to Yougoslavie avaient prete aide et assistance aux
the guerrillas fighting against the Greek Govern- guerillas qui combattaient le Gouvernement
ment. I shall not enter here into a critical analy- grec. Je n'entrerai pas ici dans une analyse
sis of the procedure by which this conclusion was critique de la procedure par laquelle on arriva
established. Such an analysis has been made by a ces conclusions. Cette analyse a deja ete faite
many members of the First Committee of our pin bon nombre de membres de la Premiere
Assembly. I want to mention only the admission Commission de l'Assembl~e. Je voudrais seuleof the majority of the Commission that this con- ment mentionner le point de vue admis par la
clusion was based on the fact that, although the majorite des rnembres de la Commission d'enrepresentatives of Albania, Bulgaria and Yugo- quete, a savoir que ces conclusions etaient
slavia repeatedly denied the charges of the Greek fondees sur le fait que, malgre les d6negations
Government, "little direct evidence was brought opposees a plusieurs reprises aux accusations du
forward to disprove them". This appears in Gouvernement grec par les representants de l'Alvolume I, page 167 of the report. Thus, the banie, de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie "on
conclusions were based on the inability of the a produit peu de temoignages directs susceptibles
representatives of Albania, Bulgaria and Yugo- d'en infirmer le bien-fonde". Cette citation est
slavia to disprove the charges rather than on the tiree du volume I, page 175, du rapport. Ainsi
ability of the Greek Government to prove them. done, ces conclusions furent fondees sur l'unpos_To our delegation, conclusions based on such sibilite Oll Se sont trouves les representants de
unjudicial procedure were unacceptable, and we l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie
_submitted a minority report.
d'infirmer le bien-fonde des accusations, pIutot
que sur les preuves dont le Gouvernement gree
a pu les appuyer. Notre delegation a juge inacceptables des conclusions basees sur une procedure si peu juridique, et nous avons presente
un rapport de minorite.
Cependant, sur la base de ces conclusions, la.
On the basis- of these conclusions, however,
the United States delegation proposed in the delegation des Etats-Unis proposa au Conseil de
Security Council the creation of a commission. securite la creation d'une commission. Etant
Since the investigation has been concluded, the donne que l'enquete etait terminee, ce~te seconde second commission obviously could not have commission ne pouvait evidemment avoir le cabeen a commission of investigation. It was rather ractere d'une commission d'enquetej c'etait pIua commission of control. Based on the assump- tot une commission de controle. Fondee sur la
tion of guilt of the northern neighbours of presomption de la culpabilite des voisins septenGreece, it appeared as a punitive measure against trionaux de la Grece, la creation d'une telle
them. For this reason, our delegation was op- commission apparaissait comme une mesure de
posed to it and the commission also failed to gain coercition a. leur egard. C'est pourquoi notre
the unanimous support of the permanent mem- delegation s'y opposa et ce projet de commisbers of the Council, which is required by Article sion ne recueillit pas l'adhesion unanime de
tous les membres permanents du Conseil de
27 of the Charter.
securite, comrne l'exige l'Article 27 de la Charte.
On the other hand, the delegation of the
D'autre part, la delegation de l'URSS a preUSSR presented a resolution which was found sente une resolution que les autres membres
unacceptable to the other pennanent members permanents et la majorite du Conseil ont jugee
inacceptable.
.
and to the majority of the Council.
Dans ces conditions, si l'on avait vraiment
Under these circumstances, if a solution was
really sought, the members of the Security Coun- voulu trouver une solution, les membres du
1 The page reference is to the mimeographed document, S/360, which will be reproduced as Special Supplement No. 2 to the OfJicial Records of the Security
Council, Second Year.

1 Se referer au document 5/360, qui sera public comme
Supplement special No 2, aux: Procds-vsrbaux ofJicieu
du Conseil de sBcuriti, DeuXieme Annee.

Ninety-seventh Plenary Meeting

20 October 1947

394

Conseil de securite auraient dil rechercher un
terrain d'entente que1conque. La delegation polonaise a offert ses bons offices et a presente
une resolution contenant tous les points acceptables pour tous les membres du Conseil, y com·
pris tous les membres permanents. Ces points
figuraient dans la resolution des Etats-Unis aussi
bien que dans ceDe de l'URSS. Comme nollS
croyions que tous les membres du Conseil recherchaient sincerement une solution du pro·
bleme grec, nous nous attendions ce que notre
resolution rencontrat un appui unanime. Mais
le seul membre du Conseil qui ait fait preuve
d'un esprit de conciliation et vote pour notre
resolution a ete le representant de l'URSS. Tous
les autres membres se sont abstenus, ce qui est
significatif. Nul n'a eu le courage de voter
contre notre resolution.
Apres que notre resolution de conciliation eut
After our conciliatory resolution ,was rejected,
the representative of the United States and the ete rejetee, le representant des Etats-Unis et le
representative of Australia intro~uced resolutions representant de l'Australie ont presente des rewhich were much sharper and went further than solutions qui etaient beaucoup plus accentuees
the original United States resolution which had et a1laient beaucoup plus loin que la resolution
failed to receive the unanimous support of the primitive des Etats-Unis qui n'avait pas re!;u
permanent members of the Security Council. l'appui unanime des membres permanents du
The United States resolution indicted Greece's Conseil de securite. La resolution des Etats-Unis
northern neighbours for breach of peace in the accusait les voisins septentrionaux. de la Grece
sense of Article 39 of the Charter. Such a charge de s'etre rendus coupables d'une rupture de la
was not originally made by the Greek Govern- paix au sens de l'Article 39 de la Charte. Cette
ment and was not examined by the Commission accusation n'avait pas ete formuIee a l'origine
par le Gouvernement grec et la Commission
of Investigation sent to Greece.
d'enquete envoyee en Grece ne l'avait pas examinee.
Comme des resolutions beaucoup plus modeSince much weaker resolutions had failed to
receive the unanimous support of the permanent rees n'avaient pas rencontre l'accord unanime
members of the Council, it could have been an- des membres permanents du Conseil, on aurait
ce qu'il en filt de meme pour
ticipated that these resolutions would not receive pu s'attendre
such support. I can interpret them only as de· les deux resolutions en question. Je ne puis les
signed deliberately to provoke two more vetoes interpreter que comme des tentatives deliberees
in the Security Council, and thus to make a case de provoquer deux vetos de plus au Conseil de
securite afin de justifier une nouvelle intervenfor further intervention in Greece.
tion dans les afl'aires de la Grece.
En tous cas, la procedure suivie au ConseU
In any case, the procedure in the Security
Council was marked by the absence of any desire' de securite a ete caracterisee par l'absence de
on the part of the United States to reach an la part des Etats-Unis de tout desir de parvenir
un accord. La procedure de vote elle-m&ne
agreement. The voting procedure of the Security
Council is based on the idea that agreement of au Conseil de securite se fonde sur l'idee qu'il
the permanent members must be aimed at. This faut s'efforcer de parvenir a l'accord des memis the fundamental idea which underlies our Or- bres permanents. Tel estIe principe fondamenganization as well as all international co-opera- tal sur lequel est fondee notre Organisation, ainsi
tion. In the last stage of the Greek debate in the que toute cooperation internationale. Dans la
Security Council, this idea was replaced by at- derniere phase des debats sur la question grecque
tempts to make political capital against one of the au Conseil de securite, au lieu d'appliquer ce
permanent members by forcing a situation de- principe, on a essaye de deconsiderer politiquesigned to make it use the veto.
ment un des membres permanents en creant une
situation qui le contraindrait se servir du droit
de veto.
The same unfortunate absence of a desire to
La meme absence regrettable de tout desir de
reach agreement was characteristic of the pro- parvenir a un accord a caracterise les travaux:
ceedings in the First Committee of our Assembly. de la PTemiere Commission de notre AsscmA number of resolutions were presented by the b16e. Les Etats-Unis, l'URSS, la Suede et Cuba
United States, the USSR, Sweden, and Cuba. ont presente un certain nombre de resolutions.
If agreement was sought, then all these resolu- Si l' on avait recherche un accord, on aurait dll
tions should have been fully discussed on their discuter pleinement toutes ces resolutions sur
merits, and a way should have been found .to leurs merites propres et 1'on aurait peut.etre
bring together the different points of view. One trouve le moyen de rapprocher les points de vues
means of achieving this might have been a draft- en presence. On aurait pu parvenir a ce resuling sub.committee; another means might have tat en constituant un sous-comite de redaction;

cil should have looked for some common ground
for agreement. The Polish delegation offered its
good services and presented a resolution containing all the points which were acceptable to all
the members of the Council, including all permanent members. These points were contained
both in the United States resolution and in the
. USSR resolution. Believing that all members of
the Council honestly seek a solution of the Greek
problem, we expected that our resolution would
meet with unanimous support. But the only
member of the Council which showed a conciliatory spirit and voted for our resolution was the
representative of the USSR. All other members
significantly abstained. None had the courage to
vote against our resolution.

tit
lZI

sb
er
(:,
gl
u

ti

I

a

a

a

a

:'j'

":!!'~~;i;i~

20 oetobre 1947

395

been consideration in the Committee of the different points presented by the various resolutions
and an attempt to determine where agreement
exists and where it does not exist. Both these
methods have been used successfully in other
Committees. Indeed, there was a proposal made
by the representative of Egypt to establish a
drafting sub-c~mmittee. However, a later proposal, first to discuss and vote on the part of the
United States resolution which establishes a special committee, was adopted. In a quick vote
which came upon the representatives rather sud~
denly and unexpectedly, this part of the United
States resolution was passed.

Quatre-vingf-dix-septieme seance pleniere

la Commission aurait pu aussi examiner les
diverses resolutions en essayant de degager de
celIes-ci les points sur lesquels il y avait accord
ou non. Ces deux methodes ont ete employees
avec sucd:s par d'autres commissions. En fait,
le representant de l'Egypte a propose de nommer un sous-comite de redaction mais la Commission a adopte ensuite une pr;position consistant a discuter et a mettre aux voix d'abord la
partie de la resolution des Etats-Unis prevoyant
la creation d'une commission speciale. Au cours
d'un scrutin h~.tif, devant lequelles representants
se sont trouves places d'une maniere assez soudaine et inattendue, cette partie de la resolution
des Etats-Unis a ete adoptee.
This decided the basic issue. A drafting subCe vote a tranche la question fondamentale.
committe~, or some other method of bringing to- La possibilite de nommer un sous-comite de regether the points of view, was already out of daction ou d'adopter un autre moyen de
place, and the representative of Sweden, who rapprocher les points de vue se trouvait des lors
had a compromise solution, had no other course ecartee et le representant de la Sueqe, qui enthan to withdraw his resolution. In this way, the visageait une solution de conciliation, n'avait plus
Committee had disposed of a compromise pro- qu'a retirer sa resolution, C'est de cette maniere
posal. Proposals made.by Colombia to introduce que la Commission a regIe le sort d'une proposia more conciliatory tone into the first part of the tion de compromis. EIle a rejete aussi une propoUnited States resolution were also rejected. A sition de la Colombie, suggerant un ton plus conFranco-British amendment was accepted with the ciliant dans la premiere partie de la resolution
concun'ence of the United States. However, this des Etats-Unis. La Commission a adopte un
amendment, though appearing to be conciliatory, amendement franco-britannique auquelles Etatsdoes not introduce any substantial change into Unis avaient acquiesce, mais cet amendement,
the original text. It leaves unchanged the spirit malgre son apparence conciliante, n'a pas
and intent of the resolution.
apporte de modification essentieIle au texte primitif; illaisse inchanges l'esprit et l'intention de la
resolution.
The way in which the establishment of the speLes conditions dans lesquelles la Premiere
cial commission proposed by the United States Commission a vote la creation de la commission
was carried through the First Committee indi- speciale proposee par les Etats-Unis montrent
cates clearly that such a commission is not de- clairemellt que cette nouveIle commission
signed to serve the purpose of conciliation, but n'est pas destinee a jouer un role de conciliation
rather to become a means of further intervention mais qu'elle servira plutot de moyen d'intervenir
in the affairs of Greece and in the relations be- davantage dans les affaires interieures de la Grece
tween Greece and her northern neighbours, an et dans les relations entre la Grece et ses voisins
intervention which will not contribute and can- septentrionaux, intervention qui ne contribuera
not contribute towards the improvement of these pas et ne peut contribuer a l'amelioration de ces
relations.
relations.
Under the circumstances described, my GovDans ces conditions, mon Gouvemement csernment finds it impossible to take part in such timerait impossible de participer a une telle coma commission if it should be established by the mission, si l'Assemblee generale decide de la
General Assembly. I have made a statement to creer. J'ai fait une declaration dans ce sens devant
this effect before the First Committee, and I re- la Premiere Commission, et je le repete maintpeat it now before the whole Assembly.
nant devant l'Assemblee tout entiere.
Our readiness to co-operate in any honest atNous avons demontre maintes fois que nous
tempt to solve the Greek question has been etions prets a COllaborer a tout essai honnete de
demonstrated many times. We have shown it solution de la question grecque. Nous l'avons
in the Security Council by voting fOf the estab- montre au Conseil de securite, en votant pOUf la
lishment of the Commission of Investigation con- creation de la Commission d'enquete sur les incerning Greek frontier incidents, and by ac- cidents survenus le long de la frontiere grecque,
tively participating in the formulation of its et en participant activement a la fixation de son
tenns of reference. We have shown it by our mandat. Nous l'avons montre en participant acactive participation in the Commission of In- tivement aux travaux de la Commission d'enquete
vestigation and later in the Subsidiary Group. et ensuite aux travaux du Groupe subsidiaire.
We have shown it by our support of the proposal Nous l'avons montre en soutenant la proposition
to create a commission to guarantee, through visant a la creation d'une commission chargee de
proper supervision, that foreign economic aid garantir, au moyen d'un controle approprie, que
given to Greece be utilized for the reconstruction l'aide economique donnee a la Grece par
of the Greek economy rather than for purposes l'etranger serait utilisee a la reconstruction de
of political intervention. We have shown it by l'economie grecque et non a des fins d'interventhe proposal of compromise and conciliation tion politique. Nous l'avons montre par la propo-

Ninefy-seventhPlenary Meeting

til
lZI

sb
er

(:
gl
u

ti
fI
r,

cl
c
I

~'.•

396

20 October 1947

which our representative made before the Se- sition de compromis et de conciliation faite par
notre representant au Conseil de securite.
curity Council.
Toutefois, nous nous trouvons maintenant deWe are now, however, confronted with a different situation. We are confronted with an vant une situation differente. Une ou deux
attempt by one or two Powers to utilize the Puissances s'efforcent d'utiliser le mecanisme de
machinery of the United Nations in their en-, l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour essayer
deavour to isolate politically another Power. The d'isoler politiquement une autre Puissance. Les
northern neighbours of Greece have become the voisins septentrionaux de la Grece sont devenus
les victimes de cette tentative.
victims of that attempt.'
Si vous me permettez de m'exprimer ainsi, je
With all due respect, such an attempt is indirai
que cette tentative est incompatible avec
compatible with the purposes and structure of.
our Organization. Our Organization is an or- les buts et la structure de notre Organisation.
ganization for agreement and conciliation; its L'Organisation des Nations Unies est une orgavery structure is built upon the idea of co-opera- nisation d'accord et de conciliation; sa structure
tion among the great Powers. To ignore this or, meme est fondee sur l'idee de la cooperation
what is more, ,to attempt to utilize our Organiza- entre les grandes Puissances. Ne pas en tenir
tion as a tool of such a policy, to transform it compte, et bien plus encore essayer de faire de
into a coalition of States against one Power, or notre Organisation l'instrument d'une politique,
anyone of the Member S,tates, must shake the la transformer en une coalition d'Etats dressee
very foundation of the United Nations. This may contre une Puissance ou l'un quelconque des
be convenient for those who like to by-pass our Etats Membres, c'est ebranler les fondations
Organization and base their policies on unil- memes des Nations Unies. Cette fa90n de proateral action; it may be convenient for those ceder convient peut-ctre a ceux qui aiment a
who seek international conflicts rather than in- agir en marge de notre Organisation et a fond er
, ternational conciliation. The Polish delegation leur politique sur des mesures unilaterales; eUe
refuses to be part of it, and we shall vote against sert peut-ctre les desseins de ceux qui recherchent les conflits internationaux plut8t que la
the United States resolution.
conciliation internationale. La delegation de la
Pologne refuse de s'y associer, et votera contre
la resolution des Etats-Unis.
Quoi qu'il en soit, la question grecque exige
The Greek problem, however, requires some
solution; it requires a positive solution. Such a une solution, et une solution positive. Les forces
solution has been proposed repeatedly 'by the democratiques du peuple grec ont propose a
democratic forces among the Greek people. The plusieurs reprises une telle solution, dont les
elements of the solution are well known. A recent elements sont bien connus. Ces elements ont ete
statement of them was given by the political enonoes recemment par le groupe politique des
coalition of parties of the EAM in a memo- partis de l'EAM, dans un memorandum adresse
randum addressed especially to the General As- specialement a l'AssembIee generale des Nations
sembly of the United Nations. This coalition Unies. Ce groupe comprend les partis suivants:
comprises the following parties: the Agrarian parti agraire grec, Union republicaine, parti
Party of Greece, the Republican Union, the republicain radical, parti communiste grec et
Radical Republican Party, the Communist parti socialiste grec. Le memorandum est date
Party of Greece and the Socialist Party of du 14 septembre 1947. Pa.r combien d'entre
Greece. The above-mentioned memorandum is vous, mes chers collegues, ce texte a-toil ete lu,
dated 14 September 1947. I do not know how je ne sais; mais je voudrais recommander, de la
many of you, my honourable fellow representa- maniere la plus pressante a chacun de vous d'en
tives, have read it. I should like to recommend prendre connaissance. .11 contient des proposimost urgently that all of you do read it. It con- tions positives qui meritent votre attention. Laistains positive proposals which deserve your at- sez-moi VOllS donner lecture de ces propositions.
tention. Let me read you these proposals. I read Je cite le memorandum:
from the memorandum:
H • • • The EAM proposes, regarding the issue
"... L'EAM propose, en ce q~i concerne la
of internal policy, the formation of a broadly question de politique interieure, la formation
representative Government in which the demo- d'un gouvernement largeinent representatif
cratic left would also participate." You see a auquel participerait egalement la gauche demovery radical proposal. "Such a Governm~nt cratique." Comme vous le voyez, c'est la une prowould inspire confidence in all the popular position tout a fait radicale. "Un tel gouvernestrata and thus would have both the authority ment inspirerait confiance a toutes les couches
and the force to apply political equity and populaires et jouirait ainsi de l'autorite et de la
equality before the law, and to end the civil force necessaires pour appliquer a tous un traitewar immediately, and to lead the country to ment politique equitable et assurer l'egalite defree and genuine elections for the promotion vant la loi, mettre fin immediatement a la guerre
of a really people-born national assembly as soon civile et conduire le pays vers des elections libres
as possible. This programme is not at all theo- et sinceres, en vue de reunir aussit8t que posretical, but it is the only one which can securely sible une assemblee nationale qui soit veritableand speedily lead the country to democratic ment nee du peuple. Ce programme n'est pas
order and normalcy. Moreover, it is completely du tout tMorique; c'est le seul programme qui
approved by the democratic army. This has puisse conduire si'lrement et rapidement le pays

20 octobre 1947

397

been repeatedly proclaimed by its leadership
both to the Greek people and to the United
Nations.

"..• Regarding the issue of foreign policy,
the coalition of EAM proposes the withdrawal
of all foreign troops and foreign missions from
Greece . . . In fact, the Greek people do not
desire their country to become a field for international dissension, nor a centre of dark intrigue
against peace and democracy in the Balkans."
The memorandum ends with the following
appeal:
" ... The Greek people do not deserve such a
destiny for themselves or for their country. They
want their independence, the security and integrity of their country, peace and equal friendship
and collaboration with all their great allies, their
neighbours and, in general, all the democratic
and peace-loving peoples; and therefore, despite
their hard test, they are determined to continue
their struggle to the end.
"In their misfortune and pain, for which
they are not in the least responsible, the Greek
people address themselves to the United Nations
and anxiously invoke their help to realize their
aforementioned claims. These claims, being in
full h"armony with the constitutional principles
of the United Nations, simultaneously have the
practical' quality that they are the only ones
which can serve the Greek people, without exposing the United Nations to tests or arousing
any of its Members in particular.
"Their adoption as a whole by your General
Assembly would really be of profit to the Greek
people who are so hardly tested and, simultaneously, while reinforcing the authority of the
United Nations, would positively serve international peace."
This is the voice of the Greek people. Do not
let us dismiss it unheard. Let us not withhold
the justice which they expect from us. The
voice of the Greek people demands an answer.
The demands concerning internal policy, such
as the formation. of a broad coalition Government and the holding of new elections, are beyond the scope of Our competence. But well
within our competence is the granting of the
basic demand, the demand which is the prerequisite of the realization of' all other demands,
namely, the, withdrawal from Greece of all
foreign troop/! and foreign military missions. The
General Assembly has the power to recommend
such action. Therefore, in the name of my delegation, I submit to you for your consideration
the following resolution:

,"The General Assembly,
<rHaving considered the question of threatS

. Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance p"~niere

vers l'ordre democratique et une situation normale.' De plus, il est completement approuve
par l'armee democratique. Ce programme, les
chefs du mouvements 1'ont proclame, a plusieurs
reprises, et devant le peuple grec, et devant
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
"En ce qui conceme la politique exterieure,
la coalition des partis de l'EAM propose le retrait de toutes les troupes etrangeres et de toutes
les missions etrangeres de Grece . . . En fait, le
peuple grec ne desire pas que son pays devienne
le champ clos des desaccords internationaux ni
un centre d'mtrigues tenebreuses contre la paix
et la democratie dans les Balkans."
Le memorandum se termine par l'appel suivant:
"Le peuple grec ne nierite pas un tel destin,
ni pour lui-meme ni pour son pays. 11 desire
l'independance, la secm"ite et l'integrite de son
pays, la paix, des rapports d'egale amitie et de
collaboration avec tous Ses grands allies, avee
ses voisins et d'une maniere generale avec tous
les peuples democratiques et pacifiques. En depit de la dure epreuve a laquelle il est soumis,
il est done decide a continuer la lutte jusqu'au
bout.
"Dans son malheur et dans sa douleur, dont
il n'est en rien responsable, le peuple grec
s'adresse a l'Organisation des Nations Unies et lui
demande anxieusement de l'aider a. obtenir satisfaction des demandes exposees plus haut. Ces
demandes, qui sont en pleine harmonie avec les
principes constitutionnels des Nations Unies,
presentent en meme temps l'avantage pratique
d'etre les seules qui puissent servir le peuple grec
sans exposer l'Organisation des Nations Unies a
des epreuves et sans eveiller l'animosite d'aucun
de ses Membres.
"Votre AssembIee generale, en adoptant l'en,.
semble de ces demandes, rendrait un reel service
au peuple grec, soumis a une si dure epreuve,
et, tout a la fois, servirait veritablement, en
renfor~ant l'autorite des Nations Unies, la paix
internationale."
Voila la voix du peuple grec. Ne refusons
pas de 1'entendre. Ne lui denions pas la justice
qu'il attend de nous. La voix du peuple gree
exige une reponse. Les demandes relatives a. la
politique interieure, telles que la formation d'un
largegouvernement de coalition et de nouve1les
elections, depassent les limites de notre competence. Mais ce qui est bien de notre competence,
c'est d'agreer la demande fondamentale, qui est
la condition prealable de toutes les autres et qui
tend au retrait de Grece de toutes les troupes
et de toutes les missions militaires etrangeres.
L'Assemblee generale est qualifiee pour reeommander de telles mesures. Je soumets done a.
votre examen, au nom de ma delegation, le projet de resolution suivant: ,

. "L'AsembUe generale,
"Ayant pris connaissance du probleme consti-

to the political independen.ce and territorial in- tue par les menaces a l'independance politique
tegrity of Greece and the views expressed by the et a 1'integrite territoriale de la Greee et des
) .
various delegations, !
opinions exprimees par les diverses delegations,

Ninety-eighth Plenary Meeting

398

U Recommends that all foreign troops be immediately withdrawn and all foreign military
missions, instructors and other military experts
be recalled immediately from the territory of
Greece;

20 October 1947

URecommande que toutes les troupes etrangeres soient immediatement retirees et que toutes
les missions militaires, tous les instructeurs milltaires et tous autres experts militaires soient
immediatement rappeles du territoire de la
Grece;

URequests all Governments concerned to report not later than 1 January 1948 to the Secretary-General on the implementation of this
recommendation."

Ulnvite tous les Gouvernements interesses a
adresser au Secretaire general, avant le 1er janvier 1948, un rapport sur l'application de la
presente recommandation."

The PRESIDENT: As I have already told the
Assembly, we shall have a night meeting. I
think it would be best to adjourn now and meet
again at 8.15 p.ro.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Comme
je l'ai deja dit, noUs tiendrons seance ce soil'.
J e pense qu'il vaudrait mieux lever la seance
maintenant et nous reunir a nouveau a 20 h. 15.

The meeting rose at 6.47 p.m.

La seance est levee

a18 h. 47.

NINETY-EIGHTH PLENARY
MEETING

QUATRE-VINGT-DIX-HUITIEME SEANCE

H eId in the General Assembly Hall
at Flushing Meadow, New York,
on Monday, 20 October 1947, at 8.15 p.m.

Tenue dans la salle de l'Assemblee genhale
Flushing Meadow, N ew-YorkJ le lundi
20 octobre 1947, a20 h. 15.

President: Mr. O. ARANHA (Brazil).

President: M. O. ARANHA (Bresil).

PLENIERE

a

41. Continuation of the general discus- 41. Suite de la discussion genera le sur
sion 'on threats to the political indeles menaces Cl I'independence politique et Cl I'int,egrit,e territoriale de
pendence and territorial integrity of
la Grece
Greece
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Czechoslovakia.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : J e donne
la parole au representant de la Tchecoslovaquie.

Mr. MASARYK (Czechoslovakia): In begging
the indulgence of the Assembly for a brief moment, the Czechoslovak delegation will not reveal
any new and startling facts; it will state in simple
terms that the opinion it had the honour of expressing before the First Committee1 has not
changed and has not been shaken by the speeches
we have heard since our last intervention.

M. MASARYK (TcMcoslovaquie) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Si la delegation de la Tchecoslovaquie
demande a l'Assemblee de vouloir bien lui accorder que1ques instants, ce n'est pas pour apporter des revelations sensationnelles, mais pour dire
en termes simples que l'opinion qu'elle a ell'1'honneur d'exprimer devant la Premiere Comrnission1
n'a pas change et n'a pas ete Cbranlee par les
discours que nous avons entendus depuis notre
derniexe intervention.
Ma delegation regrette que la majorite n'ait
pas examine plus serieusement l'argumentation
tres d,etaillee que certaines delegations ont opposee a la proposition d'envoyer une nouvelle commission en Grece, et que 1'on n'ait presque fait
aucun effort pour refuter les faits presentes par ces
delegations. Cette attitude n'aidera pas a regler .
definitivement la question. 11 est vrai que la declaration relative a la culpabilite de la Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l' Albanie a ete tres .
adoucie, mais, de l'avis de ma delegation, cette
mesure ne nous aide pas a sortir du dilemme ou
nous nous trouvons. Ces trois pays sont encore
virtuellement sous le coup d'une accusation de
culpabilite, et je n'estime pas que ce soit justifie.
En d'autrt';s termes, les arguments de la minorite,
et je voudrais ajouterqu'il s'agit d'arguments d'un

My delegation regrets that the very detailed
arguments of some delegations against'the proposal to send a new committee to Greece have
not been taken up more seriously by the majority,
and that there has been almost no effort to refute
the facts brought forward by those delegations.
That will not help the final settlement of the question. It is true that the declaration about the guilt
of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania has been
whittled down, but in the eyes of my delegation
that does not help us out of the dilemma in which
we find ourselves. There is still a potential shadow
of guilt on these three countries which I do not
consider justified. In other words, the arguments
of the minority-and I should like to say that
they were very weighty arguments-made no impression on the majority, whose judgment was
1

See the sixty-first meeting of the First Committee.

1 Voir la soixante et unieme seance de la Premiere Com·
mission.
