General Assembly -

Twelfth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
1147 (XII). Effects of atomic radiation (14 November 1957) (item 57) . . . . . .
1148 (XII). Regulation, limitation and balanced reduction of all armed forces
and all armaments; conclusion of an international convention (treaty) on the
reduction of armaments and the prohibition of atomic, hydrogen and other
weapons of mass destruction (14 November 1957 (item 24) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1149 (XII). Collective action to inform and enlighten the peoples of the world
as to the dangers of the armaments race, and particularly as to the destructive effects of modern weapons (14 November 1957) (item 24) . . . . . . . . . .
1150 (XII). Enlargement of the membership of the Disarmament Commission
(19 November 1957) (item 24) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1180 (XII). The Korean question (29 November 1957) (item 23) . . . . . . . . . . .
1184 (XII). The question of Algeria (10 December 1957) (item 59) . . . . . . . . .
1236 (?(II). Peaceful and neighbourly relations among States (14 December 1957)
(item 66) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

3

3
4

4
4
S
5

1148 (XII). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments; conclusion of an international con•
vention (treaty) on the reduction of
armaments and the prohibition of atomic,
hydrogen and other weapons of mass destruction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 808 (IX) of 4 November
1954,
Emphasizing the urgency of decreasing the danger
of war and improving the prospects of a durable peace
through achieving international agreement on reduction, limitation and open inspection of armaments and
armed, forces,
Welcoming the narrowing of differences which has
resulted from the extensive negotiations in the SubCommittee of the Disarmament Commission,
Believing that immediate, carefully measured steps
can be taken for partial measures of disarmament and
that such steps will facilitate further measures of
disarmament,
1. Urges that the States concerned, and particularly
those which are members of the Sub-Committee of the
Disarmament Commission, give priority to reaching a
disarmament agreement which, upon its entry into
force, will provide for the following :
(a) The immediate suspension of testing of nuclear
weapons with prompt installation of effective international control, including inspection posts equipped with
appropriate scientific instruments located within the
territories of the United States of America, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in Pacific Ocean
areas, and at other points as required ;
( b) The cessation of the production of fissionable
materials for weapons purposes and the complete devotion of future production of fissionable materials to

1147 (Xll). Effects of atomic radiation
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of problems relating to
the. effects of ionizing radiation upon man and his
environment,
RecqJling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955
by which the General Assembly established a Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation and
~ntrusted to it among others the task of collating in
its report information on radiation effects on man and
his environment,

1. Calls upon all concerned to continue their co-operation in making available information within the
sphere of the terms of reference of the Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation;
2. Requests the Committee to complete its report at
the earliest possible date and to make that report available to all Members of the United Nations and members
of the specialized agencies and to the second conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy ;
_3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Committee, to consider the question of the
sti:engthening and widening of scientific activities in
this field, taking into account in this connexion the
discussion of this item at the twelfth session of the
General Assembly, including the proposals submitted
thereunder, and to report to the Assembly at its thirteenth session ;
4. Decides to include in the agenda of its thirteenth
session the report of the Committee ;

5. Transmits to the Committee the records of the
discussion in the First Committee of the item entitled
"Effects of atomic radiation."
715th plenary meetina,
14 November 1957.
3

4

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

non-weapons purposes under effective international
control;
( c) The reduction of stocks of nuclear weapons
through a programme of transfer, on an equitable and
reciprocal basis and under international supervision,
of stocks of fissionable material from weapons uses to
non-weapons uses;
( d) The reduction of armed forces and armaments
through adequate, safeguarded arrangements ;
( e) The progressive establishment of open inspection with ground and aerial components to guard
against the possibility of surprise attack;
(f) The joint study of an inspection system designed to ensure that the sending of objects through
outer space shall be exclusively for peaceful and scientific purposes ;
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission to reconvene its Sub-Committee as soon as feasible for
this purpose ;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to invite
its Sub-Committee to establish, as one of its first
tasks, a group or groups of technical experts to study
inspection systems for disarmament measures on which
the Sub-Committee may reach agreement in principle
and to report to it within a fixed period ;
4. Recommends that any such technical group or
groups be composed of one expert from each of the
States members of the Sub-Committee and one from
each of three other States Members of the United
Nations which shall be designated by the SecretaryGeneral in consultation with the Sub-Committee;
5. Invites the States concerned, and particularly
those which are members of the Sub-Committee, to
consider the possibility of devoting, out of the funds
made available as a result of disarmament, as and when
sufficient progress is made, additional resources to the
improvement of living conditions throughout the world
and especially in the less developed countries ;
6. Requests the Sub-Committee to report to the Disarmament Commission by 30 April 1958 on the progress achieved.
716th plenary meetin_q,
14 November 1957.
1149 (XII). Collective action to inform and
enlighten the peoples of the world as to the
dangers of the armaments race, and particularly as to the destructive effects of
modern weapons
The General Assembly,
Considering that the armaments race, owing to advances of nuclear science and other modern forms of
technology, creates means whereby unprecedented devastation might be inflicted upon the entire world, and
that peoples of all countries should be made to realize
this,
Considering that any agreement, whether partial or
general, on the regulation of armaments necessarily implies adequate international control,
Considering consequently that public opinion must
be made aware both of the effects of modern weapons
of all kinds and of the necessity of reaching a disarmament agreement providing effective measures of
control,
Considerin.o that it is therefore desirable to seek ways
and means of organizing an effective and continuing

publicity campaign on a world-wide scale, under the
auspices of the United Nations and disregarding all
ideological or political considerations,
1. Requests the Disarmament Commission to make
recommendations on the nature of the information
to be disseminated and requests the Secretary-General
to report to the Commission on the means available
for conducting such an international campaign;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Disarmament Commission whatever assistance it may
request for this purpose ;
3. Invites Member States to communicate to the
Disarmament Commission or to the Secretary-General
in good time any views they may see fit to submit as
to the scope and content of the proposed campaign.

716th plenary meeting,
14 November 1957.
1150 (XII). Enlargement of the membership of
the Disarmament Commission1

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 502 (VI) of 11 January
1952 establishing the Disarmament Commission,
1. Decides to enlarge the Disarmament Commission
by the addition of fourteen Member States which, for
the first year, from 1 January 1958 to 1 January 1959
shall be: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Burma,
Czechoslovakia, Egypt, India, Italy, Mexico, Norway,
Poland, Tunisia and Yugoslavia;
2. Transmits to the Disarmament Commission the
records of the proceedings of the First Committee during the twelfth session of the General Assembly at
which disarmament was discussed.
719th plenary meeting,
19 November 1957.
1180 (XII). The Korean question

The General Assembly,
Having received and noted the report of the United
Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea,2
Recalling its resolutions 195 (III) of 12 December
1948, 498 (V) of 1 February 1951, 811 (IX) of 11
December 1954, 910 (X) of 29 November 1955 and
1010 (XI) of 11 January 1957,
Noting that the Armistice Agreement of 27 July
19538 remains in effect,
1. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United
Nations are to bring about by peaceful means the
establishment of a unified, independent and democratic Korea under a representative form of government,
and the full restoration of international peace and security in the area;
1
This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assembly after consideration of
the report of the First Gommittee. For the text of the report,
see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, a,genda item 24, document A/37'19.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Supplement No. 13 (A/3672).
• 0 fficial Records of the Security Council, Eighth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1953, document S/3079,
appendix A.
