United Nations

S/PV.4967

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4967

th meeting
Tuesday, 11 May 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Akram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Pakistan)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Lucas
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Arias
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2004/348)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-34516 (E)

*0434516*

S/PV.4967

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2004/348)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Iceland, Ireland, Japan,
Serbia and Montenegro and Ukraine, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and Montenegro, Mr. Draskovic.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Draskovic
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Holkeri to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security

2

Council is meeting in accordance with
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

the

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/348, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Holkeri: This is my first report to the
Council since the brutal wave of violence in midMarch. The violence was the most serious setback to
the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) of the
past five years and shook the Mission to its
foundations. It challenged the sustainability of the
international community’s efforts to build a multiethnic Kosovo where all citizens could live in peace
and security. UNMIK will do all it can to bring to
justice all those who provoked or engaged in the
violence. Some 270 arrests have been made so far. The
priority at this time is to target investigations at the
principal organizers as well as at cases of homicide and
arson.
Local prosecutors are handling more than 130
cases that are directly related to the riots. Some 50
cases of a more serious nature have been entrusted to
international prosecutors. We aim to resolve these
cases and to punish the perpetrators. To facilitate that,
UNMIK has requested 100 additional police
investigators, six international prosecutors and three
international judges. So far, 14 police investigators
have arrived in Kosovo, and we expect at least 20 more
shortly, for which we are most grateful. But we request
a more definite commitment from Member States to
enable us to move ahead with the investigations.
The arrest of key suspects in the March violence
triggered some protest demonstrations. However, they
were isolated and this time local politicians were quick
to urge veterans’ and students’ associations not to
participate and to refrain from violence.
The focus on investigations into the violence has
limited our capacity in other areas, including the fight

S/PV.4967

against corruption. Nevertheless, there has been some
progress in that area with the recent arrest of three
individuals.

“misgovernment”. The unprofessional and provocative
reporting of the events by many of the local media
inflamed the situation.

There have been several other violent events
since the March violence. Investigations are
progressing well into the murder of two police
officials, one local and the other international, near
Podujevo on 23 March. All four suspected perpetrators
have been identified. One of the attackers was killed in
the encounter with the police. Another suspect has
since been arrested, and inquiries are ongoing to locate
the remaining two.

The impact of the violent attacks on members of
the Kosovo Serb, Roma and Ashkali communities was
dramatic. Some 4,100 persons were displaced in just
two days. The violence has obviously had a very
adverse effect on the overall returns process. The
viability of returns in 2004 is dependent on a variety of
factors, including initiatives on the part of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and of
Kosovo society to build trust and enhance security.
Much will depend on the effectiveness and visibility of
the initiative led by the Provisional Institutions to
rebuild what has been destroyed as well as on outreach
by the Provisional Institutions to the minority
communities and on confidence-building and
reconciliation efforts.

The Mission suffered yet another shock when, on
17 April, three United States correctional officers were
killed and 11 others — 10 United States officers and
one Austrian officer — were injured when a Jordanian
special police unit officer opened fire without any
provocation. The Jordanian police officer was killed
when the United States officers returned fire. His four
companions, also Jordanian officers, are being
investigated for their role in the crime. One of them
remains in detention.
The violence has forced us at UNMIK to take a
long, hard look at ourselves. Was our response
adequate? Did we do enough to prevent the violence?
The speed with which violence spread over Kosovo
overwhelmed the capacity of Kosovo Force (KFOR)
and UNMIK security forces to respond. UNMIK had
no means to augment its security forces; KFOR was
not reinforced until after the violence ended. Our
Mission has been working to review operational
procedures and coordination in responding to crises. To
that end, I have appointed a review board to examine
our response, and I will act on its recommendations.
In reaction to the March unrest, the Prime
Minister and other key political leaders, after pressure
from
the
international
community,
showed
responsibility by calling for a halt to the violence.
However, they were tardy in specifically condemning
the attacks on minorities and minority sites, including
religious and cultural sites.
Some politicians used the violence to renew calls
for independence. Some senior Government officials
and the local media jumped to conclusions about the
cause of the 16 March drowning of young Albanian
boys and thereby contributed to the trouble. Some went
so far as to justify the violence as a legitimate reaction
against Serb parallel structures and United Nations

Achieving progress on returns — including of the
newly displaced — and ensuring a truly secure
environment for returns will require a substantial
increase in the quality and quantity of protection
provided by KFOR and the police. In the immediate
future, KFOR in particular needs to play a much more
substantial role in providing a secure environment
regarding returns and minority communities than was
envisioned at the outset of this year.
The Kosovo Government’s initiative to
reconstruct damaged houses is to be commended, and I
have welcomed it. But reconstruction must not be
allowed to become a half-hearted, superficial effort.
UNMIK will continue to work with the Provisional
Institutions to ensure that the concerns of community
members are fully addressed throughout the process.
Rebuilding the physical infrastructure is just the first
step; restoring the confidence of the affected
communities is even more important.
The current security environment in Kosovo is
not conducive to the forcible return of members of
minority communities to their homes in Kosovo. We
are urging countries where persons from minority
communities in Kosovo have been granted temporary
protection to extend such protection until such time as
their return in conditions of safety and dignity can be
guaranteed, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).
The rights of all communities in Kosovo can be
ensured, above all by vigorously implementing the

3

S/PV.4967

standards for Kosovo. The standards remain a top
priority for UNMIK. The Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan sets out in detail what actions are
designed to meet the standards, who is responsible for
undertaking those actions and when the actions are
planned to take place.
The Provisional Institutions and UNMIK began
work together on the Implementation Plan the very day
we unveiled the “Standards for Kosovo” document last
December. We were putting the final touches on the
Plan when the violence erupted in March. Just days
later, on 31 March, Prime Minister Rexhepi and I
jointly launched the Plan. That was a demonstration of
our intention to overcome the legacy of the violence
and to set the policy course for the future.
The commitment of the Provisional Institutions
and of the people of Kosovo to the Plan’s
implementation is crucial to its success in all areas of
the standards. The coming elections will be a test of
that commitment. I expect a politically mature election
campaign and the swift formation of a new
Government. It is imperative that all the political
parties maintain their full support for the standards
process and that the next Government — whatever its
composition — works hard to ensure maximum
progress on the standards.
The Implementation Plan is comprehensive and
details many policies. There is a great deal to do and
little time in which to do it. Progress will require hard
work on the part of all the institutions of Kosovo, at
both the central and the municipal levels. UNMIK is
determined to give all its support to the people and the
Government of Kosovo so that they can make the
greatest possible progress. Partnership between the
Provisional Institutions and UNMIK is the only way
for Kosovo to make progress.
The introduction of new and tough actions in the
Implementation Plan in the areas of returns and
communities as well as freedom of movement was
essential to reflect the new reality in Kosovo. I am
concerned, however, that the level of commitment
displayed so far in those areas by the Provisional
Institutions is insufficient. The deadline for the
formulation of revised policies on those areas in the
Plan following the violence has already been missed.
The Provisional Institutions need to do more. I know
that the Prime Minister shares my view, and I hope that
the necessary commitment will be forthcoming.

4

As Council members know, the Serb community
has chosen not to participate in the standards process. I
regret that, and I will continue my efforts to encourage
them to change their minds. Other non-Albanian
communities are participating, because they understand
that the standards process is all about the improvement
of conditions for their communities — indeed, for all
communities in Kosovo.
The door remains open for the Serb community to
participate. I encourage them also to re-engage in the
work of the Provisional Institutions and the other
institutions of Kosovo. I understand their doubts after
the terrible shock of the recent violence, but such
participation is the best way to ensure that their voice
is heard and to protect their interests.
As Council members are aware, one of the eight
standards is direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. Just days before the violence erupted,
UNMIK successfully launched two direct-dialogue
working groups, on energy and on missing persons.
Unfortunately, the outbreak of unrest has forced the
postponement of that process.
In the weeks since the violence, leaders in
Belgrade and Pristina have told me that, in the current
political situation, dialogue is on hold. However, as
one of the standards, it cannot be ignored or deferred
indefinitely. I will strive to ensure that direct dialogue
is resumed as soon as possible.
Strengthening local government is an important
component of the standards and is key for ensuring the
peaceful coexistence of all communities. Work in that
area has begun. For that work to succeed, the full and
constructive engagement of all communities, as well as
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, is
required. The objective is to put in place effective
Government structures at the local level without any
partitioning or cantonization of Kosovo, neither of
which is practical or sustainable.
We have taken note of the plan proposed by
Serbian Prime Minister Kostunica and endorsed by
Serbia’s National Assembly. We share Belgrade’s
concerns about the security and economic
sustainability of the Serb community in Kosovo.
But the key to effective and enduring reform of
local government is that any concept should be
developed, discussed and agreed by the parties within
Kosovo itself. Our guiding principle is that devolution

S/PV.4967

of powers to communities and local government reform
must be acceptable to all communities. That means that
the entire population should enjoy the benefits and
share in the responsibilities of local government
reform.
We are encouraged by the continuing support and
active engagement of the international community in
the implementation of the following policies:
standards, dialogue and local government reform. In
that regard, we welcome the recent engagement of the
Contact Group Plus.
Looking to the future, we intend to continue with
our task, under Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), to prepare the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment for self-government. This would mean, in
addition to building capacities, an eventual transfer of
further competences from UNMIK. I have asked all
pillars and offices of UNMIK to involve the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government as much as
possible in their work, including in the reserved areas.
Those measures are the right way forward if we are to
create truly responsible and effective government in
Kosovo. The status quo does not provide for such
change. But, of course, our efforts to build and increase
engagement with the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment will depend to a great extent on how
seriously those Institutions are committed to taking the
responsibility we offer them. They must, above all,
show real progress on standards implementation,
reconciliation and reform of local government.
As for UNMIK, it is right, too, that we should
consider whether its structures and organization are the
most effective for today’s and tomorrow’s
circumstances. UNMIK has always been a changing
mission, as the needs and challenges in Kosovo have
altered. For example, at the municipal level, our role is
already shifting from administration to monitoring and
advice. This is a natural consequence of our work to
prepare and build Kosovo’s own institutions. At my
instruction, we have begun to consider our future
configuration, including the possible reorganization of
our structure. I would like to take this opportunity to
encourage the Council to consider this question, too;
we would welcome its views. Meanwhile, UNMIK will
forcefully continue its mission, as defined by Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Council’s
instructions.

Privatization has been for some time a crucial
issue in Kosovo’s economic life. It is no secret that this
process has been fraught with difficulties, both legally
and politically. I am glad to report to the Council today
that there has recently been progress in this area, with
agreement on operating procedures between UNMIK
and the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.
Before concluding, I want to say an important
word about Kosovo’s political future. The Security
Council has endorsed the mechanism for a review of
Kosovo’s readiness for consideration of its future
status. It is not for me to say what that decision should
be, though I will certainly give the Council my view
when the time comes. The decision will be for this
Council to make. But with mid-2005 just over a year
away, thought should be given now on how to handle
the difficult choices that lie ahead.
There is much work ahead for us in UNMIK and
for the people and the Government of Kosovo. The
continued support of the Security Council and of the
international community is for all of us both essential
and welcome.
The President: I thank Mr. Holkeri for his
briefing to the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Draskovic.
Mr. Draskovic (Serbia and Montenegro): Allow
me at the outset to express my appreciation to you, Mr.
President, and to the members of the Council for
giving me the opportunity to address the Council on
this very important issue concerning my country and
the province of Kosovo and Metohija.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his in-depth report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Although the facts presented in the report are far from
encouraging, my delegation welcomes its objectivity
and constructive conclusions. Let me also thank
Special Representative Harri Holkeri for his
comprehensive briefing.
I have come here to call on the Council to ensure
greater and more resolute respect for the United
Nations Charter and strict compliance with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) on Kosovo and
Metohija and its implementation.

5

S/PV.4967

Kosovo and Metohija is an open wound for Serbs
and Albanians as well as for the entire international
community. In the wake of mass violence against Serbs
and the barbaric destruction of their centuries-old
churches and cultural sites, on 17 and 18 March of this
year, the Council adopted a presidential statement that
did not adequately respond to the tragedy suffered by
the Serbian people in that province.
From 10 June 1999, when the United Nations and
international civilian and military forces took over the
control and administration of Kosovo and Metohija,
until 17 March this year more than 200,000 Serbs were
expelled, while 40,000 Serbian houses were burned
down or destroyed, along with 115 churches and
monasteries and hundreds of Christian cemeteries.
During that period, approximately 2,500 Serbs,
including dozens of children, were murdered or
kidnapped.
International administrators and the Provisional
Institutions in the province did not react resolutely
enough. And so, on 17 March, tens of thousands of
ethnic Albanians, driven by local media and radicals,
started killing Serbs and destroying monuments of the
centuries-old Serbian and Christian tradition in the
province.
It is undeniable that the regime of Slobodan
Milosevic was responsible for many crimes against
Kosovo Albanians, tens of thousands of whom were
expelled during the NATO bombing campaign. But that
same regime was equally brutal and brought harm to
Serbs as well, who in the majority resisted and opposed
that regime. Hundreds of thousands of Serbs fought for
more than ten years against the Milosevic dictatorship,
terror, wars and atrocities. I am saying this to remind
the Council, with pride, of the democratic values
displayed by Serbs during those years of isolation.
The Head of UNMIK and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, recently
promulgated the “Standards for Kosovo” document as
the only way to build a democratic, multi-ethnic and
multicultural Kosovo and Metohija.
The cornerstone of those standards must be to
eliminate the consequences of the ethnic cleansing of
Serbs and to provide for their full security, their right
to life and other human, civil and ethnic rights. In other
words, it is urgent to rebuild the approximately 40,000
destroyed and burned Serbian houses and to begin
immediately the reconstruction and restoration of

6

churches, monasteries and other sites of cultural
heritage, under the full supervision of the United
Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and
Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). All those efforts should be
internationally funded, since the international
community has been responsible for Kosovo and
Metohija since 10 June 1999.
At the same time, the perpetrators of all murders,
kidnappings and acts of vandalism against those
religious and cultural sites should be tracked down,
apprehended and brought to justice. In particular, the
international military and police forces should be dutybound to vigilantly guard the churches and
monasteries, which belong to the cultural heritage of
the entire world. In short, I call on the international
community to assist and help the Serbs and other nonAlbanians in the same way the ethnic Albanian
population was assisted after 10 June 1999.
The Government of Serbia and the Council of
Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro are in favour of
the decentralization of power in Kosovo and Metohija
through the establishment of the highest level of local
self-rule in Serb-populated municipalities, towns,
villages and the so-called Serbian enclaves. The
Government of Serbia, in its plan approved by the
parliament, referred to those units of local selfgovernment as regions. We could even accept some
other term, because what is important is the substance.
That kind of autonomy paves the way for a multiethnic and multicultural Kosovo and Metohija, leading
to reconciliation between Serbs and Albanians and to
their common European future.
Today, we should not think in terms of final
status, since all of the rights of Serbs are being
tragically violated in Kosovo and Metohija, and that
ghetto of human suffering cannot constitute the basis
for any final status of Kosovo and Metohija. The
Government of Serbia and the State Union of Serbia
and Montenegro are in favour of equal rights for all
their citizens, full respect for the United Nations
Charter and the implementation of all European
standards in Kosovo and Metohija.
We call for the start of a sincere dialogue at all
levels between ethnic Albanians and Serbs — either a
direct dialogue or through the good offices of the
international community. No agreement can be reached
without negotiations. Nor can hostilities be brought to

S/PV.4967

an end by continuing hostilities. The only way forward
is through dialogue and reconciliation.
I thank you, Mr. President, and I thank the
Secretary-General and Council members for their kind
attention and sincere concern for the peoples of my
country.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Like
other colleagues, I am sure I am very grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and to
Minister Draskovic for their contributions. I would like
to associate myself with the remarks shortly to be made
by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of the European Union.
We have just witnessed the most serious outbreak
of inter-ethnic violence in Kosovo since 1999. There is
no question that it has severely damaged Kosovo’s
reputation and has shown that there is a long way yet to
go to build the necessary tolerance in Kosovo. All
parties need to understand clearly that we cannot turn
the clock back to the worst aspects of inter-ethnic
conflict.
It should make the international community more
determined that the standards review policy endorsed
by the Council in December should be fully
implemented. So we very much welcome the
publication of the plan to do just that — the plan issued
on 31 March — because the implementation of the
standards remains the best basis on which to build an
inclusive, multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo where all
its citizens can live in peace and in security. That has
to be the continuing goal.
We therefore welcome the efforts made by
Member States in the arrangement now being put in
place on the ground in Pristina through an intensified
dialogue to give impetus to that process. But our
accepted policy is “standards before status”. Both those
issues are sensitive, and they are linked. The standards
are basic. But on the other hand, the Kosovars will all
need greater clarity or, at least, reassurance as to their
eventual destination.
It seems to me that there are two bottom lines in
this. The first is that achieving standards will facilitate
the final status negotiations; on the other hand, not
achieving the standards will jeopardize the future we
all want to see for Kosovo and its peoples.
I should like to pick out, if I may, three
challenges which face the Kosovo Albanians and the
Serbs today. The first and immediate one is to build

tolerance and to reassure the Kosovo Serbs on the
ground. The Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment need to demonstrate a genuine
commitment to strengthening the rights and the
protections of Kosovo’s minorities. The open letter of 2
April from Kosovo leaders, calling for all citizens to
build that tolerant democracy, is a positive step
forward and it needs to be built on, and so Belgrade
and Kosovo Serbs also have an important part to play
in the process and need to make a constructive
contribution and to get engaged. The United Kingdom
looks for a constructive Pristina-Belgrade dialogue. I
would say that unilateral statements on status by any
side are not just unacceptable, but have always proved
to be destabilizing.
Secondly, Kosovo needs a more responsive and
effective Government. It was clear before 17 March
that local leaders needed to take more responsibility at
the central and the local level. We very much support
Special Representative Holkeri and his plans for the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to take on
further responsibilities in areas such as the economy,
with the important caveat that they can take on only
those responsibilities which are not formally reserved
in the Constitutional Framework for elsewhere and
cannot be transferred.
Thirdly, the intention to devolve more
responsibility to local Government is very welcome,
but I think we should be clear that the aim of
delegating responsibility is to achieve greater
efficiency and to have more responsive Government. It
does, however, entail a responsibility by all those who
gain greater authority from that devolution. The United
Kingdom very much agrees with the way Special
Representative Holkeri put it. The aim is greater
efficiency; it is not partition or cantonization. So we
look forward to recommendations on that. Not only are
the proposals from Belgrade on decentralization a
useful contribution to the debate, but I understand that
they have been put forward in a spirit of actually being
prepared to work constructively, and that is very
welcome.
As far as the international community is
concerned, let me simply enumerate two points. The
first is that we all have to learn the lessons of 17-20
March. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has
taken fairly prompt action through its lessons-learned
paper and there is an intention to restructure the
Kosovo Force and to remove national caveats. That is

7

S/PV.4967

very welcome, as is the review of the performance of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) which has been set in train by the
Special Representative. Drawing on this, UNMIK
needs urgently and very carefully to assess whether it
has the right structures and whether the resources we
are deploying are appropriate in dealing with Kosovo
in 2004 and not in the very different situation of 1999.
The aim is to reduce the dependency in Kosovo on the
international community, but let us be clear: That will
need an integrated response by the international
community and a greater coherence in the international
effort, with the different organizations pulling together
more coherently, more flexibly, more responsibly and,
if I may say so, more responsively to the common
objectives. The efforts of the Special Representative to
address those aspects are crucial, we think, to the way
forward.
My last simple point is that we need to inject
impetus into Kosovo’s economy because, at the heart
of this, there are some very severe economic problems.
The case for privatization and moving forward quickly
on that — I hope, with the cooperation of Belgrade to
permit lots of necessary steps to be taken — is in the
right direction.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister of Serbia
and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Draskovic, at this meeting of
the Security Council. My delegation would also like to
express appreciation to Special Representative Holkeri
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General and
for the work he has been carrying out as head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
In spite of what this Organization has been doing
to protect the population and help the cause of a stable
Kosovo, the situation in the province has deteriorated.
The ideal of a multi-ethnic, tolerant and democratic
society is once again threatened. The international
community, including Brazil, has already voiced its
vehement condemnation of the episodes of ethnic
violence witnessed in Kosovo in March. All those
responsible must be brought to justice, with the full
cooperation of the Provisional Institutions. Effective
public security measures, such as the apprehension of
illegal weapons, must also be taken.
Intents to force a premature solution to the status
question through violence and intimidation must be

8

promptly thwarted. Brazil continues to lend its full
support to the process of peace and reconciliation, as
foreseen by resolution 1244 (1999) and the standards
before status policy for Kosovo.
Last month, we welcomed the launching of the
Standards Implementation Plan and its set of guidelines
and goals in the effort to bring peace and stability.
Immediate and steady progress is needed to speed up a
long-term political solution that will reflect the needs
of all populations of the province. We concur with the
Secretary-General in that
“the implementation plan will need to be
recalibrated and prioritized by giving additional
emphasis to security and matters relating to the
rule of law, minority rights and protection, return,
and the devolution of functions from the central
level to local bodies, as well as economic
development”. (S/2004/348, para. 60)
There is no doubt that episodes of ethnic violence
should also raise an alarm for the international
community. While our attention is devoted to new
conflicts, some of the old ones have recurred. We
wonder how such an “organized, widespread, and
targeted campaign”, whereby
“properties were demolished, public facilities
such as schools and health clinics were destroyed,
communities were surrounded and threatened and
residents were forced to leave their homes”,
(ibid., para. 2)
— a campaign in which 730 houses and 36 religious
sites were damaged or destroyed — could have
escalated to such proportions.
The report before the Council mentions the
number of injured officers of UNMIK, the Kosovo
Police Service and the Kosovo Force and the number
of arrests undertaken in connection with the violence.
This morning, Special Representative Holkeri
elaborated on the response of UNMIK and local police
forces to all those criminal events. My delegation
welcomes the establishment of a crisis management
review body by Special Representative Holkeri to
assess the Mission’s response to the crisis and would
like to suggest that their conclusions be brought to the
attention of the Council at an appropriate time.
Reconciliation became more elusive after March,
but we believe that an unwavering commitment by all
parties is the key to advancing the process of standards

S/PV.4967

and to moving on to the next steps of the peace
process. This commitment is particularly important on
the part of the Provisional Institutions and the political
leaders in Kosovo, but is also needed from
Governments in the region. We congratulate the new
Government of Serbia and Montenegro and hope that it
will engage in a fruitful dialogue with the leadership in
Kosovo and with UNMIK. We expect the coming
months to bring the intensification of the talks between
Pristina and Belgrade.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): We too wish to thank His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Serbia and
Montenegro, who has joined us this morning for a
discussion on the situation in Kosovo. We also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for introducing the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/348) and for
briefing us on the latest situation in the province.
In considering the situation in Kosovo today, it
may be relevant to recall the history and context of
United Nations involvement there. Five years ago the
international community intervened in Kosovo to put
an end to the slaughter that was being perpetrated
against its ethnic Albanian population.
It should be noted that the Security Council
initially ceded to NATO and the Group of Eight initial
responsibility for Kosovo. By virtue of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), the international
community, through the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), assumed
the responsibility of healing Kosovo of the wounds of
inter-ethnic strife and rebuilding it into a tolerant,
multi-ethnic and democratic society. Since that time,
Kosovo has been a de facto United Nations-NATO
protectorate.
During the last five years, UNMIK and its
partners — the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) — have accomplished much in
putting Kosovo back on the road to peace and stability.
Provisional Institutions have been established and
competencies have been transferred. Inter-ethnic
tensions appeared to have subsided and the start of
discussions on Kosovo’s final status seemed possible in
the foreseeable future. Also, the parties on the ground
did not challenge, but rather accepted, United Nations
authority.

Our hopes for Kosovo’s future were dashed two
months ago, when a wave of inter-ethnic violence
again plunged Kosovo into another abyss of death and
destruction. Ambassador Holkeri this morning
presented us with a graphic tale of the violence and its
consequences. This time, it was the ethnic Serb
population at the receiving end.
What happened in Kosovo two months ago has
made the task ahead more difficult for the international
community, but it should not prevent the rebuilding
process from moving forward. In that connection, the
Philippine delegation welcomes the actions taken by
UNMIK and KFOR to reassert control and restore the
rule of law in the province immediately after the
outbreak of violence. We welcome the arrest of those
involved in the riots and the fact that the judicial
process towards their prosecution has begun. We also
welcome Mr. Holkeri’s statement that UNMIK is
reviewing operational procedures and coordination in
responding to crises there.
The privatization process should also be pursued,
and we are glad to hear from Mr. Holkeri of the
progress in that area, with agreement on operating
procedures between UNMIK and the authorities. We
also continue to advocate the resumption of
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Even as we reiterate our commitment to the
international community’s efforts in Kosovo, we also
call upon UNMIK to exercise greater flexibility in
exploring all avenues that would lead us to our
common vision for Kosovo.
In an earlier briefing to the Council, Mr. Holkeri
spoke of his plan — or vision — to develop his own
political constituency among the people themselves,
beyond authorities and institutions, to support his
political and economic programme for Kosovo. I
wonder if Mr. Holkeri has an update on that effort,
especially
concerning
the
Kosovo
Standards
Implementation Plan.
In that connection, we welcome the views
presented to the Security Council this morning by His
Excellency the Foreign Minister for Serbia and
Montenegro, which may be worth looking into and
which could be considered along with other proposals
aimed at putting the Kosovo process back on the right
track.

9

S/PV.4967

Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Holkeri for his excellent introduction
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/348) and
for his briefing on the situation in Kosovo. I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro and thank him for addressing the Council.
The clashes and acts of violence which took place
in March, with their toll of dead and wounded and the
destruction of religious and cultural sites have
undoubtedly revealed the precariousness of the
situation in Kosovo and the climate of mistrust and
suspicion which still reigns within Kosovar society.
Those acts of violence, which we have unanimously
condemned, have derailed the peace process in Kosovo
and have seriously hampered efforts by the
international community to build a democratic, tolerant
and multi-ethnic Kosovo. In particular, those events
have struck a heavy blow to the return of refugees and
displaced persons and to the freedom of movement,
two key elements of the “standards before status”
policy.
On this occasion, we wish to pay tribute to all
Kosovars and to the international presence in Kosovo
for measures taken to put an end to the unfortunate
clashes, and to assure security for all communities. It is
reassuring to note that the security situation is
gradually improving, but more must be done in order to
keep such acts from happening again.
The open letter addressed on 2 April 2004 by a
great number of Kosovo leaders to the people of
Kosovo, in which they committed themselves to
restoring
multi-ethnicity
and
to
promoting
reconciliation, is a praiseworthy initiative aimed at
restoring trust within the Kosovar communities.
Similarly, the commitment of the Kosovo Government
to finance reconstruction of damaged or destroyed sites
and to try those responsible for violence is a strong
signal that could boost national reconciliation efforts.
But the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has a responsibility to
bear. We can only welcome its determination to ensure
that those who are responsible for violence will be
punished. Additional efforts are required in that area.
Understanding and coexistence among all Kosovars
must, henceforth, be a priority objective in order to
strengthen tolerance and mutual trust, and to rise above
past resentments.

10

In order to achieve those objectives, we must
remain committed to the principle of establishing a
multi-ethnic Kosovo and we must forcefully
underscore the need to fully implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the “standards
before status” policy. The successful implementation of
the “standards before status” policy will make it
possible to consider the fundamental question, which is
the final status of Kosovo.
In that regard, the 31 March 2004 launch of the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan was a major
milestone and a valuable starting point for assessing
the progress achieved in attaining the eight standards
set for mid-2005. As does Mr. Holkeri, we hope that
the Serb community will ultimately join the standards
process.
The opening on 23 April 2004 of the Liaison
Office for Coordination of International Cooperation
and Regional Dialogue in the office of the Kosovo
Prime Minister, aimed at strengthening cooperation
between UNMIK and the Government, is another
noteworthy development that should be welcomed.
Despite such considerable achievements, interethnic clashes have shown that much remains to be
done. An economically prosperous, democratic,
tolerant and multi-ethnic Kosovo is still a difficult
objective to attain. Therefore, it is essential for direct
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina to resume as
soon as possible, and for contacts among all elements
of Kosovo to be furthered.
A multi-ethnic Kosovo requires a unifying and
responsible dialogue, along with sincere collective
efforts in the interest of Kosovo, which will help bring
all Kosovars together, put an end to acts of
intimidation and violence, improve the security
situation, meet standards for the sustainable return of
refugees and displaced persons to their places of
origin, and ensure respect for the rights of minorities.
Active participation by all communities in the
Provisional Institutions and resolution of the problem
of parallel structures in Kosovo are essential elements
in our common efforts. My delegation supports the
appeal of the Secretary-General to all communities to
join efforts in applying the standards. The
implementation of standards undoubtedly will be
further facilitated by an improved economic and social
situation. To achieve its objective in Kosovo, the
international community must not abandon the

S/PV.4967

Kosovars. Consistent political and financial support on
the part of the international community is more than
ever necessary.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Holkeri for his briefing, which
comes after the excellent report of the SecretaryGeneral of 30 April (S/2004/348). I welcome among us
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Drascovic. We have listened to
him attentively.
I wish to state in advance that I associate myself
with the statement to be made shortly by the
Ambassador of Ireland on behalf of the member States
of the European Union, so I shall confine myself to a
few remarks.
By way of introduction, I would like
to say a few words about the violence last March and
its consequences.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
Albanian Kosovo officials, as representatives of the
largest community in Kosovo, have a clear obligation
to protect and promote the rights of all communities.
The feeble commitment of the Kosovar leaders to
preventing, and their belated condemnation of, the
ethnic violence give rise to questions, even if we note
that they disseminated a more encouraging letter on 2
April. Clearly, the burden of proof rests on them.
The violence has only strengthened our resolve to
see the standards rapidly implemented so that the
question of status might be settled. We will pay special
attention to progress achieved in multi-ethnicity and
reconciliation, the return of displaced persons, dialogue
with Belgrade, a code of ethics for the media, and
decentralization. In fact, that is what was just affirmed
by the Security Council in its statement of 30 April
(S/PRST/2004/13). I note, however, that the quarterly
evaluation of the progress in the latest report of the
Secretary-General confirms setbacks on all the
standards.
I now wish to emphasize two specific topics: the
role of the media, and decentralization.
The report of the new Representative of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for Freedom of the Media confirms that the
media in Kosovo played a very negative role in the
violence in March. Mr. Haraszti has especially
highlighted the lack of professionalism, the biased
nature of reporting and the lack of pluralism in the

media. With the OSCE, the international community
must create the conditions so that the Kosovo media
might respect basic ethical rules. It seems that for its
part, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should without further
delay take steps against those press organs that have
incited hatred and inter-ethnic violence.
The Special Representative quite rightly pointed
out that decentralization is a priority for action by the
international community. Decentralization could allow
for peaceful coexistence among the various
communities in Kosovo. There exist several models,
including those drawn from the Ohrid agreements. We
note that Belgrade has just made proposals, and we
welcome its willingness to dialogue on this crucial
issue.
In conclusion, I wish to say a word about method
and emphasize transparency and cooperation. We are
all aware that we must make progress on several fronts
in order to go forward in the settlement of the question
of Kosovo and the protection of all communities.
Consideration of that is under way in the United
Nations, including UNMIK, as well as in the capitals
of the countries most concerned. All of this thinking is
welcome. In due course we will have to compare all
those proposals. At any rate, we will have to work with
full transparency and full cooperation so that the
members of the Security Council might be able to take
the necessary decisions with full knowledge of the
facts.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk
Drascovic, and his participation in the current meeting
of the Security Council. We thank Mr. Harri Holkeri
for his briefing introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/348), and we commend the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo for their efforts to
establish lasting peace in Kosovo based on the
principles set by resolution 1244 (1999).
Today’s meeting takes place amid renewed
concerns over the future of Kosovo and a feeling of
dismay at the serious setback to the normalization and
stabilization of Kosovo. It will take time and
painstaking efforts to repair the damage. The ethnically
motivated violence against minority groups of Kosovo

11

S/PV.4967

must be condemned and measures must be taken so
that it does not occur again.

Kosovo may live in his country in dignity, liberty and
security.

The deterioration of the security environment and
the overall political situation after the incidents in
March has prompted the Security Council to take a
very clear stand, particularly through the presidential
statement of 30 April (S/PRST/2004/13), stressing the
need to review and revise, in a timely manner, key
sections of the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan
on returns and the rights of communities and on
freedom of movement. We extend our full support to
UNMIK for introducing tough actions to implement
those standards.

To conclude, we reiterate our full support for the
Special Representative, for UNMIK and for KFOR in
their efforts to achieve reconciliation, reconstruction
and restoration of the political process in order to fully
implement Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
and the standards for Kosovo policy.

Actually, we believe that in the end the standards
for Kosovo policy will make sense only when the
rights of all communities are fully protected and
respected and Kosovo becomes a democratic, multiethnic society. Anything short of that will mean failure
for the great efforts and investments made by the
international community for Kosovo. To reach that
goal, we deem it essential that the rule of law be
established and guaranteed, as well as effective
operation of the police and the judicial and penal
systems. We hope that UNMIK’s measures to enhance
the security situation will produce tangible results in
guaranteeing full respect for the rule of law and for
human and minority rights, including respect for
religious, historical and cultural sites.
We further hope that those measures will promote
full participation by the Serb minority at all levels of
government. We took note of the proposals by the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro on
decentralization. It is our view that Serb participation
in the provincial institutions is the best means to
guarantee security and economic sustainability of the
Serb community in Kosovo.
We wish to underline the crucial role and
responsibilities of the Kosovo leadership in promoting
a climate of tolerance among the communities and the
responsibilities of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment to take a stand and live up to their
commitments to ensure that threats and acts of violence
are not repeated.
My delegation underlines the need for
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina to
achieve meaningful progress on issues of common
interest and, above all, to ensure that each inhabitant of

12

Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to join others in thanking Special Representative
Holkeri for joining us today and for providing us with
an excellent briefing. I wish also to welcome Foreign
Minister Draskovic and to thank him for his
presentation this morning.
It was almost two months ago that a deplorable
and unjustifiable outbreak of violence shook Kosovo.
That violence was a setback to Kosovo’s own
aspiration to develop into a society that can become
part of Europe. It must not be repeated. Violence will
damage the prospects of all of Kosovo’s citizens: the
history of the Balkans gives ample evidence of the
devastation brought by ethnic hatred and violence.
Down that path lies destruction.
The international community, through the review
date process, has laid out a brighter path for Kosovo.
Kosovo faces a key decision point now: to choose
whether it will seize that path and make it its own.
Foreign Minister Draskovic told us this morning that
the only way forward is through dialogue and
reconciliation; that suggests strongly that all parties
must participate. We remain determined to see Kosovo
attain, as rapidly as possible, the United Nations
standards for Kosovo through the mechanism of the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan; both the
standards and the Implementation Plan have been
welcomed by the Security Council. Implementation of
the Plan will benefit all Kosovars.
The leaders of Kosovo can best respond to the
tragic events of March by bringing a new commitment
and energy to implementing the United Nations
standards. That will require a close and growing
partnership between the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Provisional Institutions, and full consultations with —
and the support of — Kosovar Serbs and other
minorities.

S/PV.4967

Security for all residents of Kosovo must be
assured. We in the international community will do our
part, as shown by NATO’s rapid reinforcement of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), and by the commitment to keep
sufficient international civilian police on duty. But
Kosovars themselves must be more involved in, and
must be held accountable for, their own security. We
must also address other problems such as an
unacceptably high rate of unemployment. We want to
see privatization revitalized so that State and socially
owned enterprises can be transformed, providing jobs
and growth. And we want to see continued and
renewed efforts to combat the corruption that has
sapped international and local confidence and driven
off needed investment.
As part of the Contact Group, we support the
Group’s new schedule of meetings, every six weeks in
Pristina. Those meetings are designed to help Kosovo
meet the standards by focusing attention on key
problems, assessing progress made and identifying
further necessary steps. We are establishing a security
advisory group in Pristina, where Kosovo Albanians
and Kosovo Serbs can discuss critical security
concerns. Another such group has been established in
Belgrade to give Serbia a voice in security issues.
We commend to the attention of all parties
concerned the statement made on behalf of the Security
Council
by
its
President
on
30
April
(S/PRST/2004/13). We look forward to hearing at an
early date from the Secretary-General about his
recommendations on possible new institutional
arrangements to allow effective local government
through the devolution of central responsibilities to
local authorities and communities in Kosovo.
I wish in closing to recognize the tragedy of those
in Kosovo who lost their lives or who were injured
during the March violence, and to urge the Provisional
Institutions to quickly rebuild the homes and churches
destroyed, as promised, as soon as possible. I would
also like to recognize the service and sacrifice of all
those internationals serving with UNMIK and its
international civilian police, and with KFOR. In
particular, I wish to recall and commend the United
States police officers who lost their lives in the line of
duty at Mitrovica as a result of the incident there on 17
April, and to extend our hopes and prayers for the full
recovery of those who were injured.

Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I too wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/348). We wish
also to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Draskovic.
The report introduced this morning helps us
understand the dimensions of the setback experienced
in the process of establishing a multi-ethnic, stable and
democratic Kosovo. There is no doubt that recent
appalling and unfortunate events — loss of life,
hundreds of injuries and considerable material
damage — have had a negative effect on the pace and
the course of the process of reconstruction and
normalization in Kosovo. One example of the
devastation is that, as noted in paragraph 22 of the
report, in less than 48 hours, 4,100 minority
community members were newly displaced, more than
the total of 3,664 that had returned throughout 2003.
We are aware that as a result of the events of
March redoubled efforts will be required in such areas
as minority rights, human rights, equal security,
freedom of movement, and a return to sustainable
conditions for all inhabitants of Kosovo.
The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and local political leaders have major challenges ahead
of them. First and foremost, they must put an end to
calls to violence, irrespective of their source. They
must adopt measures to establish and ensure respect for
the rule of law, including by ensuring that the
perpetrators of violence are brought to justice and that
illegal weapons are seized. Thirdly, they must begin to
rebuild damaged or destroyed sites or to provide
appropriate compensation; they must rebuild holy sites
and must facilitate the return of persons who have been
displaced. Fourthly, they must ensure that no sector
gains politically from the March violence. Finally, it is
our view that they must fully comply with the
commitment set out in the 2 April 2004 open letter
signed by political leaders and officials from the
Institutions:
to
restore
multi-ethnicity
and
reconciliation throughout Kosovo.
These challenges underscore the validity of the
“standards before status” policy. The Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan launched on 31 March was noted
by the Security Council in its 30 April presidential
statement (S/PRST/2004/13). It is urgent that we take
the opportunity to review two of the key elements of

13

S/PV.4967

the plan in the light of the inter-ethnic violence in
March: sustainable returns and the rights of
communities and their members; and freedom of
movement.
Cooperation between the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and UNMIK will be essential for
the success of the Kosovo Standards Implementation
Plan. Support from Belgrade is also critical. We
reaffirm that without significant, sustainable returns of
displaced persons and refugees, without sufficient
freedom of movement and without the dismantlement
of parallel structures it will be impossible to establish a
multi-ethnic, democratic society able to integrate all
inhabitants of Kosovo. Constructive dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina and between UNMIK and the
Kosovo Assembly is a key element for the success of
that undertaking.
We must spare no effort to avoid a repetition of
abhorrent acts like those we witnessed in March.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the information he has just shared with the
Council on the situation in Kosovo since the
unfortunate events of March. I also wish to welcome to
the Council the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and Montenegro.
The briefing has demonstrated once again the
exceptional seriousness of the violence that occurred
from 17 to 21 March 2004, particularly since we now
know that those acts of violence were part of an
organized, widespread and targeted campaign. Given
the difficulty for the ethnic communities of Kosovo to
coexist, all the communities in Kosovo must be
protected. We must also consider Kosovo’s effective
commitment to the normalization process under way
and the prospects for the “standards before status”
policy,
which
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
striving to implement.
Nevertheless, we believe that we should stay the
course and continue the efforts undertaken to help the
Kosovars resume internal inter-ethnic dialogue and
dialogue with Belgrade. We should avoid solutions that
might enhance inter-ethnic division, as well as ones
that might lean towards abandoning the initial
objective of a multi-ethnic, democratic and prosperous
Kosovo.

14

However irreconcilable the positions of the
Albanians and Serbs of Kosovo might seem, UNMIK
must continue to pay special, and even central,
attention to the claims of the two parties and to work
toward national reconciliation. In that regard, my
delegation appreciates the efforts made to adjust the
implementation of the “standards before status” policy.
Those efforts should be continued in order to fully take
into account the new situation created by the events of
March 2004.
To do that, UNMIK should rely on initiatives
such as the memorandum of agreement whereby the
Albanians and the Serbs in Kosovo would establish a
partnership based on mutual respect and the
marginalization of extremists of all stripes, or on the
initiative of the open letter sent to the population of
Kosovo by some of its leaders. Those two actions,
which do credit to their authors, represent an
encouraging sign.
We also welcome the urgent steps taken,
including, inter alia, the creation of an emergency fund
that will allow for the start of reconstruction of
damaged sites and buildings, compensation of victims
for the loss of their property and personal effects and
facilitation of the return of refugees. Special attention
should be given to the fight against impunity.
In that regard, the international community
should mobilize additional resources in order to
effectively meet this requirement. That would help
strengthen the deterrence of serious violations of
human rights and acts aimed at erasing the history and
the memory of minority ethnic groups of Kosovo.
We cannot emphasize enough the need for
internal inter-ethnic dialogue and reconciliation.
Progress made to promote reconciliation and tolerance,
internally in Kosovo as well as with Pristina, is and
will remain the measure of success of the
reconstruction of Kosovo. Decentralization should also
allow for coexistence among all components of
Kosovar society.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
commend and encourage UNMIK, the European
Union, NATO and all those who helped contain the
violence of last March, particularly the SecretaryGeneral for his personal dedication to the cause of
peace in Kosovo.

S/PV.4967

Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2004/348). I also
thank Mr. Holkeri for his additional briefing, and
welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro to today’s meeting and thank him for his
statement.
The Security Council has repeatedly considered
the Kosovo question recently, which has reflected
international community’s concern about the Kosovo
question and the importance it attaches to it. Indeed, as
the Secretary-General points out in his report, the
serious violence of March in Kosovo has had a
disturbingly negative impact on local political,
economic and social development.
The Security Council’s presidential statement of
30 April (S/PRST/2004/13) set out a series of measures
to be taken to emerge from the present difficult
situation. The Secretary-General also expressed some
important recommendations in that regard in his report.
We believe that the present task is to implement those
measures and recommendations as soon as possible.
Only by doing that can the Kosovo peace process be
maintained
and
advanced.
The
international
community’s efforts throughout the years will not have
been in vain.
The investigations of the March incidents should
be accelerated and those responsible should be brought
to justice. That will help ensure that that type of
violence will not be repeated. Secondly, the facilities
and the property destroyed during the violent clashes
should be rebuilt and compensation paid, and the
security needs of the minorities must be met. At the
same time, specific steps should be taken to gradually
resume mutual trust and enhance reconciliation among
all communities in Kosovo. Thirdly, the relevant
parties, particularly the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment, should make greater efforts to enhance
the rule of law, protect minority rights and decentralize
functions from the central level to local bodies.
Here I wish to reiterate that resolution 1244
(1999) and the “standards before status” policy remain
the basis for resolving the Kosovo question. We
encourage Belgrade and Pristina to resume direct
dialogue as soon as possible. We hope UNMIK will
continue to play a constructive role in ensuring
Kosovo’s stability, promoting harmonious coexistence

among all communities and facilitating the
implementation of the Kosovo standards document.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank Mr. Holkeri for his excellent briefing. I also wish
to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and Montenegro, Mr. Draskovic.
My country fully endorses the statement that will
be made by the Permanent Representative of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union.
The detailed report of the Secretary-General on
Kosovo (S/2004/348) has only confirmed what had
already come to light in the most recent Council
meeting on Kosovo. The unbridled inter-ethnic
violence of the events in March has caused a serious
setback to the process of normalization and compliance
with standards for the province. We reiterate our
vigorous condemnation of those events, and we appeal
that those responsible for them be brought to justice.
However, this is not the time to make statements
of disapproval, but rather to determine precisely what
happened, make a serious political assessment of the
events and calculate their impact, not only so that such
unfortunate events will not be repeated, but also so that
the international community can take the appropriate
measures so that the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999) can be fully complied with.
Let us begin with the facts. Three conclusions can
be drawn from Mr. Holkeri’s briefing and from the
report of the Secretary-General. First, the inter-ethnic
violence of March was not an isolated event, but rather
an organized campaign, spread throughout the territory
with specific objectives against three of the province’s
ethnic minorities, but with particular malice against the
Serb minority. Secondly, that violence was not directed
only against individuals and the heritage of those
minorities — including sites of particular cultural and
religious significance — but also against UNMIK and
the forces that the international community has charged
with maintaining order. Thirdly, the initial response of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government was
ambivalent; they were reluctant to clearly condemn the
violence, particularly the violence unfortunately
directed against the Serb community. Worse yet, in
some cases they attempted to use the violence for their
own political objectives, calling for independence and
the transfer of UNMIK’s competencies. Only after
UNMIK and the international community had put

15

S/PV.4967

pressure on the authorities did they show a change of
attitude.
A second aspect is the consequences. The
Secretary-General’s report indicates that the interethnic violence has affected the entire normalization
process. Thus, not only has it compelled UNMIK to
modify the Implementation Plan, but it has set back the
situation of minorities and hampered the return of
refugees, seriously affecting freedom of movement,
freezing direct dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
and seriously damaging the functioning of democratic
institutions. Those are all crucial aspects of resolution
1244 (1999) and of the “Standards for Kosovo”
document. Moreover, the attitude of the municipalities
and of the media — key institutions in the
normalization process — has revealed how far they are
from complying with the standards. Only the Kosovo
Protection Corps has demonstrated — with certain
exceptions — some degree of professionalism during
the crisis. On the whole, the objective of establishing
the rule of law has been seriously damaged by the
violence, which has even affected economic
development, weakening the confidence and interest of
investors.
Finally, we must consider measures to prevent
such unfortunate events from happening again and
derailing the situation. It is worthwhile to highlight the
work of UNMIK, headed by Mr. Holkeri, and that of
KFOR during the outbreak of the crisis and in the days
following. They have paid a high price, but they
probably prevented a true catastrophe. The change of
attitude among the provisional authorities —
particularly in terms of putting right the damage — is
also commendable, but there is still more than a
shadow of doubt as to their true commitment to
applying the standards for Kosovo.
Spain believes that the “standards before status”
policy is more valid now than ever before. The
incidents of March are proof that Kosovo is not
implementing the standards required of it by the
international community. What is more, there has been
considerable movement away from the standards. We
must send a loud and clear message to the Kosovo
authorities, insisting that there will be no discussions
on status until the standards are fully implemented, and
that episodes of violence will only postpone that date.
Any different course could have very serious
consequences for Kosovo’s future and for the entire
region.

16

Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2004/348), and we thank the Head of the Mission,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in the province. We welcome the
participation in today’s Security Council meeting of
Mr. Vuk Draskovic, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro, and of the Secretary-General.
The appraisals provided in the report and the
position of the Special Representative coincide to a
great extent with our view of the alarming situation in
Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro. The wide-scale
outbreak of ethnic violence in March, provoked by
extremists, has seriously damaged the efforts to
establish a democratic, multi-ethnic and stable society
in the province. That planned and targeted attempt to
force members of the non-Albanian communities —
primarily Kosovo Serbs — out of the province and to
undermine the social foundations of their lives,
including by destroying historical and cultural Serbian
Orthodox monuments, can be seen as nothing other
than a conscious policy of ethnic cleansing of
Kosovo’s non-Albanian population.
Russia has repeatedly warned of the danger of
such developments. Unfortunately, however, the
alarming trends that have emerged in recent years have
not been met with an adequate response. The Security
Council, in its presidential statement of 30 April 2004
(S/PRST/2004/13), sternly condemned the events of
March and clearly stated that no party can be allowed
to profit or to advance a political agenda through
violent measures.
It is important that, in the same presidential
statement, the Security Council reaffirmed its full and
consistent support for the “standards before status”
policy as part of the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Only the true attainment in Kosovo of the
democratic standards established for it by the
international community can serve as a basis for the
Council’s consideration of the possibility of beginning
a discussion of the province’s future status.
With regard to the complex and tense situation
still prevailing in Kosovo, we believe that a series of
steps must urgently be undertaken, aimed at
normalizing the situation and at returning the process
of reaching a Kosovo settlement to the track of

S/PV.4967

restoring a multi-ethnic society. In conformity with the
demands of the Security Council, we must carefully
study the circumstances surrounding the events of 17
to 20 March and punish those responsible, including
those who directly or indirectly incited those events,
those who engaged in hate propaganda or nationalism
and those who promoted the events by doing nothing.
We must identify and dissolve the paramilitary groups
left over from the organizational structure of the
former Kosovo Liberation Army and take stringent
measures against organizations and political figures
who, during those events, revealed their outright
nationalist or extremist nature. We must take urgent
steps to effectively restore law and order and to seize
illegal weapons. We must intensify our fight against
organized crime and all manifestations of extremism.
We support the Secretary-General’s demand that
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
immediately put into effect their verbal promise to
restore a multi-ethnic society and ensure reconciliation
in Kosovo.
It is clear today that the process of normalization
has been seriously damaged. This threatens to
destabilize the situation in the region and calls into
question the timetable for the gradual implementation
of the standards set out for Kosovo by the international
community.
In that connection, we are convinced that the
strategy for attaining democratic standards in the
province needs to be modified. It is important, as noted
in the April statement of the President of the Security
Council, that we review and adapt the plan for the
implementation of Kosovo standards. Bearing in mind
the ethnic cleansing that took place in March, we need
to enhance its key provisions regarding safeguards for
equal security for the population, freedom of
movement, the return of refugees and displaced
persons, and the protection of the rights of minorities
and their full integration into Government institutions
at all levels.
Serious attention needs to be devoted to the task
of decentralizing executive powers in Kosovo, so as to
ensure, through the necessary institutional machinery,
conditions conducive to the coexistence of all
communities in Kosovo in a unified multi-ethnic
democratic society. In that connection, we await from
the Secretary-General recommendations with regard to
a balanced model for the transfer of executive powers

at the provincial level to local bodies and communities
in Kosovo, bearing in mind the relevant studies carried
out and proposals made by interested parties and
international organizations.
It would be appropriate to consider also the Serb
plan for a political settlement of the current situation in
Kosovo. This is important in the context of both
establishing constructive cooperation between the
United Nations Mission and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo on the one
hand and the Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade on the other,
and finding appropriate ways and means to solve the
Kosovo problem and maintain the multi-ethnic nature
of the province.
Advancing in the “Standards for Kosovo” process
without taking into account the events of 17 to 20
March is inadmissible. We continue to believe that, at
the current stage, it would be premature to set a
deadline for a comprehensive review of the
implementation of the plan for Kosovo standards by
the middle of 2005. Arguments to the effect that this
would provoke additional tension in the province do
not convince us — quite the contrary. Such a hasty
setting of deadlines would incite extremists and would
be taken as an attempt to relieve the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo of their
responsibility for developments in the province.
We need to review, also in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), the current
practice of involving the Provisional Institutions in
activities related to the reserved areas. The provincial
structures should be deserving of trust and should
beforehand show themselves to be effective in
administering various aspects of life in Kosovo.
The Russian delegation shares the concern of the
Secretary-General at the continuing threat of new
outbreaks of violence in Kosovo. We note the decisive
action taken by the international presence in Kosovo to
restore law and order and to protect minorities in the
province as well as their religious, historical and
cultural sites. However, we believe that, along with
strengthening KFOR, we could also strengthen its antiterrorist component and give it additional means of
combating massive outbreaks of violence. We cannot
allow, and we should condemn most sternly, attacks on
the United Nations Mission and on KFOR.
We welcome the constructive role that the
leadership of Serbia and Montenegro played in March

17

S/PV.4967

in the context of their collective efforts to combat
extremist violence, and we note the effective measures
taken to punish those individuals who took part in, or
who did not prevent, the burning of mosques in
Belgrade and Nis, and we note also the steps taken to
restore them.
We welcome the intention of the Belgrade
authorities to undertake active work in Kosovo,
including their stated readiness for the earliest possible
resumption of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Russia is prepared to cooperate fully and closely
in order to put an end, as soon as possible, to the
tragedy in the Balkans and to put the situation back on
the track set out in Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), which remains the sole legal basis for a
Kosovo settlement. We firmly believe that we must
draw the most serious conclusions from what has
happened, which will enable the international
community, through its joint efforts, to provide a just
solution to the problem of Kosovo and to ensure lasting
stability and security in the province.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Like other colleagues, I
should first of all like to thank Mr. Holkeri for his very
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
Kosovo. I think that both today’s presentation and the
Secretary-General’s excellent recent report on Kosovo
clearly show that Kosovo and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
require continuous attention and support.
My delegation also welcomes the participation in
our discussion of Foreign Minister Draskovic and
would like to associate itself with the statement to be
made shortly by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf
of the European Union.
We have seen some of the worst ethnic violence
in Kosovo since 1999, but we have also seen some
positive changes since the Council discussed Kosovo
in April. As Mr. Holkeri mentioned, some 270
Kosovars have been arrested for possible involvement
in the March violence, and some of those cases should
soon be going to trial. Tenders are being prepared for
reconstruction contracts to begin repairing the damage
to houses. Ministers from the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government have visited some Serb
communities to personally assess the damage and to
show their sympathy for the affected members of those
communities. We hope that working groups will meet

18

again soon to map out further progress in implementing
the “Standards for Kosovo” document.
All of these are worthy developments, but they
fall short of what we had hoped for. We want to see
clearer statements and actions by leaders of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government that will
demonstrate to extremists that they have no place in
Kosovo in future.
Political leaders should encourage their
constituents actively to assist police in investigating
the March uprisings and to testify against the
extremists who led the violence. Political parties and
Government structures should do all they can to
dismiss those who actively or passively supported the
violence which did so much harm to the aspirations of
all Kosovars.
Political leaders in Kosovo must break new
ground. Beyond the obligation to marginalize
extremists, to follow through on commitments to
rebuild communities destroyed by the March violence
and to renew the dialogue of working groups with
Belgrade, political leaders in Kosovo must find new
ways to reconcile the ethnic communities. They should
do far more to encourage minority returns and ensure a
safe environment for members of minority groups who
do go back to their homes in Kosovo. This is a problem
of society-building for which neither UNMIK nor the
international community is responsible, but the
political elite of Kosovo alone.
Political leaders must also demonstrate a greater
willingness to compromise. Further progress in Kosovo
will require some devolution of political power. That
would help bring government closer to the people and
at the same time reassure members of all ethnic groups
that they can have greater control over their lives. We
welcome the fact that Special Representative Mr.
Holkeri, under whose reserved powers issues of local
government fall, will soon prepare a concept based on
the proposals made by the Council of Europe last year
and will consult with the parties concerned. We urge
political leaders in Kosovo to move constructively and
quickly to engage in open discussion on measures for
devolution, without prejudice to the status issue.
Ethnic Serbs and other minorities must
demonstrate that they, too, are approaching Kosovo’s
problems in good faith. One important step is for them
to participate fully in the working groups that will be
implementing the “Standards for Kosovo”.

S/PV.4967

Clearly, much of the future progress in Kosovo
will depend on the economy. In that respect, we look
forward to progress soon to be made in the field of
privatization. Germany, both through its bilateral
assistance and by working through the European
Union, will do all it can to promote economic
development in Kosovo. But economic development
requires, above all, political stability. To secure their
economic future, all communities in Kosovo must
demonstrate to potential investors that events like the
March uprisings will not reoccur and that the ethnic
communities can live together in peace.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): First, I would like to
thank Special Representative Mr. Harri Holkeri, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and, not least, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for this thorough and lucid
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/348). I also
welcome the presence at our meeting of Mr. Vuk
Draskovic, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro.
Romania associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union.
The general image of the situation in Kosovo in
the aftermath of recent events as depicted in Mr.
Holkeri’s report is a distressing one. The progress
made in the province prior to the ethnically motivated
violence in March has been seriously overshadowed by
the organized, widespread and targeted attacks against
the Serb and other communities in Kosovo.

The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and all communities in Kosovo, with the assistance of
the international presence, should work together in a
responsible and coherent manner to achieve that goal
and to prevent the recurrence of similar violence in the
future. An important step forward would be the
establishment of a stricter legal regime for small and
light weapons and the intensification of operations to
collect illegal weapons. It is crucial to eradicate the
mentality existing in Kosovo of violence as a means to
achieve political goals. And that action should proceed
at every level and in every field, not least starting with
a change of attitude among those political and local
leaders who failed to act responsibly during the recent
crisis. To the same end, the local media should be
supported in acquiring more professional and
democratic reporting standards.
As a country of the region, Romania is
particularly
concerned
about
the
long-term
implications of any action related to Kosovo’s future.
That is why we insist that “standards before status”
should be taken very seriously and reiterate that its
implementation should be reflected throughout
Kosovo, serving as a symbol of the Kosovars’ will to
live in peace in the region and to promote its stability.

We are at the stage where simply identifying
problems is not enough. Concrete measures have to be
adopted and put in place for ensuring the real and
effective implementation of measures set out in the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan and, as an
ultimate goal, for the development in Kosovo of a
secure, democratic, tolerant and multi-ethnic society.

We all have a stake in implementing standards, no
matter what status will eventually be arrived at. In the
same vein, the longer it takes for standards to be
worked on, the more difficult it will prove catch up,
irrespective of the eventual determination of the final
status. In this context, we note that the report before
the Council also stands as an initial review of the
current state of standards implementation in Kosovo.
Romania attaches great importance to the further
development of the review mechanism, the functioning
of which will be essential in clarifying the political
approach and reasoning of the international community
and the Security Council with respect to the discussion
of Kosovo’s final status.

Therefore,
while
reaffirming
Romania’s
attachment to the “standards before status” policy, we
fully share the view that the aforementioned Plan must
be further recalibrated and prioritized. More emphasis
should be put on security, returns, minority rights, the
rule of law and justice and the devolution of functions
from the central level to local bodies, so that every
inhabitant of Kosovo and every person wishing to
return there can have an equal opportunity for a
normal, free and secure life.

We can find no better illustration of why full
implementation of the standards should dominate the
political agenda of Kosovo than the fact that recent
violent events have further damaged its already fragile
and weak economy. How can one build a future on
such foundations? Romania welcomes in that respect
the public commitments of Kosovo leaders to
implementing the standards. We hope that those
commitments — and every chapter of the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan — will be fully put into

19

S/PV.4967

practice in order to maximize the chances of a positive
review in 2005.
However, in the short term, we believe that
confidence-building in Kosovo will not be possible
without some timely and effective measures in terms of
rule of law and justice, reconstruction and full
protection of minority communities. In that respect,
every effort should be made to bring to justice those
responsible for the grave attacks in March, to enforce
the rule of law throughout Kosovo and to reverse the
huge moral damage created by the violence and the
destruction of property and Serbian Orthodox churches
and monasteries, many of which are part of our
universal heritage.
At the same time — and as requested recently by
the Council — solutions must be sought for more
effective
governance
and
the
evolution
of
responsibilities at the local level, allowing for the full
observance of the rights and interests of all members of
minority communities. In this context, we welcome
proposals that are discussed and agreed by all
interested parties. But it is clear that the situation
should not be prolonged for too long, as that could
generate even more problems for everyone.
Finally, I would like to add a few words of support
and acknowledgement for UNMIK and its chief, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Harri
Holkeri, for KFOR and for the entire international
presence in Kosovo. They have huge tasks ahead in
difficult and — as the report indicates — dangerous
conditions. Those tasks cannot be accomplished
effectively unless sufficient political backing and
resources are made available to them by the
international community and the Council.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Pakistan.
I wish once again to welcome Mr. Holkeri, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to this
Chamber and to thank him for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report, as well as for updating the
Council on the work being done by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
My delegation also welcomes the participation of
the Foreign Minister of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr.
Vuk Draskovic, in this debate.
Pakistan reiterates its strong condemnation of the
violence in March 2004 and deplores the loss of

20

innocent lives and the destruction of religious and
historical sites. We once again call for bringing all
perpetrators to justice. We commend the efforts of
UNMIK, led by Mr. Holkeri, and of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) in restoring stability and order in Kosovo
during and after these tragic events.
The Secretary-General’s report, however, is a
sobering assessment of the situation in Kosovo in the
aftermath of the March violence. We note with concern
its assessment that
“the situation in Kosovo remains tense, and further
violence is possible”. (S/2004/348, para. 9)
The violence has been the most serious blow thus far to
inter-ethnic relations in Kosovo. Despite the
painstaking efforts of UNMIK, both past and present,
we are no nearer healing the wounds that have been
inflicted on Kosovo for so long and which we sought to
heal when resolution 1244 (1999) was adopted by the
Security Council.
Problems persist, especially in the key areas of
UNMIK’s mandate to ensure sustainable returns,
community rights, freedom of movement and the
functioning of democratic institutions. Extremists from
both sides continue to obstruct meaningful progress in
these areas. Parallel structures continue to exist,
despite repeated calls for their dismantling. At the
same time, Kosovo’s economic situation has continued
to deteriorate, with marginal support from the
international community. Direct dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade has not yet resumed, in spite of
commitments by both sides to do so. Above all,
security in Kosovo remains fragile, in spite of the
presence of thousands of KFOR troops.
Mr. Holkeri, we believe, is making every effort to
redress the situation, to defuse tensions and to move
forward on the implementation plan. We understand
that the implementation plan is also being revised in
some key areas to take into account the implications of
the recent events. Pakistan will continue to offer its
fullest support to Mr. Holkeri in his efforts for the
implementation of standards, in line with the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999), and to establish a
multi-ethnic, tolerant, democratic and peaceful society
in Kosovo.
Mr. Holkeri has remarked that “the recent
violence has forced us at UNMIK to take a long, hard
look at ourselves”. Some, including Pakistan, have felt

S/PV.4967

that the entire process of seeking to promote standards
without addressing the status issue has been flawed in
its conception and inappropriate to prepare Kosovo for
the transition from war to peace, from socialism to a
market economy, and from international political limbo
to political and legal clarity. We need to determine
whether the failure to clarify the status of Kosovo has
fed the frustrations and grievances of both sides,
hardened positions and perpetuated the proclivity
towards violence. Continued delay in addressing the
question of political status will, in our view, increase
the complexity of the situation and the dangers of
revived violence.
Instead of transforming the “standards before
status” issue into dogma, the Council should move
with more deliberate political realism to promote peace
and prosperity in Kosovo. As Mr. Holkeri said this
morning, the time is coming when we shall have to
consider how to handle difficult choices. We agree.
The Council, in our view, should promote a “status
with standards” approach — a two-pronged approach
that, on the one hand, would hold the Kosovars, both
the people and leadership, accountable for
implementing the standards programme, to work to end
extremism and intolerance, and to create friendly and
cooperative relations with their neighbours. On the
other hand, this approach would see simultaneous
progress on clarifying Kosovo’s status issue and
identifying ways of promoting self-determination for
all Kosovars, while seeking to uphold the rights and
interests of its minorities.
As a first step, the international community must
act to hold back the efforts being made to consolidate
parallel structures and to pre-empt future discussions
on political status. While the plan presented by
Belgrade has been advanced unilaterally, this is an
acknowledgement of the need to begin consideration of
the status issue. Other ideas on the status issue,
especially from the Kosovars themselves, should be
welcome. The Council and UNMIK, while securing the
implementation of standards, should begin to give
consideration to proposals on the status issue. A change
of course is essential to creating hope for peace and to
ending the tragic legacy of war and suffering in that
region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Ireland. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council and to make his statement.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Bulgaria and Romania, and the European
Free
Trade
Association
countries
Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.
In common with other speakers, we welcome the
presence at this meeting of the Secretary-General. We
also warmly appreciate the presence of Foreign
Minister Vuk Draskovic of Serbia and Montenegro.
I would like to express our appreciation for the
presence here today of Mr. Holkeri and we welcome
the opportunity to hear a briefing on the situation in
Kosovo. The European Union has expressed its full
support for the efforts of Special Representative Harri
Holkeri, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) to stabilize the situation and to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
policy of “standards before status”.
In our statement to the Council on 13 April, the
European Union strongly condemned the recent
ethnically motivated violence in Kosovo that resulted
in many dead and wounded, the destruction of personal
property and the destruction of Serbian Orthodox
churches and monasteries, which form part of the
common religious and cultural heritage of all
Europeans. The EU also strongly condemned the
attacks on the troops of KFOR and on the personnel
and sites of UNMIK. Extremism and intolerance are
contrary to European values. The European Union
urges the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
to take concrete steps to fulfil their commitment to
rebuilding
multi-ethnicity
and
reconciliation
throughout Kosovo.
The Secretary-General’s report clearly sets out
the background to the recent violence, and also notes
the need for concrete action by the leaders and people
of Kosovo to ensure that the violence is not repeated.
The European Union emphasizes its full support
for the policy of “standards before status”, and we note
that the presentation of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan on 31 March in Pristina is a step
forward in the standards process. We urge the

21

S/PV.4967

Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
demonstrate their responsibility for, and commitment
to, achieving concrete progress on the implementation
of the standards.
We also stress the importance of reconciliation
between the communities in Kosovo and urge the
parties to resume the direct dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade in order to address critical issues of
common interest. The European Union stands ready to
support that dialogue.
The European Union has reaffirmed its strong
commitment to a secure, democratic, multi-ethnic and
prosperous Kosovo. The recent violence has been a
setback for Kosovo and has endangered the progress
made in recent years. The European Union believes
that in the aftermath of the violence the immediate
priorities must be to ensure security, to facilitate the
return of displaced persons, to reconstruct destroyed
property and religious sites and to bring those
responsible to justice. Progress by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in meeting the
standards will be assessed periodically, and progress
towards a process to determine the future status of
Kosovo, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), is
conditional on the positive outcome of a
comprehensive review.
The European Union urges all political leaders in
Kosovo, in particular the Kosovo Albanian leadership,
to work closely with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to address the many challenges
that lie ahead, including economic development. The
European Union welcomes the presidential statement
adopted by the Security Council on 30 April
(S/PRST/2004/13), which outlined the need to allow
for more effective local government through
devolution and to ensure the physical security and the
full protection of the rights of members of all
communities in Kosovo.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this public meeting. I
would also like to thank Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Kosovo.

22

As I stated at the previous public meeting on this
item (see S/PV.4928), the Government of Japan is very
concerned about the violence that erupted in March in
Kosovo. Based on that incident, we wish to reiterate
the following points, which we think should be given
serious consideration by all members of the
international community.
First, I would like to reiterate once again that the
most important lesson we have learned from the
violence is that we must redouble our efforts towards
the establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo. There is no alternative to
implementing the Kosovo standards if we are to reach
that goal.
As became clear from the violence, there is still a
strong need for improvement in the protection of
minorities, including Serbs. Guaranteeing various
minority rights, including freedom of movement, must
be one of the most important elements of a democratic
and
multi-ethnic
Kosovo.
Devolution
of
responsibilities to local authorities should therefore not
lead to the division of Kosovo along ethnic lines. It
must be considered with a view to ensuring that it
contributes to the creation of a democratic and multiethnic society.
In addition, efforts to strengthen minority rights
in Kosovo must be accompanied by sustainable returns.
In that connection, we call for the resumption of the
direct dialogue, especially the working group on
refugee returns. We expect the Secretary-General to
include those issues in his recommendations for
incorporation
into
the
Kosovo
Standards
Implementation Plan.
Secondly, the violence has also demonstrated all
too clearly the need for increased security in Kosovo.
My Government expresses support for the prompt
response of the Special Representative, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, and of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) in their efforts to stabilize the
situation in the immediate aftermath of the violence. At
the same time, on the basis of an assessment of the
measures taken by UNMIK prior to the outbreak of
violence, we need to study seriously the question of
how we can achieve sustained improvement in the
security situation.
The Government of Japan also notes with alarm
the fatal incident among UNMIK officers on 17 April

S/PV.4967

and the concern that has been expressed over the issue
of discipline in relation to some of the international
staff in Kosovo. The need for peacekeepers to win the
respect of the people in the region where they are
operating should be self-evident.
With regard to the issue of the trafficking of girls
and women, Japan hopes that UNMIK will provide
further information and will take appropriate measures
to address the problem without delay.
My Government intends to adhere to its
commitment to achieving stability and prosperity in
Southeastern Europe, in cooperation with the
international community as a whole. It is our firm
belief that stabilizing the situation in Kosovo is
essential for the stability and prosperity of the entire
region.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Iceland. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Iceland, as a member
of the European Economic Area, aligns itself fully with
the statement just made by Ambassador Richard Ryan
on behalf of the European Union, including its
welcome to Mr. Harri Holkeri and its strong support
for his work and that of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). I would also like, as others
have done, to state our appreciation to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro for his
participation here today.
Iceland recognizes, along with its partners, the
need for long-term practical commitment to the
rebuilding of the western Balkan region. In that spirit,
at the request of the Secretary-General of NATO,
Iceland took over the running of the Prístina airport in
March 2003; the personnel included some 200 persons
from 13 countries. Iceland provided both air traffic
controllers and firefighting personnel. During that
period the management of the airport has been
upgraded to full International Civil Aviation
Organization standards. In looking to future
sustainability, Iceland has emphasized the preparation
of local operatives. Some 50 firefighters and 20 air
traffic controllers have received training. UNMIK has
now taken over control of the airport but will continue
to be assisted by the Icelandic Civil Aviation
Administration on a contractual basis.

We emphasize the need for continuation of the
peaceful economic and social reconstruction of
Kosovo, including a constructive confidence-building
dialogue between the communities. We urge the parties
concerned to cooperate fully with UNMIK and KFOR
and to renounce violence, and thereby to facilitate the
political process designed to determine Kosovo’s
future based on Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of the Ukraine. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this important meeting today. I avail myself of
this opportunity to wish the Pakistani delegation and
you personally every success in fulfilling the highly
responsible duties of the Security Council presidency.
My gratitude goes to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his
update on the current situation in Kosovo. I am also
pleased to see at the Council table the Foreign Minister
of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Draskovic, whose
remarks made an important contribution to the
comprehensive analysis of the current situation on the
ground.
Ukraine strongly condemned the outburst of
inter-ethnic violence in Kosovo last March, which
resulted in dozens of deaths and hundreds of injuries,
the demolition of property and the destruction of
religious and cultural heritage and also the outrageous,
inadmissible attacks on the representatives of
international presence, including the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR.
In the statement issued by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine, my Government expressed its
absolute rejection of any manifestations of violence
based on political, ethnic or other forms of extremism
as an unacceptable way of resolving the existing
problems in Kosovo. It was also stated that Ukraine
strongly hoped for the continuation of the democratic
process aimed at establishing a multi-ethnic, tolerant
and democratic society in a stable Kosovo.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on
UNMIK (S/2004/348) has demonstrated that the root

23

S/PV.4967

causes of the widespread violence are yet to be
thoroughly analysed and addressed by the international
community. There is a long path ahead in reaching the
standards for Kosovo. In fact, today, instead of
speaking about real multi-ethnicity in the province, we
have to return to the implementation of the “agenda for
coexistence” put forward by the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, some five years ago. That is the reality.
In addressing the Kosovo crisis, the international
community, with the United Nations at the forefront,
has to ensure that the process of political recovery will
be fully along the lines of the framework established
by resolution 1244 (1999) and the “standards before
status” policy. In that regard, we strongly support the
observations made in the Secretary-General’s report, as
well as the Security Council’s position expressed in the
statement of its President of 30 April 2004
(S/PRST/2004/13).
As was stated by many speakers today, the
Provisional Institutions, local authorities and political
leaders should bear more responsibility in the process
of normalization. In our view, it is highly important to
restore direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
In that context, we welcome the readiness to restore the
dialogue expressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia and Montenegro at this meeting.
For its part, Ukraine will spare no effort in
providing its assistance to the settlement of the
situation in Kosovo. Most recently, in response to the
United Nations request, Ukraine increased its
contribution to the UNMIK police with 10
investigators. They were deployed a week ago by the
newly created task force aimed at bringing to justice
those responsible for the crimes perpetrated during the
recent riots.
We believe that the region must continue to carry
out significant work to meet the standards set by the
international community, especially taking into account
the recent developments. Acts of intimidation and
violence must stop. Key requirements related to the
status of ethnic minorities and the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons should be fulfilled.
The situation demonstrates a lack of equality in
fundamental rights and freedoms and has to be
radically changed.
In conclusion, I want to stress that Ukraine
reaffirms its commitment to promoting peace and

24

security in Kosovo and expresses its support for the
work of the international presence in the region. We
look forward to further assisting UNMIK and KFOR in
their efforts to implement Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).
The President: I thank the representative of the
Ukraine for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Albania. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council and to wish you every success.
The Albanian delegation welcomes the presence
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, at this Security Council meeting and
commends the work and great efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and KFOR in achieving their important goal
of a free, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo.
The negative events of March 2004 in Kosovo
should not deny or dispute the progress and overall
success already achieved there, such as the creation of
an open and free society, the building of democratic
institutions and the new prospect for the people of
Kosovo to integrate themselves into the European
family.
UNMIK should face the problems created by the
events of March 2004 with realism, not only by
condemning the perpetrators of the violent acts, but
also by identifying the responsibilities of all the parties
involved and programming in advance all the tasks and
obligations that must be carried out by all the
institutions in Kosovo.
We welcome and encourage UNMIK to continue
vigorously implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
and the decisions of the international community,
regardless of nationalistic pressures and interference
and destabilizing actions carried out by extremist
groups. The determination to go ahead with the plan of
action and to achieve the goals of the standards will lay
the groundwork for full discussion of the final status of
Kosovo.
The realistic evaluation of the situation in
Kosovo gives incentive to the need to transfer more
social and economic powers from UNMIK to the

S/PV.4967

Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. It also
demonstrates the necessity for a faster privatization
process and for strengthening the rule of law by
sharing responsibility with local authorities. It is the
right time, and it would be very useful as well, to find
the solution to the problem of parallel structures so that
they will no longer continue to challenge the vision and
the ideas of UNMIK regarding the country’s future.
The Government of Albania reaffirms its
appreciation for the work of UNMIK and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
and reiterates its continuing support for their mission
in Kosovo.
The Albanian Government has followed
attentively the latest developments in Kosovo and has
condemned the violence exercised by extremist
elements to destabilize the situation. The perpetrators
of violence have jeopardized the democratic process
and the future of Kosovo. For these actions they should
be brought to justice. The citizens of Kosovo should
realize that their free and democratic future will be
achieved only when a multi-ethnic society is
functioning, when the rights and freedoms of
minorities are protected by law and when civil society
and democratic institutions, through heightened
conscience and mature action, will help the existing
reality become more effective.
Dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on
technical issues of mutual interest should restart as
soon as possible. This is an important time — a time
when Kosovo’s democratic Provisional Institutions
should take a leading role and collaborate closely with
UNMIK and KFOR to implement the standards. It is
important that Kosovo’s Institutions be open and that
they assist in the process of returning displaced
persons, strengthen the rule of law, create an impartial
justice system and work to establish the right
conditions and environment for all people in Kosovo to
work together towards their common future.
For a relatively long period of time, this body and
the international community have promoted the
creation of a multi-ethnic society as the only solid
foundation for a democratic culture in Kosovo. We
acted to give life to that idea when hate and division
were at their most extreme, yet we still achieved
considerable success. This process of building a multiethnic society cannot be held back by new proposals
based on old ideas of division and cantonization,

provided with legal cover and introduced as a
democratic process aimed at decentralizing power.
What we should offer to Kosovo is freedom, not
isolation; peaceful coexistence, not division along ethnic
lines. We should offer Kosovo the opportunity to become,
as quickly as possible, part of the European family and a
place where aspirations and opportunities are shared
equally by all. Kosovo is not an experiment that can take
shape according to the tenor of the old nationalistic rhetoric
of the Balkans. Kosovo needs the political will of all
interested parties; it needs them to understand and evaluate
the irreversible realities and to contribute positively to
finding a democratic solution that is acceptable to all and in
the interest of peace and stability in the region.
The President: I thank the representative of
Albania for the kind words he addressed to me.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Holkeri to
respond to comments and questions.
Mr. Holkeri: I thank the members of the Council
for their constructive discussion of issues of crucial
importance
to
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and to
the people of Kosovo. The proposals and assessments
of Council members are most welcome. I will now try
to answer the questions raised in the discussion and
offer my comments on some details of particular
interventions.
I will begin with the Foreign Minister of Serbia
and Montenegro, whom I thank for his remarks. I fully
agree with his call for dialogue and reconciliation
between Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians.
I should like to pick up one point from the very
insightful statement made by the representative of
France. I welcome and agree with his statement that
those considering how to handle Kosovo’s political
future should do so in transparency and discussion with
one another. We are entering a tricky and sensitive
phase, and we in the United Nations should closely
coordinate our efforts with those of concerned Member
States.
I fully concur with the representative of France’s
observations on the quality of the media in Kosovo.
Like media in other regions emerging from ethnic
conflict, the media in Kosovo do not meet international
standards. UNMIK is studying carefully the recent
report of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and is prepared to consider

25

S/PV.4967

appropriate measures to impose sanctions on the media
that inflamed the situation in March.
I take note of the list of measures outlined by the
representative of the Russian Federation, aimed at
normalizing the situation in Kosovo following the
March violence. As I stated in my briefing, enhancing
security in Kosovo — particularly the security of nonmajority communities — and working towards multiethnicity, returns and freedom of movement are at the
heart of UNMIK’s current efforts. The implementation
of the standards remains the centrepiece of UNMIK’s
activities under its mandate, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).
The representative of Japan referred to a recent
Amnesty International report. He said that, with regard
to the issue of trafficking in girls and women, Japan
hopes that UNMIK will provide further information
and take appropriate measures to address the problem
without delay. UNMIK takes the Amnesty International
report very seriously. The report on human trafficking
addresses a very serious problem that is common
throughout the Balkans. We recognize that UNMIK has
important responsibilities to combat this tragic and
criminal phenomenon in Kosovo. UNMIK policy is
also to ensure the provision of appropriate assistance
and rehabilitation to the victims of such trafficking.
Our Mission takes immediate and strict disciplinary
action against any staff member found in
establishments where prostitution is suspected and that
we have declared to be off-limits. I have directed
UNMIK staff to review the recommendations in
Amnesty International’s report and to take action to
improve our response in combating human trafficking
where appropriate.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). I note the
priority issues raised in members’ interventions:
security, the rule of law, the rebuilding of houses and
destroyed property, protection of the rights of
communities, multi-ethnicity, returns, reform of local
government, implementation of standards and revival
of Kosovo’s economy. I can assure the Council that
these are our common priorities and that we will make
every effort to achieve them.
Finally, let me say that I am encouraged by this
discussion. I sense a growing recognition of the fact
that the United Nations and all concerned Member
States must reflect deeply on the issue of how to
handle Kosovo’s political future and move towards a
more stable political settlement. I encourage this
reflection and look forward to further discussions with
the Council on the sensitive steps ahead of us.
The President: I thank Mr. Holkeri for his
clarifications and comments.
I understand that the Foreign Minister of Serbia
and Montenegro wishes to make a further statement,
and I give him the floor.
Mr. Draskovic (Serbia and Montenegro): I
should like to underline two issues in particular.
The first issue is that of final status, which was
mentioned by many members. For the Government of
Serbia and the Government of Serbia and Montenegro,
the final status of the province of Kosovo entails very
specific models for local autonomy and self-rule of
Albanian
Serbs
and
other
non-Albanians,
reconciliation, forgiveness and repentance, in the
framework of Serbia and the European Union.

Ukraine is one of the few countries that
responded to our request by providing new
investigators for the riots that took place mid-March.
We are grateful for that kind of support, and we hope
that this encourages other Member States to help us as
well.

With respect to the framework of the European
Balkans, which my Government sees as a region in
which State borders would exist on maps only, not in
practice, my Government is for the project. We in the
Balkans must become Europeans from within. We must
start to act and think in the European way; that is the
condition for us to be accepted by Europe. The
interdependence of States, nations, cultures, religions —
that is the future. Independence that is rooted in past
attempts at ethnic and religious domination must be
consigned to history.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Council
members for their support of UNMIK and of our
policies. Such support is absolutely essential for our
joint efforts in the successful implementation of

Secondly, let me turn to the issue of privatization.
Of course, this is very important. But the United
Nations, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and Mr. Holkeri must be

I should like to thank in particular two countries,
Iceland and Ukraine. Iceland has provided us with
important support in areas where it has expertise — air
traffic control and airports.

26

S/PV.4967

very careful, because we in Kosovo need, first of all, a
restitution law. After the Second World War,
communists took land, property and houses from many
people and institutions that were against communism.
Some might now say, well, that happened a long time
ago. But no — a restitution law must be the condition
for privatization.
The main victim of that communist crime in
Kosovo was the Serbian Church. The Church’s land
must be given back to it. Individuals’ land must be
given back to them, regardless of who they may be —
Serbs, Albanians or others. It will be up to them to
decide later what to do with their property.
I studied the law, and I should like to say to the
Council that restitution and the rejection of the

legalization of any crime is the basis of the law. It is
stated in an article of the Codex Justinianus that, if
something is criminal in the beginning, it cannot be
legalized by the passing of time.
The Government of Serbia and Montenegro and
the Government of Serbia are grateful for the
opportunity to speak about such an important and
painful issue as Kosovo.
The President: I thank the Foreign Minister of
Serbia and Montenegro for those remarks.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

27
