S/PV.8694

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8694th meeting

Thursday, 19 December 2019, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Norman-Chalet/Mr. Barkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aljarallah
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Mabhongo
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018) (S/2019/949)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-42301 (E)
*1942301*

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

listed terrorist entities, in Idlib and Aleppo. For their
part, non-State armed groups have escalated attacks
against areas controlled by Government forces in
southern Idlib and Aleppo.

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018) and
2449 (2018) (S/2019/949)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/949, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018).
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: With the end of 2019 approaching, I
am afraid that the humanitarian situation for the people
in many parts of Syria is worse than when the year
began. The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/949) provides updates about many concerning
developments. I would like to touch on a few of
these developments today and highlight the ongoing
humanitarian efforts aimed at assisting people in need.
I will also speak to the continued importance of crossborder humanitarian operations, and I will conclude
by highlighting several trends that may increasingly
shape the humanitarian outlook in Syria during the
year ahead.
To begin with, in north-west Syria, the situation
remains alarming. Syrian Government forces and their
allies continue to shell and conduct air strikes on areas
under the control of non-State armed groups, including
2/19

19/12/2019

Civilians on both sides of the front line suffer
the consequences. On 20 November, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) reported that a missile reportedly fired
from Government-held territory hit the Qah al-Qadim
camp in Idlib. At least 16 people were allegedly
killed, and 30 more were injured. The following day,
on 21 November, ground-based attacks on several
neighbourhoods of the Government-held city of Aleppo
reportedly killed seven children and injured 29 others.
Some 23 civilians were reportedly killed in little more
than 24 hours, with many more wounded.
Medical personnel and facilities have also suffered.
OHCHR confirmed that, on 4 and 6 November, a total
of four separate health-care facilities in Idlib were
affected by hostilities. At least three medical personnel
were reported injured, and medical activities were
interrupted. At the same time, the listed terrorist
group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham continues to harass and
intimidate health-care services providers and other
civilians in areas under its control.
Across north-west Syria, civilians live the
consequences of the continued violence. Humanitarian
networks report that hostilities have displaced up to
60,000 people in Idlib in recent weeks. Rain, cold and
other winter conditions have compounded hardship for
many displaced families and their host communities.
At the same time, the price of fuel required for
heating remains above the national average, owing to a
supply shortage and inflation linked to the depreciation
of the Syrian pound on the unofficial market. Earlier
this month, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs received reports of families in
Idlib burning tires, old clothes and other household
items to stay warm.
Humanitarian organizations are doing everything
possible to assist the most vulnerable. Partners
continue to provide food assistance to newly displaced
households, increase health-care services in areas that
are receiving an influx of internally displaced persons
and provide emergency protection services. In recent
months, the World Food Programme has increased the
number of people to be assisted via its cross-border
modalities to more than 1 million people per month.
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Tens of thousands of people have received supplies,
services and support, including education materials,
non-food items, clean water, shelter, emergency
nutrition and winter supplies.
By some measures, the intensity of hostilities
remains below levels seen in the middle of the year,
when fighting was most acute in northern Hama and
southern Idlib. Nonetheless, the impact of current
hostilities in north-west Syria remains concerning. As
the Secretary-General continues to warn,
“A full-scale military offensive would result in a
devastating humanitarian cost for the 3 million
people living in the area. It must be avoided”
(S/2019/949, para. 51).
In this context, the internal United Nations Headquarters
board of inquiry established by the Secretary-General
continues its work to investigate a series of incidents
that have occurred in north-west Syria since September
2018 causing damage or destruction to civilian facilities.
In north-east Syria, the humanitarian situation
remains serious, even as hostilities have decreased
in recent weeks. After Turkey and allied non-State
armed groups launched Operation Peace Spring in the
area between Tall Abyad and Ra’s Al-Ayn in Syria on
9 October, more than 200,000 people fled the area.
As of 26 November, 123,000 people had returned to
their areas of origin. More than 70,000 people remain
displaced from Al-Hasakah, Raqqa and Aleppo
governorates. Nearly 17,000 people have fled to Iraq.
Humanitarian organizations have mounted a
significant response so as to assist the hundreds of
thousands of people affected by hostilities in the northeast. As the Secretary-General notes, humanitarian
organizations in the area have been very adaptive in order
to ensure that the necessary assistance reaches those
most in need. With approximately 1.8 million people in
need in north-east Syria, the task is considerable.
Rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access remains
essential for all facets of the ongoing humanitarian
response in the north-east. Assessments must be
facilitated in order to identify the most pressing needs
and vulnerable populations. Supply lines via the M4
highway and various border crossings must remain open
for humanitarian cargo. The delivery of humanitarian
assistance must be allowed without interference by the
parties. Finally, monitoring missions must be allowed to
confirm that needs are being met. We expect all parties

S/PV. 8694

to the conflict to facilitate a sustained and scaled-up
coordinated response.
The situation in Al-Hol camp also requires
a dedicated and urgent response. As noted in the
Secretary-General’s report, some 46,400 people
remain in the camp, 94 per cent of whom are women
and children. I join OHCHR in urging Governments
to immediately take back their nationals, who are the
most vulnerable. Many of those individuals, including
orphans and unaccompanied children, may require
further assistance, given the presence of potential
abuse and trauma. Ultimately, though, the best chance
they have of a better future is for their Governments
to respond.
As the Under-Secretary-General stressed in his
briefing last month, the humanitarian situation in
north-west and north-east Syria would be markedly
worse without the cross-border operation. The
aid provided through the modalities set out in the
relevant resolutions have staved off an even larger
humanitarian crisis inside Syria. Without the crossborder operation, we would see an immediate end of
aid supporting millions of civilians. That would cause a
rapid increase in hunger and disease, resulting in death,
suffering and further displacement — including across
borders — for a vulnerable population that has already
suffered unspeakable tragedy as a result of almost nine
years of conflict. As the Secretary-General notes in his
latest report, he counts on
“Security Council members to ensure that the
United Nations is authorized to meet the needs of
all who need humanitarian assistance, including by
the swift renewal of the modalities set out in its
resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions”
(S/2019/949, para. 55).
In a letter to Council members yesterday, the
Emergency Relief Coordinator made clear the position
of the United Nations on the importance of maintaining
all four border crossings, including Tall Abyad. The
timely renewal of cross-border resolution is vital to
ensuring that lifesaving work in Syria continues.
In Rukban, efforts continue to assist the remaining
population until durable solutions can be found for
them. Despite repeated efforts, the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent have been unable to
return to the area since September to support voluntary
departures to shelters in Government-controlled areas.
Efforts continue in order to secure the necessary

19-423013/19

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

agreements from all parties for a humanitarian mission
to proceed in a safe manner. We remain hopeful that
it will proceed in the weeks ahead. Many Rukban
residents express their desire to leave the area. At
least 640 people have left the camp for areas under the
Syrian Government through their own means since the
previous United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
mission. Others are expected to follow. Financial
constraints, however, prevent others from being able to
leave the camp without support.
In the meantime, I am encouraged that, earlier
this month, the Syrian Government permitted the
United Nations to conduct monitoring missions to
the two shelters in Homs where people from Rukban
pass through. We hope that such access will continue
in the weeks to come. Across the country, I urge all
parties — States and armed groups — to spare civilians
and civilian infrastructure and to facilitate humanitarian
activities without hindrance. For humanitarian reasons
and as a matter of international humanitarian law,
human suffering must be minimized.
Before the Security Council concludes its work
for the year, I would like to draw members’ attention
to several trends that may become more significant
in 2020 for civilians living through the Syrian crisis.
Three of those deserve special consideration.
First, the scale of humanitarian needs in Syria will
remain vast. As members will have seen in the Global
Humanitarian Overview 2020, which was released
earlier this month, current estimates project that some
11 million people in Syria will need regular humanitarian
assistance. Five million of those are in acute need of
assistance. The United Nations estimates that the
overall financial requirements for the humanitarian
response in 2020 will be similar to the $3.3 billion
requested in 2019. Moreover, across the region, some
5.6 million Syrian refugees need assistance, more
than 70 per cent of whom live in poverty. The current
plan to assist that refugee population and their host
community remains considerable, with projected costs
of $5.2 billion. Financial support for both the response
in Syria and the wider region remains vital.
I am pleased to confirm that, earlier this month,
the Under-Secretary-General selected Syria to receive
a provisional allocation of $25 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund Underfunded Emergencies
Window. Those funds will be used to support the most
critical collective priorities within the humanitarian
4/19

19/12/2019

response plan. Much more support is required to sustain
humanitarian operations in Syria and neighbouring
countries. We will count on donor generosity during the
year ahead to help humanitarians reach more people in
need with the most appropriate and effective assistance.
Secondly, the economic situation across Syria
stands to compound humanitarian needs. Syria’s
currency has lost half of its value this year. The factors
behind recent economic shocks may be debated, but
basic indicators present a concerning economic outlook
for civilians in Syria — the cost of living grows, income
stagnates and currency loses value. We know that the
most vulnerable populations are the ones least able
to afford the increasing cost of living. Communities
struggle to respond to sudden emergencies if they
are just getting by. Families will adopt more extreme
measures to cope with chronic hardship. Humanitarian
organizations will seek more ways to ensure that the
poorest and those on the brink of poverty do not slip
into an even worse state. We need to ensure the life and
dignity of those in need, including by finding new ways
to restore essential and lifesaving services.
Thirdly and finally, insecurity continues to
endanger civilians across much of Syria, including
areas away from front lines. Earlier this month, for
example, OHCHR warned about the increasing number
of incidents in northern Syria involving improvised
explosive devices in marketplaces, residential
neighbourhoods and other populated areas. Some 49
incidents have been verified since late October, 43 of
which were in areas under the control of Turkish forces
and affiliated non-State armed groups. At least 78
civilians were killed, and more than 300 persons were
injured in those incidents.
Similarly, in south-western Syria, civilians face
persistent risks amid continued violence. OHCHR has
recorded growing instances of detentions, improvised
explosive attacks and assassination attempts against
both pro-Government and former opposition-linked
individuals. Such patterns of violence pose considerable
risks to civilians and their efforts to pursue a safe and
dignified life.
As this is the final scheduled humanitarian briefing
on Syria for this year, I would like to conclude with a
genuine wish that the year ahead will be a better one for
the people of Syria.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I wish to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, and
on behalf of my fellow co-penholders, Kuwait and
Belgium, let me thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ursula Mueller for her comprehensive briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We once again reiterate
our appreciation for all the efforts of humanitarian and
medical personnel to alleviate human suffering in Syria.
We meet once again having heard from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) about the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria, especially in the north-west of the country.
We condemn the recent intensification of hostilities,
in particular aerial bombardments that have killed
civilians, including women and children. While we are
preparing for the holidays, almost 3 million people in
Idlib are in desperate need of shelter, food and medicine
and do not know what tomorrow brings.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the humanitarian dimension of the
crisis in Syria (S/2019/949). The numbers in the report
speak for themselves. The Secretary-General calls on
the Security Council to
“ensure that the United Nations is authorized to meet
the needs of all who need humanitarian assistance”,
and reiterates that
“the United Nations does not have an alternative
means of reaching people in need in the areas in
which cross-border assistance is being provided.”
(S/2019/949, para. 55)
He has asked for a swift renewal of the crossborder resolution.
That is why, later today, we plan to vote on a
draft resolution proposed by the Syria humanitarian
co-penholders. We have been negotiating that text in
an inclusive, transparent and thorough manner for the
past few weeks with all Council members, while also
consulting OCHA and neighbouring countries. The
aim of the text is to ensure life-saving cross-border

S/PV. 8694

assistance for more than 4 million people. The World
Health Organization approached us today once again
about the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing — they really
need it, as 40 per cent of all medical goods pass through
there. During our negotiations, we reached out to find
compromises to ensure the Security Council speaks
with one voice. Guided by humanitarian needs, we
listened to the concerns of all Member States and did
not ignore recent developments. We went a long way
to try to get everybody and take everything on board.
The text, which was put in blue yesterday, is a result of
that inclusive process. Some members may think that
there is still room for improvement, but that is exactly
what compromise means — there will be always room
for improvement, and it is never a matter of “take it or
leave it”. We ask the Council to send a strong signal of
unity at the end of this year. The world is watching us.
As the year comes to an end, five elected countries
will soon leave the Council after two years of hard and
constructive work. We thank them all. Today we are
honoured by the presence of His Excellency Mr. Khaled
Aljarallah, Deputy Foreign Minister of Kuwait. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank Kuwait for being
such a dedicated co-penholder on this difficult file.
Minister Aljarallah’s colleagues here in New York did a
great job, and we will miss their inspiration, creativity,
efficacy, efficiency and in-depth knowledge of the
region. We thank Ambassador Alotaibi and his team.
The co-penholders, but mostly millions of people
in need in Syria, count on the support of the Council
this afternoon.
Mr. Aljarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Ursula Mueller, for her valuable briefing
on the latest developments relating to the humanitarian
situation in Syria.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Germany on behalf of the Syria
humanitarian co-penholders. I would like to make the
following points in my national capacity.
The co-penholders — Kuwait, Belgium and
Germany — have presented a draft resolution to renew
the work of the cross-border mechanism for the delivery
of humanitarian aid to Syria. There is currently no
alternative to the mechanism, which is relied upon by
4 million people in need of humanitarian aid, mostly
in northern Syria. Several rounds of negotiations
and consultations were held in recent weeks but,

19-423015/19

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

unfortunately, the Security Council has yet to reach
an agreement to renew the work of the mechanism,
which has become the difference between survival and
death for those who desperately need that assistance
to continue. Alongside Belgium and Germany, we will
continue and intensify our efforts to renew the work
of the mechanism. We call on all parties and Security
Council members to cooperate with us in order to adopt
a draft resolution to that end, which is a key shared
humanitarian responsibility.
We have witnessed this year significant
humanitarian tragedies in Syria as a result of the
ongoing conflict in the country, which has caused
immense suffering since the outbreak of the Syrian
crisis in 2011. The crisis, which has affected the Middle
East and far beyond, poses a flagrant threat to regional
and international peace and security. The Syrian
crisis has resulted in one of the largest humanitarian
tragedies in modern history, claiming the lives of
hundreds of thousands of Syrians, displacing 6 million
Syrians internally and creating over 5 million Syrian
refugees. As we enter 2020, 11 million people will still
be in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria. All
of the horrific statistics issued by the United Nations
clearly show the extent of the human suffering faced by
this brotherly Arab people, who have for years been the
subject of flagrant violations of all the basic principles
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
In the light of the humanitarian catastrophe in
Syria, the State of Kuwait adopted over the past years
a policy underpinned by the humanitarian dimension
of the Syrian crisis and its repercussions, as we believe
in the importance of standing alongside the brotherly
Syrian people and alleviating their suffering. We have
been proactive in hosting three donor conferences and
co-chaired the subsequent conferences in London and
Brussels. During those conferences, Kuwait contributed
$1.9 billion, rendering it one of the largest donors to the
humanitarian response.
The Council was not able to adopt a draft resolution
(S/2019/756) submitted by Belgium, Kuwait and
Germany for a ceasefire in Idlib governorate, which is
home to nearly 3 million people (see S/PV.8623). The
United Nations has issued repeated warnings about
the potential occurrence of the largest humanitarian
catastrophe in the twenty-first century if the military
operations there continue on a massive scale.
6/19

19/12/2019

In that connection, we renew our condemnation
of the targeting of civilians by any party and of
attacks that target hospitals and health and civilian
facilities. Terrorism is a serious scourge that threatens
international peace and security. We all agree on the
importance of combating terrorism anywhere, including
Idlib governorate. However, we also reiterate our earlier
statement, with which many Council members agree,
that counter-terrorism operations do not in any way
absolve parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including their obligations to protect
civilians and civilian facilities and to comply with the
principles of proportionality, distinction and caution.
We reiterate the fact that there can be no lasting
peace in Syria without justice, and we stress the need to
hold to account all those who have committed serious
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law and to eradicate impunity.
We therefore support the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since 2011, as
well as that of the board of inquiry established by the
Secretary-General to investigate incidents that targeted
medical and civilian facilities in north-western Syria.
We stress that the return of refugees and displaced
persons must be safe, voluntary and dignified. In
addition, we stress the need to make progress in the
dossier concerning detainees and missing persons and
to allow relevant international organizations to visit
detention centres and prisons in Syria in accordance
with the provisions of international humanitarian law
and resolution 2474 (2019).
In conclusion, as this is the last scheduled
meeting on the Syrian humanitarian dossier before
our membership of the Security Council expires, I
would like to extend many thanks to Belgium and
Germany for their cooperation with us in the course
of discharging our responsibility as co-penholders on
the Syrian humanitarian dossier. I would like to take
this opportunity to renew my thanks and deepest
appreciation to the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, funds and programmes, as well as to all
humanitarian workers for their noble efforts and
humanitarian work in Syria. I assure them that the State
of Kuwait is committed to continuing its support for
those humanitarian efforts aimed at alleviating human
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8694

suffering in Syria and strengthening the partnership
between my country and the United Nations in the
humanitarian field.

has recently regained control — in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and international
humanitarian law.

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I extend my sincere thanks to Ms. Ursula Mueller
for her briefing. I welcome the participation of the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait at this
meeting. And I fully echo the congratulations expressed
by Ambassador Heusgen to Kuwait on its outstanding
contribution to the work of the Security Council.

France calls on members of the Council to
demonstrate unity and responsibility in preserving the
indispensable cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism by renewing resolution 2165 (2014) for a
further 12 months.

I will not repeat the figures cited by the
Under-Secretary-General,
as
they
speak
for
themselves — cross-border humanitarian assistance
is essential and irreplaceable. The renewal of the
United Nations cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism is imperative. Humanitarian agencies,
the Secretariat, starting with the Secretary-General
himself, and the countries of the region are all insistent
on the need to preserve that mechanism. Allow me to
give a brief reminder as to why.
First, cross-border humanitarian assistance is
crucial to bringing aid to the more than 4 million people
in need, as the regime of Bashar Al-Assad continues
to hinder humanitarian access and use humanitarian
assistance for political purposes, at a time when the
situation remains unstable throughout the country,
including in those areas regained by the regime. There
is therefore no alternative.
Secondly, the Syrian population is preparing to
face the rigours of a new winter of war. As in previous
years, it is essential to have access to the population
throughout the Syrian territory by the most direct roads
and the fastest means. The survival of millions of men,
women and children depend on it. With regard to border
crossings, the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing is of vital
importance, as it is the route of transport for 40 per cent
of medicines destined for humanitarian operations in
the north-east.
Certain among us insist that cross-border
humanitarian assistance is no longer necessary,
following the regime’s recovery of several territories,
particularly in the south-west. We know, however,
that humanitarian access to those areas is still largely
hampered by Damascus. In that regard, we call once
again on those actors that hold influence over Damascus
to guarantee safe, comprehensive and unobstructed
humanitarian access throughout the entire Syrian
territory — including those areas in which the regime

As we have been tirelessly repeating, respect for
international humanitarian law by all is essential and
non-negotiable. The protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, is an absolute
priority. We reiterate our condemnation of the attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure, especially
medical infrastructure, and most notably those that
have taken place in north-western Syria. The board
of inquiry set up by the Secretary-General on those
attacks, to which we give our full support, should make
it possible to shed full light on those incidents. In view
of the displacement of over 70,000 more people in
November and the setting in of winter, everything must
be done to restore the ceasefire in Idlib.
No-one denies the fact that the fight against
terrorism is a crucial issue, but it cannot be used
to justify violations of international humanitarian
law. Those responsible for such acts must be held
accountable before the courts. Evidence will not be
buried, thanks to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We call for cooperation
with all mechanisms that contribute to the fight against
impunity for the crimes committed in Syria.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that a lasting
end cannot be put to the humanitarian tragedy that
Syrian women and men are enduring without a credible
political process. Beyond the humanitarian response,
only an inclusive political solution can bring the
suffering of the Syrian people to an end. I would like
in this regard to reiterate that until a credible political
solution has been resolutely implemented, France, like
its partners in the European Union, will not participate
in the funding of reconstruction. Resolution 2254 (2015)
remains our road map, and all its components must be
implemented. We will have the opportunity tomorrow,
during our meeting with the Special Envoy, to return to

19-423017/19

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

this topic and reflect on the insufficient progress made
in the context of the Geneva process despite his efforts.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting on
the latest developments in the humanitarian situation
in Syria and commends Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for her valuable
briefing. We also extend a warm welcome to the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
My delegation remains deeply concerned by
the resurgence in hostilities, which is exacerbating
the already dire humanitarian situation in Syria.
According to Mr. Stéphane Dujarric, Spokesman for
the Secretary-General, air strikes over recent days have
hit dozens of communities in the governorates of Idlib,
Hama, Aleppo and Latakia, displacing approximately
60,000 people. These bombings and clashes have
also left several people dead, destroyed or damaged
civilian infrastructure in the region, including schools
and hospitals, and hampered the response capacity of
humanitarian actors.
In this regard, my country commends the efforts
of the United Nations and humanitarian organizations
to meet the needs of populations in distress under
particularly difficult conditions. According to the
United Nations, an average of 5.6 million civilians have
access to humanitarian aid every month, mainly from
inside Syria. In that context, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its
call on all parties to the conflict to cease hostilities,
guarantee the protection of civilians during military
operations and respect international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution. We also urge them to respect the
Russian‑Turkish agreement on the establishment of a
demilitarized zone in Idlib, signed on 17 September
2018, as well as the agreements concluded on 17 October
2019, between the United States of America and
Turkey on the safe zone in north-eastern Syria, and on
22 October 2019, between Russia and Turkey on control
of the Syrian border.
My country welcomes the efforts aimed at
ensuring the continuation of cross-border humanitarian
deliveries for thousands of people affected by the
conflict, in particular the cross-border humanitarian
assistance mechanism established by resolution 2165
(2014). We further urge the international community
to support efforts to ensure safe, swift, unhindered
8/19

19/12/2019

and sustainable humanitarian access to populations in
distress. My country also calls for the renewal of the
mandate of the cross-border humanitarian assistance
delivery mechanism.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges all parties to the
conflict to cease hostilities throughout Syrian territory
and calls once again on the international community
to support the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral in his tireless efforts aimed at reaching a
peaceful and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis and
thereby promoting peace, stability and development in
the region.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing
and express once again our profound gratitude to the
humanitarian workers and organizations that continue
to provide life-saving assistance in the Syrian Arab
Republic despite the many obstacles.
At the outset, we wish to reiterate our commitment
to the provision of humanitarian assistance based on
the principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence — principles that take on paramount
importance in a situation as complex as this one, not
only on the ground but also in the context of a polarized
Security Council.
As Ms. Muller reiterated, humanitarian needs in
Syria are vast and continue to grow with each escalation
in violence. In the north-east, the situation following the
Turkish incursion of October remains fragile: 75,000
people remain displaced, and hundreds of thousands
are enduring critical shortages of water, shelter and
health care. These conditions also affect the Al Hol
camp, populated mainly by women and children, whose
situation requires an urgent humanitarian response,
including the repatriation of non-Syrian nationals to
their countries of origin.
However, in the north-west, despite the most recent
ceasefire, we continue to observe the occurrence of
attacks and crossfire that have already claimed the lives
of more than 1,000 people and displaced hundreds of
thousands more, including women and children.
Without a doubt, the situation in Syria remains
critical, fragile and volatile. It is at times like this
that it is more crucial than ever to place humanitarian
imperatives at the centre of the decisions of the Security
Council. Restoring a spirit of humanity to our political
decisions is a task in which we at times fall short. Today,
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the responsibility to safeguard humanitarian assistance
for 4 million people in northern Syria through the crossborder mechanism has been placed on our shoulders.
This is an exclusive responsibility of the Security
Council — a non-transferable, moral responsibility that
we cannot delegate. That is to say that each of us has the
chance to allow or halt the passage of 41 per cent of the
humanitarian assistance provided in Syria. Hungry, in
acute need and in mortal danger, these people deserve
from us courage, political will and determined action.
The Dominican Republic reiterates its support
for the extension of the cross-border humanitarian
assistance mechanism in the Syrian Arab Republic
because it is the only means of survival for millions
of people. Today, and whenever necessary, we must be
on the side of Syrian men, women, young people and
children who expect us to meet their needs and to live
up to their legitimate aspirations.
Our collective obligation is to provide the help
they deserve, prevent further suffering and lay the
groundwork for a peaceful future, including a credible
and inclusive political process that sets the stage for
broad-based renewal by and for Syrian women and
men of goodwill. We therefore call once again on the
Security Council to show unity and focus its attention
on the lives and the survival of the civilian population,
which has paid the highest price in this human tragedy.
This afternoon, we will return to this Chamber
with the conviction that, despite our differences, we
have managed to build the bridges needed to reach
an agreement and, as I said before, restore a spirit
of humanity to the crucially important decisions we
must take.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Equatorial Guinea welcomes the timely
convening of this briefing and thanks Ms. Ursula
Mueller for her presentation.
After two years of debate on humanitarian issues
in Syria, the Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea continues to observe with great regret the clear
consolidation of two diametrically opposed fronts on
this matter.
As we have reiterated, the big picture of the
humanitarian and security situation in Syria requires
that the members of the Security Council — guarantors
of international peace and security — transcend their
geostrategic interests. That requires us to focus on

S/PV. 8694

human beings as the crux of all discussions and binding
decisions. That is a very clear and objective position that
some members of the Council have been advocating, but
it remains stymied, perhaps by the inability to exercise
any significant influence on the parties to the conflict.
We recall that the possibility of a major operation
in Idlib and neighbouring regions where Government
forces, the Al-Nusra Front and forces opposing the Syrian
Government are continuing to fight would undoubtedly
have very serious consequences for millions of civilians
and the work of humanitarian agencies.
As has already been mentioned, some 4 million
people, including around 3 million in the north-western
regions, which cannot be reached from the centre of
the country, depend on the cross-border assistance
mechanism and crossing points coordinated by the
United Nations. Our Government is fully aware that the
humanitarian situation has become extremely difficult
for vulnerable persons in Syria, and when it comes to
saving lives, no better partner or ally exists than the very
people suffering the impact of international tensions.
Consequently, until we put an end to that prolonged
conflict, Equatorial Guinea will continue to lend
its support to all mechanisms that aim to prevent an
even graver humanitarian crisis in Syria. We are
all aware that it is imperative to renew cross-border
assistance in Syria, given that the more than 1 million
people who receive assistance every month depend on
that mechanism.
However, we must continue to prioritize dialogue
among all parties, including the Government of
Damascus. Any initiative undertaken or decision
supported by the United Nations must include the
involvement of the Syrian authorities. In that regard,
given the current context, we urge the Syrian authorities
to spare no effort to guarantee safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance in all the areas that
need it and through the most direct routes.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
briefing. We also welcome the presence of the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
At present, many people are still in need of
humanitarian assistance in Syria. China commends the
fact that the United Nations and various humanitarian
agencies have made unremitting efforts to effectively
improve the living conditions of the Syrian people.

19-423019/19

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation in Syria is
closely related to the political, security and counterterrorism backdrop. To resolve the humanitarian issue,
we must adopt a holistic approach with comprehensive
measures. In that regard, I would like to make the
following observations.
First, it is essential to effectively respect and
safeguard Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity. A political settlement is the
fundamental means of improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria. China welcomes the progress made
in the work of Syria’s Constitutional Committee and
supports the United Nations, particularly Special Envoy
Pedersen, in its continuous mediation efforts, in line with
the principle of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process,
with a view to promoting a political solution that takes
into account the concerns of all parties. It is essential
to maintain the independence of the Constitutional
Committee without external interference.
Secondly, it is necessary to redouble humanitarian
relief efforts, lift the economic sanctions against Syria,
promote the return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes and support the Syrian Government in
its post-war reconstruction efforts to fundamentally
improve the living conditions of the Syrian people.
Efforts must be made to improve Syria’s economic
situation, assist with the safe and voluntary return of
Syrian refugees and support the Syrian Government in
repairing and rebuilding housing, people’s livelihoods
and medical and educational facilities. China has
provided food, medicine, public transportation and
human-resource training to Syria and stands ready to
continue to play an active role in Syria’s economic and
social reconstruction.
Thirdly, efforts must continue to unify standards
and combat all forms of terrorism in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
international law. Eliminating terrorist forces is a
necessary security guarantee for the Syrian people to
resume a peaceful, orderly life. At present, terrorist
forces still occupy a large part of Idlib, threatening
the safety of civilians, destroying infrastructure and
worsening the humanitarian situation. We hope that at
the next meeting the Secretariat will provide detailed
information and analyses in that regard. The issue of
foreign terrorist fighters is a common challenge to
peace and security in the Middle East and the world
over. The Secretariat should remain seized of the issue
10/19

19/12/2019

and gather information. The international community
should work together to bring all terrorists to justice.
Members of the Security Council have held many
discussions on the extension of the mandate of crossborder humanitarian mechanisms in Syria. On the
whole, China has reservations about the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism. We believe
that this mechanism is a special relief method under
specific circumstances and should be evaluated and
adjusted in line with developments on the ground. The
Syrian Government bears the primary responsibility
for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria. Any
humanitarian relief operation in the country should fully
respect Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
heed the views of and strengthen coordination with the
Syrian Government.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her detailed
briefing, as well as to welcome my brother His
Excellency Mr. Aljarallah, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.
My delegation is seriously concerned about the
recent escalation of hostilities in north-west Syria, the
ongoing hostilities in the north-east and, as mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/949), the
increasing tensions in the south-west. We are extremely
troubled by the risk of a worsening humanitarian
situation in those areas as a result of hostilities — the
deaths of civilians, including women and children,
injuries, displacements, the destruction of civilian
infrastructure and further suffering. The world is
watching. The international community is watching.
But we are not here to just watch; we are here to help
and take action. Our mandate is to save lives, and
that is exactly what we need to do as members of the
Security Council.
My delegation would like to highlight three points.
First, Indonesia calls for immediate de-escalation
and urges all relevant parties to strictly uphold their
obligations under international law. We urge all parties
to cease all attacks against civilians and civilian objects,
including the indiscriminate use of weapons, barrel
bombs and air strikes. It is crucial to protect civilians
from attacks and the effects of hostilities and to allow
them to voluntarily move to safe places.
Secondly, it is important for all parties to allow
unimpeded, safe, timely and sustained access for the
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

delivery of humanitarian assistance, in order for the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners to be able
to reach all people in need in Syria. We commend the
tireless work of the United Nations in continuing to
provide life-saving assistance to millions of people in
need, despite the various challenges.
Thirdly, my delegation endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s call regarding the renewal of the crossborder mechanism. It is clear that 4 million people are
dependent on that mechanism — a mechanism that
has no other alternative, as stated many times by the
United Nations. My delegation strongly believes that we
cannot jeopardize the ongoing cross-border operations
that provide food aid, medicines and other immediate
humanitarian needs. The suffering of the Syrian people
must end, and we in the Council can start to ease the
suffering by setting our differences aside and focusing
on the 4 million people who need the cross-border
operations. That is the least we can do for them. Civilian
lives are at stake, and people have been suffering for far
too long. Again, as far as my delegation is concerned,
saving people’s lives is not an option but the main goal.
This afternoon the Council is scheduled to take action
on a draft resolution on the cross-border humanitarian
aid. We acknowledge the existing dynamics, as well as
the differing views of Council members, and I appeal
to all my colleagues to use the time remaining before
the meeting to intensify our efforts and to speak to one
another in an objective manner with a view to saving
human lives. It is not about us. It is all about saving
Syrian civilians, people on the ground. I once again
appeal to all the members of the Council to do the right
thing, particularly in this season of joy when people are
united in a spirit of hope and love.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
South Africa remains gravely concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in Syria. We, as Council
members, have had many discussions on the plight
of the Syrian people and how best to improve their
circumstances. In that regard, South Africa welcomes
the efforts of the United Nations and its implementing
agencies in providing life-saving aid to millions
of Syrians through the cross-border humanitarian
assistance operations. We fully support the need for the
programme and hopes that its mandate will be renewed
in due course.

S/PV. 8694

My delegation has noted the reports of an escalation
in hostilities in north-western Syria with concern. The
destruction of civilian infrastructure, particularly
health and education facilities, is particularly alarming,
as it has a disproportionate effect on the most vulnerable
groups of society, that is, women, children, the elderly
and people with disabilities. South Africa reiterates its
call to all the parties to comply with their obligations
under international law, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. It is
also important that the parties to the various ceasefire
agreements abide by their obligations under them. With
regard to Rukban, we note the fact that approximately
4,000 people want to leave the camp and urge all
parties to provide the assistance needed to support
their departure in a safe and dignified manner. My
delegation also recognizes the importance of providing
the assistance needed for those remaining in Rukban
and call on the relevant parties to ensure that.
In conclusion, South Africa urges all the parties
to exercise the utmost restraint and to work to
de-escalate the hostilities and ensure respect for
Syria’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. As we
have said many times before, the situation in Syria
cannot be solved through military means. The only
way for long-term peace, stability and prosperity for
Syria and her people is through dialogue, negotiation
and the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
We look forward to Special Envoy Pedersen’s briefing
tomorrow, particularly with regard to the work of the
Constitutional Committee. And like others, I want to
welcome the Deputy Minister of Kuwait, who is here
with us today.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for
her briefing and to express our gratitude for the
tireless efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in support of the people of
Syria. I would like to also welcome the presence in the
Chamber today of Mr. Khaled Sulaiman Aljarallah,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
As we have just heard, civilians in Syria continue to
face significant hardships. We have to acknowledge that
the conflict has caused violence as well as violations
and abuses of international law, including human
rights law, and has brought suffering to the civilian
population of Syria on a scale that is unique in today’s
world. It is civilians, including children, who continue
to pay the highest price in the ongoing hostilities in

19-4230111/19

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

Syria. It is unacceptable that health-care and education
facilities continue to be attacked. Just two days ago, the
air bombardments in Idlib intensified, killing children
and wounding other people. We therefore reiterate
our call to the parties to the conflict to implement all
ceasefire agreements and ensure unhindered and safe
humanitarian access for all humanitarian actors to the
whole of Syrian territory.
Access should first be granted to priority areas,
including for cross-border deliveries of humanitarian
assistance in which the safety of humanitarian personnel
is ensured. We also want to underline the obligation of
all parties to the conflict to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. The protection of civilians, including
children, in armed conflict should be at the centre of
our debate. We must put practical measures in place to
effectively prevent or minimize civilian casualties and
incidental damage to civilian facilities.
While I am touching on practical issues, I want to
underline how enormous the humanitarian needs are in
Syria. On average, in every month in 2019 the United
Nations has reached around 5.6 million people in need
all over the country, including children. In November,
humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations
agencies included the delivery of food for 4.2 million
people. For a population that is highly vulnerable,
cross-border humanitarian assistance remains vitally
important. In that regard, we would like to reiterate
our strong support for the renewal of the mechanism
that enables humanitarian supplies to be brought into
Syria, provides aid to those in urgent need and supports
the delivery of basic services. Without it, it would be
impossible to ensure life-saving assistance for millions
and to reach those in need.
The scale of the Syrian crisis and humanitarian
needs remain enormous. I want to stress our concern
about the terrible state of health-care facilities in Syria.
Most are not functional and those still operating are too
poorly equipped to provide proper care to patients. In
our opinion, the international community and especially
the Security Council should vigorously advocate for
health care and the protection of civilians, especially
women, children and persons with disabilities, as stated
in resolution 2475 (2019), which we adopted in June.
As we are going to discuss the political track
tomorrow, I want to conclude by underlining that there
can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A
political agreement remains the only path to peace.
12/19

19/12/2019

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ursula Mueller for her briefing and also welcome
the participation of Mr. Khaled Sulaiman Aljarallah,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
The most problematic humanitarian and military
situation is still in the territories outside the control
of the Syrian Government on the eastern bank of the
Euphrates, in the Idlib de-escalation zone and the
United States-occupied zone around Al-Tanf. We have
carefully studied the assessments of the situation in
the Idlib de-escalation zone, which continues to be a
breeding ground for international terrorism, especially
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. We regret the fact that
information on the shelling of the surrounding areas
where militants have established themselves takes
up only a single line in the United Nations reports.
We have established that there were some 600 such
attacks and assaults in October, and the intensity of
the radicals’ firing on Aleppo has increased in the past
two weeks. While in November the city’s residential
areas were shelled 191 times, the corresponding total
for the first half of December is already 139. The use
of multiple launch systems and mortars is increasing.
In the first week of December there were 32 missile
launches in residential areas of Aleppo. In November
and December 11 civilians died and 41 were injured in
Aleppo alone. On 4 December, jihadists shelled a sports
club in Tal Rifaat in Aleppo governorate, killing eight
children. And for some reason not a single person has
wondered where these militants continue to get their
munitions from.
Unfortunately, neither have our colleagues’
statements mentioned the many incidents in which
militants are terrorizing local populations and using
civilian infrastructure for military purposes and civilians
as human shields. There are reports of executions,
detentions and the brutal dispersal of ordinary people
protesting the terrorists’ control in Idlib. Some of those
incidents are mentioned in the United Nations reports.
These acts of terror should be firmly condemned and
appropriately repudiated. We see in the silence about
such crimes an attempt to whitewash these bandits as
the so-called moderate opposition. But those who want
to solve the problems in Syria peacefully long ago joined
the negotiating process, including in the framework of
the Constitutional Committee, while those who have
continued their armed struggle, including against
Syrians, are militants who have rejected dialogue. As
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the guarantor nations of the Astana process, Russia,
Turkey and Iran are ready to continue to assist the Syrian
parties and Special Envoy Pedersen in the quest for a
political solution to the Syrian conflict. The relevance
of the Astana process was confirmed at another useful
meeting of the participants in the format in Nur-Sultan
on 10 and 11 December.
We have once again been hearing accusations that
the Syrian Army and its allies have been targeting
civilian facilities in Idlib with air strikes. And we once
again assert that the Syrian authorities are observing
the ceasefire and that the military activity is in response
to violations of the ceasefire by terrorists.
With regard to north-eastern Syria, Russia is
working with Ankara to implement the memorandum
of 22 October in the interests of preventing armed
clashes and restoring the humanitarian situation. We
are also working to establish contacts between the
Kurds and Damascus and to repair the damage caused
by the illegal occupation of the area and the dangerous
experiment in demographic engineering undertaken
there. We want to draw the Council’s attention to
the dire situation in Raqqa, which was subjected to
massive bombardment by the so-called international
coalition and held captive for more than four years by
militants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
On 7 December a Russian contingent conducted a
humanitarian operation there. Through our direct
presence on the ground, we ascertained that the civilian
infrastructure has been almost entirely destroyed. The
work on rubble removal and demining the area has still
not been completed and there are shortages of drinking
water, medicine and food.
We share the concerns expressed about the
increasing terrorist threats in various parts of Syria,
including in the north-east. We call on those who
managed and built prisons there not to shift onto others
the responsibility for preventing jihadists of every sort
from scattering throughout the region.
Together with the Government of Syria, Russia is
taking steps to create the necessary conditions for the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
More than 2 million Syrians have already returned
to their homes so far, including more than 1.3 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs). More than 1,500
houses, 95 medical facilities and 210 educational
institutions have been repaired and begun functioning
since the beginning of the year, and electricity, water

S/PV. 8694

and industrial facilities are being restored and built.
The numbers are incontestable proof of how effective
the measures taken by the Syrian authorities have been
in creating the necessary conditions for the voluntary,
dignified and safe return of refugees.
We call on international organizations, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian entities, to take
action in this arena. Unfortunately, such activities
are often being artificially delayed. We also urge
the members of the international community to get
involved in post-conflict reconstruction projects in
Syria and lift unilateral sanctions in the interests of
normalizing Syrians’ lives, without surrounding them
with political conditions. That would be a serious
contribution to improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria. Incidentally, if control of the illegally held
oilfields were returned to Damascus it would go a long
way to helping to provide Syrians with fuel and resolve
humanitarian problems.
With assistance from the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and the Syrian
Government, together with the United Nations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, efforts
to resettle the Rukban camp have been continuing.
However, owing to the desire of the armed groups
there to maintain control, they are stalled. We hope
that the problem of the IDPs and refugees there will
soon be resolved. The situation at Al-Hol camp remains
difficult and has been exacerbated by the significant
number of refugees who have moved there from other
camps in the north-east. More than half of the people
in the camp are women and children. It is high time to
think about transferring the illegally occupied territory
to the Syrian authorities in the interests of resolving the
IDP problem.
We heard the assessment of how the cross-border
operation is functioning. We want to make it clear
that we are in favour of removing the Al-Ramtha and
Al-Yarubiyah checkpoints for the following reasons.
The Jordanian border crossing at Al-Ramtha has not
been used since July 2018. We are not convinced by the
argument that it is needed just in case. The situation
in south-western Syria changed long ago, after the
reconciliation achieved with Russia’s assistance, and
the Syrian authorities are working to rebuild the region,
which endured years of crisis. There will be no “just in
case” there, especially since normally there are official

19-4230113/19

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

checkpoints that could be activated if humanitarian
deliveries have to be made from Jordan.
The situation on the Syrian-Iraqi border has changed
radically. The border crossings controlled by the Syrian
army have been reopened. The transfer of control
over other checkpoints from the Kurds to the Syrian
authorities is under discussion. A dialogue is also under
way with the Kurds about getting access to humanitarian
assistance to the eastern bank of the Euphrates from
within Syria itself rather than across the border. The
Secretary General’s latest report (S/2019/949) clearly
indicates the volume of humanitarian aid being
delivered through Al-Yarubiyah, not on a regular basis
but as needed. The data clearly show that humanitarian
convoys can be sent through official channels with the
agreement of the Syrian authorities.
As far as Idlib is concerned, we agree that this
area of Syria is still in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. Aid is being sent there through two Turkish
checkpoints, Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam. We
support their continued functioning because it is based
on the humanitarian needs of Syrians.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and
Ms. Ursula Mueller’s comprehensive briefing. We
also welcome the presence here this morning of the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Khaled
Sulaiman Aljarallah.
Peru notes with deep concern the continuing
conflict and the seriousness of the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. While there have
clearly been significant developments on the political
and military fronts in recent months, it is also clear that
millions of people are still facing incredibly precarious
conditions, further exacerbated by the harsh winter
weather. It is because of the daily risks and suffering
facing Syrians that it is essential to provide immediate,
unrestricted access for humanitarian assistance through
the efficient use of all available means, including crossborder access. Peru is of the view that it is essential to
extend that assistance for another 12 months owing to
the high degree of sophistication and security it offers
and the lack of any real alternative to it for those who
are most vulnerable. We hope that this crucial issue will
be addressed this afternoon from the sole perspective
of alleviating human suffering and that the Security
Council will remain united in its responsibility to
protect the people of Syria.
14/19

19/12/2019

The north-western part of the country remains the
focus of attention because of its population density,
high volatility and latent risks owing to terrorist groups’
extensive control of the area. We are alarmed that the
levels of violence in that area have been increasing
since October and that, as a result, another 136 people
have been killed amid arbitrary arrests, kidnappings
and the destruction of infrastructure.
Peru reiterates its condemnation of terrorism
in the strongest terms and believes that the terrorist
groups remaining in Idlib and other areas of the Syrian
territory must be held accountable and brought to
justice. We nevertheless stress that we must not use the
fight against this scourge as a means to justify putting
the lives of millions of people at risk.
On the other hand, Peru commends the remarkable
efforts being made by the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors, under extremely complex logistical
circumstances, to provide sustained assistance to the
more than 67,000 internally displaced persons in Al-Hol
camp. We note that almost half of these displaced
persons are from Iraq, which is why we encourage the
authorities of that country to continue their efforts to
facilitate the return of their nationals, a process that we
stress must take place within internationally accepted
parameters and with the support of the United Nations.
Also with regard to displaced persons, we stress
that any initiative that would lead to the return to Syria
of its millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons must be carried out within internationally
accepted parameters that guarantee their dignified,
safe and voluntary return. To that end, we consider it
essential for the parties to continue to develop measures
that might promote a better climate of understanding,
including the release of detainees, the identification of
missing persons and the return of mortal remains. We
welcome the work being done in this regard through
the Astana framework, but we note the urgency of
achieving more substantial progress in this area. We
also stress the importance of mobilizing international
community support for humanitarian mine clearance
and the removal of improvised explosive devices in
Syria. These devices continue to wreak havoc on the
population and hinder the delivery of assistance.
I conclude by reaffirming that only by achieving a
political solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) will
it be possible to overcome the humanitarian disaster in
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Syria while fully respecting the country’s sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kuwait to the Security Council. His country has
made an outstanding contribution as a donor and as a
member of the Security Council. It has been an honour
to work with his country’s delegation, which has always
focused on the heart of the issue, whether we are
considering international peace and security or, as we
are doing today, the relief of human suffering. I thank
Kuwait very much for everything that it has done for
the Security Council.
We share the concerns that have been expressed
around the table, and I think they follow a common
theme. For various reasons, since 2012, the international
community has not served the Syrian people as
well as we might have, despite some specific heroic
efforts involving the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the United Nations
and such volunteers as the White Helmets. I would
like to once again salute, through the Assistant
Secretary-General, the work that OCHA and the other
humanitarian agencies do to help the Syrian people.
And now, as others have noted, after seven long and
terrible years, the political process may finally have an
opportunity to turn the corner. We, of course, support
that effort and will do what we can to help Special
Envoy Pedersen deliver results to that end. However,
we are very sad to relate that other areas on the ground
have not made such progress. But that is not due to
the international community; it is due to the Syrian
authorities and the countries that give them the most
support. In particular, I think we need to look at Idlib
and Rukban, the added upcoming pressure of winter, as
others have said, the targeting of civilian objects around
Idlib and the need for international humanitarian law to
be upheld. Terrorism is no justification for violating the
Geneva Conventions. We say it every time we meet in
the Chamber, but it remains as true today as it did when
the Geneva Conventions were first drawn up.
But the worst situation of all, I believe, is the one
that the Assistant Secretary-General outlined in her
briefing. The humanitarian situation is getting worse,
and 4 million people are at very grave risk, which is
why, exceptionally, cross-border assistance remains
needed — and it has been needed since 2014. That is
set out clearly in the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s

S/PV. 8694

letter to the Security Council, and in correspondence
from others over the past few days. Having heard the
Assistant Secretary-General’s briefing, we have no
doubt that the fewer than four border crossings in less
than 12 months have led to saving fewer of the 4 million
lives at stake, which means more suffering for the
Syrian people.
Turning to the impending draft resolution, as others
have said, the representative of Germany set out in his
statement why his delegation drafted it the way it did,
and we respect that. The penholders are trying to find
a way through on this very important issue so that as
many of those 4 million lives as possible can be saved
and their suffering relieved. But it is not clear to us what
has changed since last year, when the Council adopted
resolution 2449 (2018) on cross-border access to Syria.
What has changed to justify such a dramatic reduction
in cross-border assistance, down to two border crossings
in only six months, as other members of the Council
have proposed? In the past, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2165 (2014) on cross-border access,
as well as resolutions 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016). In
2017, the Council adopted resolution 2393 (2017) with
12 votes in favour, with three abstentions, and in 2018,
the Council adopted resolution 2449 (2018) with 13
votes in favour, with two abstentions. I therefore repeat
that it is not at all clear why the situation should be
deemed by some to be so drastically different today.
I would also join others in making a real appeal for
us to examine the penholder text and do the very best we
can to protect the Syrian people. This is a humanitarian
briefing. There are some very important humanitarians
around the table today. The most important thing we
can do, as Ms. Mueller said, is to adopt a draft resolution
that brings genuine relief over a significant period of
time, based on an end-state and not on an end-date,
and which authorizes all the crossings that the United
Nations believes it needs.
OCHA is the component of the international system
that we, States Members of the United Nations, have
all charged with coordinating humanitarian efforts.
We may not always agree with OCHA or the United
Nations on every individual point or issue, but they are
discharging their responsibilities to the membership
and to the Syrian people to ensure that the assistance
reaches the communities that need it the most. If the
United Nations does not help these communities,
there is no evidence at all to believe that the Syrian
Government either wants to, can or will provide that

19-4230115/19

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

assistance. I therefore hope that we can find a way
forward on the draft resolution so that the Assistant
Secretary-General and her teams can do the job we
have mandated them to do.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for
her briefing. I join others in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Aljarallah, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kuwait, and in commending Kuwait on its term on
the Security Council and the strong partnership and
leadership which that country has exhibited on several
issues, including the humanitarian issues that we are
discussing today. We look forward to continuing our
strong partnership with Kuwait.
A new year is on the horizon in Syria, and with it
comes the hope not only that the Council’s efforts in
the country will improve, but also that the 11 million
Syrians who have endured years of suffering might see
an end to the violent conflict. However, before we look
ahead to what the Council should do next year to improve
humanitarian conditions in Syria, there is still one thing
the Council must achieve in 2019, and that is the renewal
of the life-saving provisions of the Security Council’s
cross-border aid mandate — resolution 2165 (2014).
The United States rises alongside the SecretaryGeneral, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the millions of Syrians who depend on that
resolution, and United Nations implementers to demand
the renewal of the resolution’s provisions for all existing
crossings. As we set our intentions for the new year, we
see several achievable steps that the Council can take to
demonstrate our commitment to real peace for Syrians
in 2020.
First, the Council can and should do much more
to demand that the parties on the ground verifiably
improve humanitarian access. In 2020, no Syrian
should be denied lifesaving assistance because he or she
lives in an area not under regime control or fears that
military operations by the Al-Assad regime, Russia or
any other party will cause United Nations aid convoys
to turn back before completing a delivery.
We call on the Al-Assad regime and the Russian
Federation to uphold an immediate cessation of
hostilities in north-western Syria and in the rest of the
country. A ceasefire is essential to addressing the needs
of the people in Idlib and to honouring commitments
16/19

19/12/2019

made by Presidents Putin and Erdoğan in Sochi in
2018. The regime’s cynical strategy of attacking its own
population, while asking the international community
to provide reconstruction assistance to Damascus, will
not go without a response. But our response cannot
come at the expense of innocent victims. Rather, the
Council must redouble its commitment to the political
process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and its
promise to reform how the Al-Assad regime treats the
Syrian people.
Secondly, the Security Council must take steps to
increase the quality and quantity of United Nations
regular access to Syria, which remains at just 30 per
cent of the desired level. The United Nations must be
allowed to expand operations to areas including southwestern Syria, Homs, and the Damascus suburbs.
For too long, the world has watched the Al-Assad
regime block the delivery of food, medicine and other
humanitarian relief to reassert control over the Syrian
people. Next year, the Council must work together
and press Damascus to permit the United Nations to
have regular and unhindered access to people in need
throughout the country.
Thirdly, we ask that the Council support
humanitarian access to north-eastern Syria for all
relevant partners, including the United Nations and
other international humanitarian organizations.
Access to north-eastern Syria is critical to ensuring
that communities recovering from the scourge of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) can receive the
provisions they need. It is equally critical to ensuring
that ISIS cannot re-emerge in Iraq or Syria.
Finally, the Council must remain united in its
efforts to keep the United Nations at the centre of any
attempts to facilitate the principled return of Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons to a place
of their choosing. The United States is alarmed by
reports that more than 150 people who voluntarily
left the Rukban encampment for Homs were arrested
and arbitrarily detained by the regime, and that that
was carried out despite the United Nations, the United
States and the Russian Federation working together to
facilitate safe and informed departures. We call for the
immediate release of those civilians in regime custody
and for the regime to stop its use of torture and the
denial of due process.
The Council must not retreat from its commitment
to ensuring that the conditions on the ground are
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8694

verifiably safe for people to return home after years
of war. The United States believes that, with focus
and effort, the Council can achieve the goals that I
just described in the next 12 months. Doing so would
represent a meaningful and necessary step towards
a more lasting peace in line with resolution 2254
(2015) — a peace that would allow the Syrian people to
at last begin the work of rebuilding their lives.

presentation of a draft resolution on the renewal of
modalities set out in resolution 2165 (2014), based on
a campaign of manipulated statistics and information,
which is a standard practice for OCHA every time the
resolution comes up for renewal, while at the same time
disregarding the fact that most humanitarian assistance
winds up in the hands of armed terrorists, not of those
who need it.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Over the past weeks, the penholders on the
humanitarian issue in Syria have worked on a draft
resolution concerning my country that is far from
achieving its supposed humanitarian objectives. That
is why we reject it in its entirety for various reasons,
including the following.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): In recent years, the Syrian Arab Republic
has made considerable efforts, in cooperation with the
relevant United Nations agencies, to ensure the continued
provision of basic services and humanitarian assistance
to all of its citizens without distinction. Those efforts
have encountered major challenges related to terrorism
and the expansion of the economic embargo imposed
on the Syrian people by the Governments of States
that continue their destructive interference in Syrian
affairs, thereby preventing any prospect of reaching
a solution, impeding the eradication of terrorism and
depriving the people of Syria of the ability to rebuild
and recover, as well as preventing the voluntary return
of Syrian displaced persons and refugees to their homes
to lead normal lives safely.
It is deplorable that, in their monthly reports, the
representatives of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) continue to disseminate
a great deal of error-laden information and assessments
for political reasons that are well known to everyone
within the Security Council. Such behaviour is
not professional and runs contrary to the spirit of
cooperation and partnership that the Syrian Arab
Republic demonstrated vis-à-vis the relevant United
Nations agencies and humanitarian partners, according
to admissions by humanitarian workers on the ground.
The representatives of certain States members of
the Council have now become completely incapable
of thinking and reacting in a positive and constructive
manner with regard to the situation in Syria. They only
react based on the principle of enmity with Syria and its
allies in the fight against terrorism. They have become
obsessed with presenting fabricated accusations
against Syria, and dismissing efforts made by my
country. That was demonstrated by the penholders’

First of all, the penholders continue to overlook
the fact that the focal point for taking humanitarian
action in Syria is the capital, Damascus. It is a matter
of the sacrosanct principle of respect for national
sovereignty, as reaffirmed in every relevant resolution
on my country.
Secondly, the penholders insist on disregarding
developments that have taken place on the ground since
the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) in July 2014. The
Syrian State has restored its control over all of the areas
identified previously by the United Nations as being
under siege or inaccessible and achieved stability in
those areas together with its allies.
Thirdly, neither the leadership of OCHA nor that of
the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism were able
to provide sufficient clarifications regarding their socalled independent third-party partners or companies
contracted to verify the delivery of aid to those in need,
despite our repeated official requests in that regard.
Fourthly, the contents of the draft resolution
unequivocally reveal the true motives behind it and
the insistence of some parties on the delivery of crossborder aid. The most notable motive is to escalate
hostility within the Council to target the Syrian
Government and its role and status which are essential.
Fifthly, my country remains steadfast in its
determination to comply with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 46/182, which emphasizes, first
and foremost, respect for national sovereignty. Syria
therefore rejects the principle of alerts and warnings,
as we believe that it does not meet the minimum
requirements of norms relating to transparency,
credibility and respect for national sovereignty.

19-4230117/19

S/PV.8694

The situation in the Middle East

We in the Syrian Arab Republic continue to be
as realistic and patient as possible in dealing with
the negative political polarization practiced by the
permanent delegations of the United States, France and
the United Kingdom in addressing the Syrian question.
Nevertheless, we continue to call on the Secretariat and,
in particular, OCHA officials to distance themselves
from such attempts at political polarization and to
instead build a professional relationship with the Syrian
Government and local humanitarian partners that is
based on good will, partnership and respect for the
principles of humanitarian action in order to achieve
the desired goals of such action. In that connection,
those concerned must refrain from using the Syrian
dossier as a tool to pressure, coerce and blackmail the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and its people.
Finally, after nine years of the terrorist war imposed
on Syria, the Governments that contributed to igniting
terrorism in the country and exacerbated the situation
continue to refuse to admit in a serious and responsible
manner that ending the suffering of the Syrian people
requires respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. They must also
support the efforts of the Syrian Government and its
allies to combat the remnants of terrorist organizations
and foreign terrorist fighters in the country and lift the
unilateral coercive economic measures imposed on the
Syrian people.
Moreover, the illegal presence of foreign forces
in Syria must come to an end, which must include the
withdrawal of the occupying American forces from oil
and gas sites in Syria. There must be a definitive end to
the first-degree piracy operations being conducted by
the United States today against the oil and gas revenues
that belong exclusively to the Syrian State and no
other party.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Turkey to participate in this meeting.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting, as
well as Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
comprehensive briefing.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
catastrophic. We are extremely worried about the
escalation of violence in Idlib. The Al-Assad regime
18/19

19/12/2019

continues to kill civilians and destroy civilian
infrastructure. The regime is more brutal, blatant and
outrageous than ever. Al-Assad knows that the reaction
of the international community will be limited to calls
and condemnations. Al-Assad knows that the Security
Council will meet, talk and adjourn. That is why he
continues with business as usual — why he continues
to kill. He does not need a message; he needs to see that
his actions will not go unpunished.
The presence of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham and other
terrorist extremist groups is an additional reason for
fragility of the situation in the region. However, the
killing of civilians under the pretext of fighting against
terrorism cannot be accepted. International humanitarian
law must be respected under all circumstances. Let me
recall once again that the ongoing escalation in Idlib
is triggering new waves of displacements, potentially
leading to a chain reaction. As of this morning, 50,000
people have been moving towards the Turkish border
from the Idlib area, which will affect not only Turkey,
but beyond. We must therefore all make every effort to
preserve the status of Idlib as a de-escalation zone.
In the Operation Peace Spring area, in the north-east
of the country, the normalization of life is under way,
thanks to our cooperation with Russia and the United
States. The strip of land stretching from Afrin all the
way to Iraq along the Turkish-Syrian border has been
freed from terror organizations and the situation is more
secure and stable. Turkish agencies have been providing
humanitarian aid to the region since mid-October.
Following the previous two operations that Turkey
carried out in north-western Syria, more than 370,000
people have already returned voluntarily to their homes
and lands. We are working towards the same objective
in the north-east. All returns will continue to be
voluntary, safe and dignified, in close cooperation with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Some 123,000 people have already returned to their
areas of origin in the north-east. Local populations that
have been expelled from the north-east since 2011 want
and continue to return to their homes.
We all heard the statement delivered by Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller. There is one
undisputable fact — the United Nations cross-border
mechanism is vital for millions of people in Syria. This
is not a political matter; it is a humanitarian urgency.
This afternoon, when the Council votes, the choice is
between the needs of the Syrian people and the wishes
of the Al-Assad regime. The Council will either decide
19-42301

19/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

to extend a lifeline to the Syrian people or extend a
helping hand to the Syrian regime. Members of the
Council must leave aside their political calculations and
focus on the humanitarian consequences.
The first revised draft resolution included the
addition of Tall Abyad to the crossings mandated for
use by the United Nations. The importance of the Tall
Abyad crossing point for United Nations operations
has already been explained by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, as well as by
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller this morning. It is
an old and functional crossing point that was promoted
to category A in 2008. The Bab Al-Hawa and the Bab
Al-Salam border crossings, which are also among
the cross-border mechanism crossing points, are also
designated under the same category. The Tall Abyad
area is convenient to establish a United Nations logistics
cluster for the collection and distribution of aid items.
In the short term, the Tall Abyad crossing point
will serve the needs of the current population and
will be instrumental to reach people in need in Raqqa
and Al-Hasakah, which have a total population of
approximately 450,000. In the medium and long
terms, humanitarian aid delivered through the Tall
Abyad crossing point can also be expanded to other
regions in the north-eastern part of Syria. Throughout

S/PV. 8694

the negotiations, a great majority of Member States
supported the inclusion of the Tall Abyad crossing
point in the mechanism.
It has been claimed that the addition of the Tall
Abyad crossing point is an attempt to legitimize the
situation in the north-east. Turkey does not need the
blessing of any other country to defend itself against
terrorist threats. Operation Peace Spring was a limited
cross-border counter-terrorism operation to fight
terror organizations, such as the Kurdish Workers
Party, the Democratic Union Party and the People’s
Protection Units and Da’esh. As President Erdoğan has
emphasized on multiple occasions, Turkey cannot and
will not tolerate any terrorist activity along its borders.
During the negotiations, no objection was raised
as to the benefits of the addition of the Tall Abyad
crossing point. All the counter-arguments were
political in nature. Discussions on the draft resolution
and the addition of the Tall Abyad crossing point must
focus only on humanitarian issues and needs. The
politicization of this issue will not serve the needs of
the Syrian people. It is high time for the Council to do
what is right and to renew the cross-border mechanism
for 12 months, with the addition of Tall Abyad to the
crossing points mandated for use by the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

19-4230119/19
