A/77/463/Add.2

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 December 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 68 (b)

Promotion and protection of human rights: human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for improving
the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee *
Rapporteur: Ms. Shalini Gungaram (Mauritius)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of
human rights”, the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms” and to allocate it to the Third Committee.
2.
The Third Committee considered the sub-item jointly with sub-items (a),
“Implementation of human rights instruments”; (c), “Human rights situations and
reports of special rapporteurs and representatives”; and (d), “Comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action”, and heard introductory statements, held interactive dialogues and a general
discussion on item 68, “Promotion and protection of human rights”, as a whole, and
considered proposals and took action on the sub-item at its 17th to 38th, 45th to
50th and 54th meetings, from 13 to 14, 17 to 21 and 25 to 28 October and on 4, 10,
11, 15 and 17 November 2022. An account of the Committee ’s consideration is
contained in the relevant summary records. 1
__________________

* The report of the Committee on this item is being issued in five parts, under the symbols
A/77/463, A/77/463/Add. 1, A/77/463/Add. 2, A/77/463/Add.3 and A/77/463/Add. 4.
1 A/C.3/77/SR. 17, A/C.3/77/SR. 18, A/C.3/77/SR.19, A/C.3/77/SR.20, A/C.3/77/SR. 21,
A/C.3/77/SR. 22, A/C.3/77/SR. 23, A/C.3/77/SR.24, A/C.3/77/SR.25, A/C.3/77/SR. 26,
A/C.3/77/SR. 27, A/C.3/77/SR. 28, A/C.3/77/SR.29, A/C.3/77/SR.30, A/C.3/77/SR. 31,
A/C.3/77/SR. 32, A/C.3/77/SR. 33, A/C.3/77/SR.34, A/C.3/77/SR.35, A/C.3/77/SR. 36,
A/C.3/77/SR. 37, A/C.3/77/SR. 38, A/C.3/77/SR.45, A/C.3/77/SR.46, A/C.3/77/SR. 47,
A/C.3/77/SR. 48, A/C.3/77/SR. 49, A/C.3/77/SR.50 and A/C.3/77/SR. 54.

22-27607 (E)

091222

*2227607*

A/77/463/Add.2

3.
For the documents before the Committee under this sub-item, see document
A/77/463.

II. Consideration of proposals
A.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.38
4.
At its 45th meeting, on 4 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “The right to privacy in the digital age” (A/C.3/77/L.38), which
was submitted by Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Uruguay. Subsequently, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, France, Iceland,
Ireland, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Panama,
Poland, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia
and Ukraine joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
5.
At the same meeting, Albania, Angola, the Congo and Equatorial Guinea joined
in sponsoring the draft resolution.
6.

Also at the same meeting, the representative of Brazil made a statement.

7.
Also at its 45th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.38
(see para. 87, draft resolution I).
8.
Before the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the
representative of Germany. After the adoption, a statement was made by the
representatives of the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland,

B.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.24
9.
At its 46th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “The right to development” (A/C.3/77/L.24), which was submitted
by China, Cuba (on behalf of the of the States Members of the United Nations that
are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries) and the Solomon Islands.
10. At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba made a statement on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
11. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.24 by a recorded vote of 128 to 24, with 28 abstentions (see para. 87,
draft resolution II). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovin a, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,

2/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam ,
Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Against:
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Poland, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Georgia, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain, Uruguay.
12. Before the vote, statements in explanation of vote were made by the
representatives of the United States of America and Armenia. After the vote,
statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives of Czechia (on
behalf of the European Union) and New Zealand (also on behalf of Switzerland).

C.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.25
13. At its 47th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights” (A/C.3/77/L.25), which was submitted by China, Cuba (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non -Aligned
Countries) and the Russian Federation. Subsequently, El Salvador joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
14. At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba made a statement on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
15. Also at the same meeting, the Committee
A/C.3/77/L.25 (see para. 87, draft resolution III).

adopted draft resolution

16. After the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the
representative of the United States of America.

D.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.26
17. At its 47th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Human rights and unilateral coercive measures” (A/C.3/77/L.26 ),
which was submitted by China, Cuba (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries) and the
Russian Federation.

22-27607

3/116

A/77/463/Add.2

18. At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba made a statement on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
19. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.26 by a recorded vote of 123 to 53, with 1 abstention (see para. 87, draft
resolution IV). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlan ds, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Brazil.
20. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) (on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter
of the United Nations) and Cuba (on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement), and a
statement in explanation of vote was made by the representative of the United States
of America. After the vote, a statement in explanation of vote was made by the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and a
statement was made by the representative of Belarus.

E.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.27
21. At its 47th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order ”
(A/C.3/77/L.27), which was submitted by Antigua and Barbuda, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), the Central African Republic, China, Cuba, the Democratic

4/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Namibia, Nicaragua, the Russian Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam. Subsequently, Algeria, Botswana, Burkina
Faso, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, India, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Sri Lanka
and Uganda joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
22. At the same meeting, Cameroon, the Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saint Kitts and Nevis, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
23. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Cuba made a statement.
24. Also at its 47th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.2 7
by a recorded vote of 117 to 54, with 10 abstentions (see para. 87, draft resolution V).
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Armenia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Liberia, Mexico, Panama, Peru,
Uruguay.
25. Before the vote, a statement in explanation of vote was made by the
representative of the United States of America.

22-27607

5/116

A/77/463/Add.2

F.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.28
26. At its 47th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Promotion of peace as a vital requirement for the full enjoyment
of all human rights by all” (A/C.3/77/L.28), which was submitted by Antigua and
Barbuda, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Cuba, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Namibia, Nicaragua, the Russian Federation, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and
Viet Nam. Subsequently, Algeria, Belize, Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, India, Libya,
Madagascar, the Philippines, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa and
Uganda joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
27. At the same meeting, Cameroon, the Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Mali, the
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leone, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
28. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Cuba made a statement.
29. Also at its 47th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.28 ,
by a recorded vote of 126 to 53, with 1 abstention (see para. 87, draft resolution VI).
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

6/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Abstaining:
Brazil.
30. Before the vote, a statement in explanation of vote was made by the
representative of the United States of America.

G.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.29
31. At its 47th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “The right to food” (A/C.3/77/L.29), which was submitted by
Antigua and Barbuda, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), the Central African
Republic, China, Colombia, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Honduras, Jordan, the Lao People ’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Portugal, the
Russian Federation, Rwanda, the Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) and Viet Nam. Subsequently, Algeria, Andorra, Austria, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Greece, Guyana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nepal, the Netherlands,
Norway, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Türki̇ ye and Uganda joined in sponsor ing the draft resolution.
32. At the same meeting, Albania, the Bahamas, Cameroon, Chad, the Comoros,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea, Haiti, Japan, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Senegal, the Sudan, Timor-Leste, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
33. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Cuba made a statement.
34. Also at its 47th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.29
(see para. 87, draft resolution VII).
35. Before the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the
representative of Canada. After the adoption, a statement was made by the
representative of the United States of America.

H.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.42 and amendment thereto contained
in document A/C.3/77/L.66
36. At its 48th meeting, on 11 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions” (A/C.3/77/L.42 ),
which was submitted by Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Uruguay.
Subsequently, Andorra, Australia, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Liberia, the Marshall Islands,

22-27607

7/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia and Switzerland joined in sponsoring the dra ft resolution.
37. At the same meeting, Colombia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
38. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Finland (on behalf of the Nordic
countries) made a statement.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.66
39. At its 48th meeting, on 11 November 2022, the Chair drew the attention of the
Committee to the amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.42, as contained in
document A/C.3/77/L.66, which was submitted by Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Cameroon, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Pakistan, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, the Sudan, Uganda and Yemen.
Subsequently, Brunei Darussalam, China, Malaysia, Oman, Qatar and the United Arab
Emirates joined in sponsoring the amendment.
40. At the same meeting, Djibouti and the Niger joined in sponsoring the
amendment.
41. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Egypt made a statement in
connection with the amendment.
42. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment by a recorded
vote of 88 to 51, with 26 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Sai nt
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Angola, Bahamas, Botswana, Central African Republic, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini, Guinea, Guyana, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar, Maldives,

8/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Mozambique, Namibia, Paraguay, Philippines, Rwanda, Sri Lanka, Togo,
Tunisia.
43. Before the vote, statements in explanation of vote were made by the
representatives of Czechia (on behalf of the European Union, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Georgia, Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia, Türki̇ ye and
Ukraine), Finland (on behalf of the Nordic countries), Argentina, Mexico, New
Zealand (also on behalf of Australia, Canada, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and
Switzerland), the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America, Colombia, Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic.
44. At the same meeting, the representative of Mozambique made a statement on a
point of order.
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.42 as a whole
45. At its 48th meeting, on 11 November 2022, the representative of Sweden made
a statement on a point of order to which the Chair respon ded.
46. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.42 by
a recorded vote of 131 to 1, with 45 abstentions (see para. 87, draft resolution VIII).
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America, Uruguay.
Against:
Burundi.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
22-27607

9/116

A/77/463/Add.2

47. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Sweden (on
behalf of the Nordic countries), the Netherlands, the United States of America and
Peru and statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives of Saudi
Arabia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Yemen, Egypt, the Russian Federation and
Pakistan. After the vote, statements in explanation of vote were made by the
representatives of the Gambia, Senegal, Mali, Malaysia, Belarus, Nicaragua, the
Philippines, China, Bangladesh, Indonesia the United Republic of Tanzania, Nigeria,
Cuba and the Syrian Arab Republic and statements were made by the representative
of Switzerland, as well as by the observer for the Holy See.

I.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.31/Rev.1
48. At its 50th meeting, on 15 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Human rights in the administration of justice”
(A/C.3/77/L.31/Rev.1), which was submitted by Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Peru, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and
Uruguay. Subsequently, Albania, Andorra, Azerbaijan, Brazil, Chile, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Iceland, India, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Poland, San Marino, Serbia, Thailand and Ukraine joined in sponsoring
the draft resolution.
49. At the same meeting, the representative of Austria made a statement.
50. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.31/Rev.1 (see para. 87, draft resolution IX).
51. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representative of the United States of America and the observer for the Holy See.

J.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.41
52. At its 48th meeting, on 11 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Missing persons”, which was submitted by Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Morocco and Norway. Subsequently, Albania, Andorra,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Canada, the Central African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d ’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, the Netherlands, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, the United States of America, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) and Zambia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
53. At the same meeting, Equatorial Guinea, Jordan, Papua New Guinea, Tajikistan
and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
54. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Azerbaijan made a statement.
55. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.41
(see para. 87, draft resolution X).

10/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

56. Before the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the
representative of Armenia.

K.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.43
57. At its 48th meeting, on 11 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Freedom of religion or belief” (A/C.3/77/L.43), submitted by
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the
United States of America. Subsequently, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Georgia,
Guatemala, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, the Marshall Islands, New Zealand,
Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, San Marino, Serbia,
Switzerland, Thailand, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Uruguay joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
58. At the same meeting, Equatorial Guinea, Kiribati, Norway, Sierra Leone,
Uganda and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
59. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Czechia (on behalf of the
European Union) made a statement.
60. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.43
(see para. 87, draft resolution XI).

L.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.44/Rev.1 and the amendment thereto
contained in document A/C.3/77/L.54
61. At its 49th meeting, on 11 November 2022, the Committee had be fore it a draft
resolution entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”
(A/C.3/77/L.44/Rev.1), which was submitted by Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldo va,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of). Subsequently, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), the Congo, El Salvador, Israel, Kiribati, North Macedonia,
San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles and Togo joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
62. At the same meeting, Kyrgyzstan joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
63. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Australia (also on behalf of Costa
Rica) made a statement.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.54
64. At the 49th meeting, on 11 November 2022, the Chair drew the attention of the
Committee to an amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.44/Rev.1, as contained in

22-27607

11/116

A/77/463/Add.2

document A/C.3/77/L.54, which was submitted by Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, China, the
Comoros, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, the Sudan,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, the Unit ed Arab Emirates,
Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe. Subsequently, India, Jordan, Malawi and
Seychelles joined in sponsoring the amendment.
65. At the same meeting, Mauritania joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
66. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Singapore made a statement.
67. Also at the 49th meeting, the representative of Singapore made a statement on
a point of order to which the Chair responded.
68. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the amendment by a recorded vote
of 103 to 68, with 13 abstentions. The voting was as follows :
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Central African Republic, Chad, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon, Liberia, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nepal,
Republic of Korea, Togo, Türkiye.
69. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of China,
Botswana, Jamaica, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Egypt, Papua New Guinea,
12/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Nigeria, Saudi Arabia and Singapore and statements in explanation of vote were made
by the representatives of Czechia (on behalf of the European Union, North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, the Republic of Moldova, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and San Marino), Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Canada, New
Zealand, Sri Lanka, Micronesia (Federated States of), Argentina and Liechtenstein.
After the vote, statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives of
Sierra Leone and Chile, and a statement was made by the representative of Belarus.
70. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Singapore made a statement on
a point of order, to which the Secretary of the Committee responded, and the
representative of Australia made a statement on a point of order to which the Chair
responded.
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.44/Rev.1, as amended and as a whole
71. At its 49th meeting, on 11 November 2022, the Committee adopted draft
resolution A/C.3/77/L.44/Rev.1 , as amended, by a recorded vote of 126 to 37, with
24 abstentions (see para. 87, draft resolution XII). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, TimorLeste, Togo, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu.
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libya, Maldives, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
United States of America, Yemen.
Abstaining:
Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, Comoros, Cuba, Eswatini, Gabon, Guyana,
Indonesia, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mauritania, Morocco,
Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, South Sudan, Thailand, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
72. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Mexico,
Switzerland (also on behalf of New Zealand), Canada, Australia and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and statements in explanation of vote
22-27607

13/116

A/77/463/Add.2

were made by the representatives of Trinidad and Tobago, Singapore, Palau, Zambia
and Yemen. After the vote, statements in explanation of vote were made by the
representatives of India, Viet Nam, Ghana, Pakistan, Japan, Myanmar, Indonesia,
Qatar, the United States of America, the Republic of Korea and Egypt and statements
were made by the representatives of Czechia (on behalf of the European Union, North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Andorra, Georgia and San Marino), Costa Rica and Fiji, as well as
by the observer for the Holy See.

M.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.46
73. At its 50th meeting, on 15 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Human rights and extreme poverty” (A/C.3/77/L.46), which was
submitted by Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Co sta Rica, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, France, Guatemala, Honduras, Jordan, Malta, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Slovenia, Tunisia, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay. Subsequently, Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Angola, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, the Central African Republic, China, the Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Estonia,
Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mexico, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles,
Slovakia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and
Zambia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
74. At the same meeting, Burkina Faso, Eritrea, Guinea, Malawi, Mali, Pakistan,
Senegal, Solomon Islands, the Sudan, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
75. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Peru made a statement.
76. Also at its 50th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.46
(see para. 87, draft resolution XIII).
77. After the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the
representative of the United States of America.

N.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.39
78. At its 54th meeting, on 17 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “The role of Ombudsman and mediator institutions in the
promotion and protection of human rights, good governance and the rule of law”
(A/C.3/77/L.39), which was submitted by Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Colombia,
Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Malta, Morocco, Portugal,
Slovenia and the United States of America. Subsequently, Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Ir eland,
Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Peru,

14/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Poland, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia,
Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Zambia joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
79. At the same meeting, Albania, Angola, Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini, Finland,
Guinea, Kiribati, Libya, Malawi, the Niger, Nigeria, Senegal and Sweden joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
80. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Morocco made a statement and
orally revised the twelfth operative paragraph of the draft resolution.
81. Also at its 54th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.39 ,
as orally revised, (see para. 87, draft resolution XIV).
82. After the adoption of the draft resolution, as orally revised, t he representative
of Japan made a statement.

O.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.47
83. At its 54th meeting, on 17 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization,
discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons, based on religion
or belief” (A/C.3/77/L.47), which was submitted by Egypt (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation). Subsequently, Australia, the Central African Republic, the Congo,
Eritrea, Japan, Peru, Thailand and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
84. At the same meeting, Equatorial Guinea and Timor-Leste joined in sponsoring
the draft resolution.
85. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Egypt (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation) made a statement.
86. Also at its 54th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.47
(see para. 87, draft resolution XV).

22-27607

15/116

A/77/463/Add.2

III. Recommendations of the Third Committee
87. The Third Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolutions:

Draft resolution I
The right to privacy in the digital age
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
the human rights and fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights 1 and relevant international human rights treaties, including the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 3 as well as the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action,4
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 68/167 of 18 December 2013, 69/166
of 18 December 2014, 71/199 of 19 December 2016, 73/179 of 17 December 2018
and 75/176 of 16 December 2020 on the right to privacy in the digital age, and
resolution 45/95 of 14 December 1990 on guidelines for the regulation of
computerized personal data files, as well as Human Rights Council resolutions 28/16
of 26 March 2015, 5 34/7 of 23 March 2017, 6 37/2 of 22 March 2018, 7 42/15 of
26 September 2019 8 and 48/4 of 7 October 2021 9 on the right to privacy in the digital
age and resolutions 32/13 of 1 July 2016 10 and 38/7 of 5 July 2018 11 on the promotion,
protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet,
Recalling also the outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World
Summit on the Information Society,12
Taking note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on the right to privacy, 13 the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression 14 and the relevant reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, 15 as
well as the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, 16

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 Ibid.
4 A/CONF. 157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
5 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
6 Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
7 Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
8 Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
9 Ibid., Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/76/53/Add. 1), chap. IV, sect. A.
10 Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. V, sect. A.
11 Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. VI, sect. A.
12 Resolution 70/125.
13 A/HRC/43/52, A/HRC/46/37, A/HRC/49/55, A/75/147 and A/76/220.
14 A/HRC/44/49, A/HRC/50/29, A/75/261 and A/76/258.
15 A/HRC/44/50, A/HRC/50/23, A/HRC/50/42 and A/75/184.
16 A/HRC/44/57, A/75/329 and A/76/434.
1
2

16/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Welcoming the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the right to privacy in the digital age, noting with interest the reports
of the High Commissioner thereon,17 and recalling the expert workshops on the right
to privacy in the digital age held on 19 and 20 February 2018 and on 27 and 28 May
2020,
Taking note of the Secretary-General’s strategy on new technologies and his
Road Map for Digital Cooperation, and noting the discussions that take place annually
in the Internet Governance Forum, which is a multi-stakeholder forum for the discussion
of Internet governance issues and whose mandate was extended by the General
Assembly in 2015 for another 10 years, and recognizing that effectively addressing
the challenges relating to the right to privacy in the context of modern communications
technology requires an ongoing, concerted multi-stakeholder engagement,
Noting that the rapid pace of technological development enables individuals all
over the world to use new information and communications technologies that empower
people, improve lives, strengthen justice and boost productivity, and at the same time
enhances the capacity of Governments, business enterprises and individuals to
undertake surveillance, interception, hacking and data collection, which may violate
or abuse human rights, in particular the right to privacy, as set out in article 12 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 17 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, and is therefore an issue of increasing concern,
Noting also that violations and abuses of the right to privacy in the digital
agecan affect all individuals, with particular effects on women, children, in particular
girls, persons with disabilities and older persons, as well as those in vulnerable
situations,
Recognizing that new and emerging digital technologies, in particular assistive
digital technologies, can especially contribute to the full enjoyment of human rights
by persons with disabilities, and that these technologies should be designed in
consultation with them and with appropriate safeguards to protect their rights,
including their right to privacy,
Recognizing also that the promotion of and respect for the right to privacy are
important to the prevention of violence, including gender-based violence, abuse and
sexual harassment, in particular against women and children, as well as any form of
discrimination, which can occur in digital and online spaces and includes
cyberbullying and cyberstalking,
Noting that children can be particularly vulnerable to abuses and violations of
their right to privacy,
Noting also that States parties should implement the Convention on the Rights
of the Child 18 in relation to the digital environment, including the importance of
privacy to children’s agency, dignity and safety, and for the exercise of their rights,
Reaffirming the human right to privacy, according to which no one shall be
subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her privacy, family, home
or correspondence, and the right to the protection of th e law against such interference,
and recognizing that the exercise of the right to privacy is important for the realization
of the right to freedom of expression and to hold opinions without interference and
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and is one of the
foundations of a democratic society,

__________________
17
18

22-27607

A/HRC/48/31 and A/HRC/51/17.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
17/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Recalling with appreciation general comment No. 16 of the Human Rights
Committee on article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
on the right to respect of privacy, family, home and correspondence, and protection
of honour and reputation,19 while also noting the vast technological leaps that have
taken place since its adoption and the need to discuss the right to privacy in view of
the challenges of the digital age,
Recognizing the need to further discuss and analyse, based on international
human rights law, issues relating to the promotion and protection of the right to
privacy in the digital age, procedural safeguards, effective domestic oversight and
remedies, the impact of surveillance on the right to privacy and other human rights,
as well as the need to examine the principles of non-arbitrariness, lawfulness, legality,
necessity and proportionality in relation to surveillance practices,
Recognizing also that the discussion on the right to privacy should be based
upon existing international and domestic legal obligations, including international
human rights law, as well as relevant commitments, and should not open the path for
undue interference with an individual’s human rights,
Recognizing further the need to ensure that international human rights
obligations are respected in the conception, design, development, deployment,
evaluation and regulation of data-driven technologies and to ensure that they are
subject to adequate safeguards and oversight,
Stressing the importance of full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information, including the fundamental importance of access to information
and democratic participation,
Recognizing that the right to privacy is important for the enjoyment of other
rights and can contribute to an individual’s ability to participate in political,
economic, social and cultural life, and noting with concern that violations or abuses
of the right to be free from unlawful or arbitrary interference with the right to privacy
might affect the enjoyment of other human rights, including the right to freedom of
expression and to hold opinions without interference, and the right to peaceful
assembly and freedom of association,
Noting that, while metadata may provide benefits, certain types of metadata,
when aggregated, can reveal personal information that can be no less sensitive than
the actual content of communications and can give an insight into an individual’s
behaviour, social relationships, private preferences and identity,
Expressing concern that individuals, particularly children, often do not and/or
cannot provide their free, explicit and informed consent to the collection, processing
and storage of their data or to the reuse, sale or multiple resale of their personal data,
as the collection, processing, use, storage and sharing of personal data, including
sensitive data, have increased significantly in the digital age,
Noting that general comment No. 16 of the Human Rights Committee
recommends that States take effective measures to prevent the unla wful retention,
processing and use of personal data stored by public authorities and business
enterprises,
Noting also that the use of artificial intelligence can contribute to the promotion
and protection of human rights and has the potential to transfo rm governments and
societies, economic sectors and the world of work and can also have various farreaching implications, including with regard to the right to privacy,
__________________
19

18/116

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/43/40),
annex VI.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Noting with concern that artificial intelligence or machine-learning
technologies, without proper technical, regulatory, legal and ethical safeguards, may
lead to decisions that have the potential to affect the enjoyment of human rights,
including economic, social and cultural rights, and affect non -discrimination, and
recognizing the need to apply international human rights law and data protection
frameworks in the design, evaluation and regulation of these practices,
Recognizing that, while the use of artificial intelligence can have significant
positive economic and social impacts, it requires and allows for the processing of
large amounts of data, often relating to personal data, including biometric data and
data on an individual’s behaviour, social relationships, race or ethnicity, religion or
belief, which can pose serious risks to the enjoyment of the right to privacy, especially
when done without proper safeguards, in particular when employed for identification,
tracking, profiling, facial recognition, classification, behaviour prediction or scoring
of individuals,
Noting that the use of artificial intelligence may, without proper technical,
regulatory, legal and ethical safeguards, pose the risk of reinforcing discrimination,
including structural inequalities, and recognizing that racially and otherwise
discriminatory outcomes should be prevented in the design, development,
implementation and use of emerging digital technologies,
Noting with concern that certain predictive algorithms are likely to result in
discrimination, including when non-representative data are used,
Noting that the use of algorithmic or automated decision-making processes
online can affect the enjoyment of individuals’ rights o ffline,
Noting also that the use of data extraction and algorithms to target content
towards online users may undermine user agency and access to information online, as
well as the right to freedom of opinion and expression,
Noting with concern reports indicating lower accuracy of facial recognition
technologies with certain groups, including when non -representative training data are
used, that the use of digital technologies can exacerbate racial inequality and in this
context the importance of effective remedies,
Emphasizing that unlawful or arbitrary surveillance and/or interception of
communications, as well as the unlawful or arbitrary collection of personal data,
hacking and the unlawful use of biometric technologies, as highly intrusive acts,
violate the right to privacy, can interfere with the right to freedom of expression and
to hold opinions without interference, the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and
association and the right to freedom of religion or belief and may contradict the tenets
of a democratic society, including when undertaken extraterritorially or on a mass
scale,
Recognizing that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected
online, including the right to privacy,
Noting that the accelerated synchronization of online and offline spaces can
affect individuals’ enjoyment of their human rights, including their right to privacy,
Noting in particular that surveillance of digital communications must be
consistent with international human rights obligations and must be conducted on the
basis of a legal framework, which must be publicly accessible, clear, precise,
comprehensive and non-discriminatory, and that any interference with the right to
privacy must not be arbitrary or unlawful, bearing in mind what is rea sonable with
regard to the pursuance of legitimate aims, and recalling that States that are parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights must take the necessary steps

22-27607

19/116

A/77/463/Add.2

to adopt laws or other measures as may be necessary to give effect to the rights
recognized in the Covenant,
Expressing concern about the spread of disinformation and misinformation,
particularly on social media platforms, which can be designed and implemented so as
to mislead, to spread racism, xenophobia, negative stereotyping and stigmatization,
to violate and abuse human rights, including the right to privacy, to impede freedom
of expression, including the freedom to seek, receive and impart information, and to
incite all forms of violence, hatred, intolerance, discrimination and hostility, and
emphasizing the important contribution of journalists, civil society and academia in
countering this trend,
Noting with deep concern that, in many countries, persons and organizations
engaged in promoting and defending human rights and fundamental freedoms,
journalists and other media workers may frequently face threats and harassment and
suffer insecurity, as well as unlawful or arbitrary interference with their right to
privacy, as a result of their activities,
Noting with deep concern also the use of technological tools developed by the
private surveillance industry and by private or public actors to undertake surveillance,
hacking of devices and systems, interception and disruption of communications, and
data collection, interfering with the professional and private lives of individuals,
including those engaged in the promotion and defence of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, journalists and other media workers, in violation or abuse of
their human rights, specifically the right to privacy,
Emphasizing that States must respect international human rights obligations
regarding the right to privacy when they intercept digital communications of
individuals and/or collect personal data, when they share or otherwise provide a ccess
to data collected through, inter alia, information- and intelligence-sharing agreements
and when they require disclosure of personal data from third parties, including
business enterprises,
Noting the increase in the collection of sensitive biometric information from
individuals, and stressing that States must comply with their human rights obligations
and that business enterprises should respect the right to privacy and other human
rights when collecting, processing, sharing and storing biometric in formation by, inter
alia, adopting data protection policies and safeguards,
Deeply concerned at the negative impact that surveillance and/or interception
of communications, including extraterritorial surveillance and/or interception of
communications, as well as the collection of personal data, in particular when carried
out on a mass scale, may have on the exercise and enjoyment of human rights,
Emphasizing that, in the digital age, technical solutions to secure and to protect
the confidentiality of digital communications and transactions, including measures
for strong encryption, pseudonymization and anonymity, are important to ensure the
enjoyment of human rights, in particular the rights to privacy, to freedom of opinion
and expression and to freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and recognizing
that States should promote such measures and refrain from employing unlawful or
arbitrary surveillance techniques, which may include forms of hacking,
Noting that, while concerns about public security may justify the gathering and
protection of certain sensitive information, States must ensure full compliance with
their obligations under international human rights law,
Noting also, in that respect, that the prevention and suppression of terrorism is
a public interest of great importance, while reaffirming that States must ensure that
any measures taken to combat terrorism are in compliance with their obli gations
20/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law,
Recognizing that a lack of access to affordable and reliable technologies and
services remains a critical challenge in many developing countries,
Stressing the need to address prevailing challenges to bridge the digital divides,
both between and within countries, and the gender digital divide, and to harness
information and communications technologies for development, and recalling the need
to emphasize quality of access to bridge digital and knowledge divides, using a
multidimensional approach that includes speed, stability, affordability, language,
training, capacity-building, local content and accessibility for persons with
disabilities, and to promote the full enjoyment of human rights, including the right to
privacy,
Stressing also the need to ensure that national security and public health
measures, including the use of technology to monitor and contain the spread of
infectious diseases, are in full compliance with the obligations of States under
international human rights law and adhere to the principles of lawfulness, legality,
legitimacy with regard to the aim pursued, necessity and proportionality and the need
to protect human rights, including the right to privacy, and personal data in the
response to health or other emergencies,
Noting the importance of protecting and respecting the right of individuals to
privacy when designing, developing or deploying technological means in response to
disasters, epidemics and pandemics, especially the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, including digital exposure notification and contact tracing,
Noting also that new and emerging digital technologies can contribute to the
recovery from global health emergencies, including the COVID-19 pandemic, and
recalling in this regard the importance of protecting human health -related and other
personal data, while noting with concern that some efforts to combat the COVID-19
pandemic have an adverse impact on the enjoyment of the right to privacy,
1.
Reaffirms the right to privacy, according to which no one shall be subjected
to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her privacy, family, home or
correspondence, and the right to the protection of the law against such interference,
as set out in article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 17
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
2.
Recognizes the global and open nature of the Internet and the rapid
advancement in information and communications technologies a s a driving force in
accelerating progress towards development in its various forms, including in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals; 20
3.
Affirms that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected
online, including the right to privacy, with special regard given to the protection of
children;
4.
Recalls that States should ensure that any interference with the right to
privacy is consistent with the principles of legality, necessity and proportionality;
5.
Encourages all States to promote an open, secure, stable, accessible and
peaceful information and communications technology environment based on respect
for international law, including the obligations enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and human rights instruments;

__________________
20

22-27607

See resolution 70/1.
21/116

A/77/463/Add.2

6.
Acknowledges that the conception, design, use, deployment and further
development of new and emerging technologies, such as those that involve artificial
intelligence, may have an impact on the enjoyment of the right to privacy and other
human rights, and that the risks to these rights can and should be avoided and
minimized by adapting or adopting adequate regulation or other appropriate
mechanisms, in accordance with applicable obligations under international human
rights law, for the conception, design, development and deployment of new and
emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence, by taking measures to ensure
a safe, transparent, accountable, secure and high quality data infrastructure and by
developing human rights-based auditing mechanisms and redress mechanisms and
establishing human oversight;
7.

Calls upon all States:

(a) To respect and protect the right to privacy, both online and offline,
including in the context of digital communications and new and emerging
technologies;
(b) To invite all relevant stakeholders to further discuss how emerging
phenomena, such as the push for widespread adoption of blockchain, expanded and
virtual reality technologies and the development of increasingly powerful
neurotechnology, without proper safeguards, have an impact on the enjoyment of the
right to privacy and the right to freedom of opinion and expression;
(c) To take measures to put an end to violations of the right to privacy and to
create the conditions to prevent such violations, including by ensuring that relevant
national legislation complies with their obligations under international human rights
law;
(d) To review, on a regular basis, their procedures, practices and legislation
regarding the surveillance of communications, their interception and the collection of
personal data, including mass surveillance, interception and collection, as well as
regarding the use of profiling, automated decision-making, machine learning and
biometric technologies, with a view to upholding the right to privacy by ensuring the
full and effective implementation of all their obligations under international human
rights law;
(e) To establish or maintain existing independent, effective, adequately
resourced and impartial judicial, administrative and/or parliamentary domestic
oversight mechanisms capable of ensuring transparency, as appropriate, and
accountability for State surveillance of communications, their interception and the
collection of personal data;
(f) To provide individuals whose right to privacy has been violated by
unlawful or arbitrary surveillance with access to an effective remedy, consistent with
international human rights obligations;
(g) To consider developing or maintaining and implementing adequate
legislation, in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, including business
enterprises, international organizations and civil society, with effective sanctions and
appropriate remedies, that protects individuals against violations and abuses of the
right to privacy, namely through the unlawful and arbitrary collection, processing,
retention, sharing or use of personal data by individuals, Governments, business
enterprises and private organizations;
(h) To consider developing or maintaining and implementing legislation,
regulations and policies to ensure that all business enterprises, including social media
enterprises and other online platforms, fully respect the right to privacy and other
relevant human rights in the design, development, deployment and evaluation of
22/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

technologies, including artificial intelligence, and to provide individuals whose rights
may have been violated or abused with access to an effective remedy, including
compensation and guarantees of non-repetition;
(i) To consider adopting or maintaining data protection legislation, regulation
and policies, including on digital communication data, that comply with their
international human rights obligations, which could include the establishment of
national independent authorities with powers and resources to monitor data privacy
practices, investigate violations and abuses and receive communications from
individuals and organizations, and to provide appropriate remedies;
(j) To further develop or maintain, in this regard, preventive measures and
remedies for violations and abuses of the right to privacy in the digital age that may
affect all individuals, including where there are particular effects for women, as well
as children;
(k) To consider developing, reviewing, implementing and strengthening
gender-responsive policies that promote and protect the right of all individuals to
privacy in the digital age;
(l) To provide effective and up-to-date guidance to business enterprises on
how to respect human rights by advising on appropriate methods, including hu man
rights due diligence, and on how to consider effectively issues of gender, vulnerability
and/or marginalization;
(m) To promote quality education and lifelong educational opportunities for
all to foster, inter alia, digital literacy and technical skills to effectively protect their
privacy;
(n) To refrain from requiring business enterprises to take steps that interfere
with the right to privacy in an arbitrary or unlawful way;
(o) To protect individuals from violations or abuses of the right to privacy,
including those which are caused by arbitrary or unlawful data collection, processing,
storage and sharing, profiling and the use of automated processes and machine learning;
(p) To take steps to enable business enterprises to adopt adequate voluntary
transparency measures with regard to requests by State authorities for access to
private user data and information;
(q) To consider developing or to maintain legislation, preventive measures and
remedies addressing harm from the processing, use, sale or multiple resale or other
corporate sharing of personal data without the individual’s free, explicit, meaningful
and informed consent;
(r) To ensure that digital or biometric identity programmes are designed,
implemented and operated after appropriate technical, regulatory, legal and ethical
safeguards are in place and in full compliance with the obligations of States und er
international human rights law;
8.
Calls upon all business enterprises, in particular those that collect, store,
use, share and process data:
(a) To meet their responsibility to respect human rights in accordance with the
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations
“Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework, 21 including the right to privacy in the
digital age, and to enhance efforts in this regard;

__________________
21

22-27607

A/HRC/17/31, annex.
23/116

A/77/463/Add.2

(b) To inform users in a clear, easily accessible and age-appropriate way about
the collection, use, sharing and retention of their data that may affect their right to
privacy, to refrain from doing so without their consent or a legal basis and to establish
and to apply transparency policies that allow for the free, infor med and meaningful
consent of users, as appropriate;
(c) To implement administrative, technical and physical safeguards to ensure
that data are processed lawfully and to ensure that such processing is limited to what
is necessary in relation to the purposes of the processing and that the legitimacy of
such purposes, as well as the accuracy, integrity and confidentiality of the processing,
is ensured;
(d) To ensure that respect for the right to privacy and other international human
rights is incorporated into the design, operation, evaluation and regulation of automated
decision-making and machine-learning technologies and to provide for compensation
for the human rights abuses that they may cause or to which they may contribute;
(e) To ensure that individuals have access to their personal data and to adopt
appropriate measures for the possibility to amend, correct, update, delete and
withdraw consent for the data, in particular if the data are incorrect or inaccurate, or
if the data were obtained illegally;
(f) To put in place adequate safeguards that seek to prevent or mitigate adverse
human rights impacts that are directly linked to their operations, products or services,
including where necessary through contractual clauses or notification of any re levant
entities of abuses or violations when misuse of their products and services is detected;
(g) To enhance efforts to combat discrimination resulting from the use of
artificial intelligence systems, including by exercising due diligence in assessing,
preventing and mitigating the adverse human rights impacts of their deployment;
9.
Encourages business enterprises to work towards enabling technical
solutions to secure and protect the confidentiality of digital communications, which
may include measures for encryption, pseudonymization and anonymity, and calls
upon States not to interfere with the use of such technical solutions, with any
restrictions thereon complying with the obligations of States under international
human rights law, and to enact policies that recognize and protect the privacy of
individuals’ digital communications;
10. Encourages States and, where applicable, business enterprises to
systematically conduct human rights due diligence throughout the life cycle of the
artificial intelligence systems that they conceptualize, design, develop, deploy, sell,
obtain or operate, including regular and comprehensive human rights impact
assessments and the participation of all relevant stakeholders;
11. Encourages all relevant stakeholders to mainstream a gender perspective
into the conceptualization, development and implementation of digital technologies
and related policies and promote the participation of women in order to address
violence and discrimination against women and girls in digital contexts, inter alia, by
encouraging digital technology companies, including Internet service providers, to
respect standards and implement transparent and accessible reporting mechanisms;
12. Emphasizes that, in the digital age, encryption and anonymity tools have
become vital for many journalists and media workers to freely exercise their work
and their enjoyment of human rights, in particular their rights to freedom of
expression and to privacy, including to secure their communications and to protect
the confidentiality of their sources, and calls upon States not to interfere with the use
by journalists and media workers of such technologies and to ensure that any

24/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

restrictions thereon comply with the obligations of States under international human
rights law;
13. Encourages all relevant stakeholders to participate in informal dialogues
about the right to privacy, and takes note with appreciation of the contribution of the
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right to privacy to this
process;
14.
session.

22-27607

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy -ninth

25/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution II
The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in particular, the
determination to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom
and, to that end, to employ international mechanisms for the promotion of the
economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 as well as the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2 and the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights,3
Recalling also the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic and social fields,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986, which confirmed that
the right to development is an inalienable human right and that equality of opportunity
for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who make up
nations, and that the individual is the central subject and beneficiary of development,
Emphasizing the urgent need to make the right to development a reality for
everyone,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated and that they must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on the
same footing and with the same emphasis,
Stressing the importance of the World Conference on Human Rights, held in
Vienna in 1993, and that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 4
reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and inalienable right and an integral
part of fundamental human rights and the individual as the central subject and
beneficiary of development,
Welcoming in this regard the upcoming thirtieth anniversary, in 2023, of the
adoption of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, and stressing the need
to strengthen efforts towards its implementation,
Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality for
everyone, as set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the
General Assembly on 8 September 2000, 5
Recognizing the importance of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 6 reaffirming that the Declaration on the Right to Development
informed the 2030 Agenda, along with other relevant international instruments, and
underlining the fact that the Sustainable Development Goals can be realized only
through a credible, effective and universal commitment to the means of
implementation by all stakeholders,
Recognizing also the successful conclusion of the United Nations Conference
on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 Ibid.
4 A/CONF. 157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
5 Resolution 55/2.
6 Resolution 70/1.
1
2

26/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

17 to 20 October 2016, that recognizes that the New Urban Agenda 7 is grounded in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, international human rights treaties, the
Millennium Declaration and the 2005 World Summit Outcome 8 and is informed by
other instruments such as the Declaration on the Right to Development,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, 9
Reaffirming the universality, indivisibility, interrelatedness, interdependence
and mutually reinforcing nature of all human rights, including civil, cultural,
economic, political and social rights, including the right to development, and that they
must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the
same emphasis,
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples and its outcome document, 10
Deeply concerned that the majority of indigenous peoples in the world live in
conditions of poverty, and recognizing the critical need to address the negative impact
of poverty and inequity on indigenous peoples by ensuring their full and effective
inclusion in development and poverty eradication programmes,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all are interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that
democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine their own
political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all
aspects of their lives, and in that context noting that the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels should
be universal and conducted without conditions attached and th at the international
community should support the strengthening and promotion of democracy,
development and respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all in the
entire world,
Recognizing that inequality is a major obstacle to the realization of the right to
development within and across countries,
Taking note of the commitment declared by a number of specialized agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other international
organizations to make the right to development a reality for all, and in this regard
urging all relevant bodies of the United Nations system and other international
organizations to mainstream the right to development into their objectives, policies,
programmes and operational activities, as well as into development and developmentrelated processes, including the follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries,
Recalling the outcomes adopted at the Tenth Ministerial Conference of the
World Trade Organization, held in Nairobi from 15 to 19 December 2015,
Calling for a successful, development-oriented outcome of the trade
negotiations of the World Trade Organization, in particular on the remaining issues
of the Doha Development Round, as a contribution to the creatio n of international
conditions permitting the full realization of the right to development,
Recalling the outcome of the fourteenth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, held in Nairobi from 17 to 22 July 2016, on
__________________

Resolution 71/256, annex.
Resolution 60/1.
9 Resolution 66/288, annex.
10 Resolution 69/2.
7
8

22-27607

27/116

A/77/463/Add.2

the theme “From decision to action: moving towards an inclusive and equitable global
economic environment for trade and development”, 11
Recalling also all its previous resolutions on the subject, the most recent of
which was resolution 76/163 of 16 December 2021, as well as Human Rights Council
resolutions and those of the Commission on Human Rights on the right to
development, in particular Commission resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998 12 on the
urgent need to make further progress towards the realization of the right to
development,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolution 35/21 of 22 June 2017 on
the contribution of development to the enjoyment of all human rights,13
Recalling the Eighteenth Summit of Heads of State and Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Baku, Republic of Azerbaijan, on 25 and 26 October
2019, and the previous summits and conferences at which the States members of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries stressed the need to operationalize the right to
development as a priority, including through the elaboration of a convention on the
right to development by the relevant machinery, taking into account the
recommendations of relevant initiatives,
Reiterating its continuing support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development14 as a development framework for Africa,
Deeply concerned about the negative impacts of the global economic and
financial crises on the realization of the right to development,
Recognizing that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is one of the
greatest global challenges in the history of the United Nations, and noting with deep
concern its impact on health and the loss of life, mental health and well -being, as well
as the negative impact on global humanitarian needs, the enjoyment of human rights
and across all spheres of society, including on livelihood s, food security and nutrition,
and education, the exacerbation of poverty and hunger, disruption to economies,
trade, societies and environments, and the exacerbation of economic and social
inequalities within and among countries,
Recognizing also that the poorest and most vulnerable are the hardest hit by the
pandemic and that the impact of the crisis will reverse hard -won development gains
and hamper progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, as well
as progress with regard to the right to development,
Deeply concerned about the uneven access of developing countries to safe,
quality, efficacious, effective, accessible and affordable vaccines against COVID-19,
and emphasizing that the realization of the right to development would enha nce the
capacities of developing countries to have equal access to vaccines and other means
to respond to and recover from the pandemic, as well as the need to strengthen the
support for national, bilateral, regional and multilateral initiatives that aim t o
accelerate the development and production of and equitable access to COVID-19
diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines,

__________________

See TD/519, TD/519/Add.1, TD/519/Add. 2 and TD/519/Add. 2/Corr. 1.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
13 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/72/53), chap. V, sect. A.
14 A/57/304, annex.
11
12

28/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Recognizing that, while development facilitates the enjoyment of all human
rights, the lack of development may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of
internationally recognized human rights,
Recognizing also that Member States should cooperate with one another in
ensuring development and eliminating obstacles to development, that the international
community should promote effective international cooperation, in particular to
revitalize a global partnership for development, for the realization of the right to
development and the elimination of obstacles to development and that lasting
progress towards the implementation of the right to development requires effective
development policies at the national level, as well as equitable economic relations
and a favourable economic environment at the international level,
Recognizing further that poverty is an affront to human dignity,
Recognizing that extreme poverty and hunger are among the greatest global
threats and require the collective commitment of the international community for their
eradication, pursuant to Millennium Development Goal 1 and Sustainable Development
Goals 1 and 2, and therefore calling upon the international community, including the
Human Rights Council, to contribute towards achieving that goal,
Recognizing also that historical injustices, inter alia, have contributed to the
poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social exclusion, economic disparity,
instability and insecurity that affect many people in different parts of the world, in
particular in developing countries,
Recognizing further that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is one of the critical elements in the promotion and
realization of the right to development and is the greatest global challenge and an
indispensable requirement for sustainable development, which requires a
multifaceted and integrated approach, and committed to achieving sustainable
development in its three dimensions – economic, social and environmental – in a
balanced and integrated manner,
Emphasizing that all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the
right to development, are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Emphasizing also that the right to development is vital for the full realization of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and should be central to its
implementation,
Encouraging relevant bodies of the United Nations system, within their
respective mandates, including the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations system, relevant international organizations, including the World
Trade Organization, and relevant stakeholders, including civil society organizations,
to give due consideration to the right to development in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and to cooperate with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in the fulfilment of his mandate with regard
to the implementation of the right to development,
1.
Takes note of the consolidated report of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights concerning the promotion and
realization of the right to development; 15
2.
Acknowledges the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization
and realization of the right to development at the international level while urging all
States to undertake at the national level the necessary policy formulation and to
__________________
15

22-27607

A/HRC/51/22.
29/116

A/77/463/Add.2

institute the measures required for the implementation of the right to development as
an integral part of all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3.
Emphasizes the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution
60/251 of 15 March 2006 establishing the Human Rights Council, and in this regard
calls upon the Council to implement the agreement to continue to act to ensure that
its agenda promotes and advances sustainable development, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which seeks to build on the Millennium
Development Goals and complete what they did not achieve, and also in this regard
to lead the raising of the right to development, as set out in paragr aphs 5 and 10 of
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, to the same level as and on a par
with all other human rights and fundamental freedoms;
4.
Supports the realization of the mandate of the Working Group on the Right
to Development, 16 and recognizes the need for renewed efforts with a view to
overcoming the existing political impasse within the Working Group and to fulfil at
the earliest its mandate as established by the Commission on Human Rights in its
resolution 1998/72 and the Human Rights Council in its resolution 4/4 of 30 March
2007;17
5.
Stresses the importance of the core principles contained in the conclusions
of the Working Group at its third session 18 that are congruent with the purpose of
international human rights instruments, such as equality, non-discrimination,
accountability, participation and international cooperation, as critical to mainstreaming
the right to development at the national and international levels, and underlines the
importance of the principles of equity and transparency;
6.

Takes note of the report of the Working Group on its twenty-first session;19

7.
Notes the presentation to the Working Group at its nineteenth session of
the set of standards for the implementation of the right to development prepared by
the Chair-Rapporteur, 20 which is a useful basis for further deliberations on the
implementation and realization of the right to development;
8.
Calls upon Member States to contribute to the efforts of the Working
Group, including, inter alia, on the elaboration of a draft legally binding instrument
on the right to development on the basis of the draft prepared by the Chair-Rapporteur,
as decided by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 42/23 of 27 September
2019,21 and in this regard notes the report of the Chair-Rapporteur entitled “Draft
convention on the right to development”, 22 submitted to the Working Group at its
twenty-first session;
9.
Stresses that it is important that the Chair-Rapporteur and the Working
Group, in the discharge of their mandates, take into account the need:
(a) To promote the democratization of the system of international governance
in order to increase the effective participation of developing countries in in ternational
decision-making;

__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/63/53/Add. 1), chap. I.
17 Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. III, sect. A.
18 See E/CN.4/2002/28/Rev. 1, sect. VIII.A.
19 A/HRC/48/64.
20 A/HRC/WG. 2/17/2.
21 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/74/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
22 A/HRC/WG. 2/21/2.
16

30/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

(b) To also promote effective partnerships such as the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development and other similar initiatives with the developing countries,
particularly the least developed countries, for the purpose of the re alization of their
right to development, including the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals;
(c) To strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the
right to development at the international level, while urging all Stat es to undertake at
the national level the necessary policy formulation and to institute the measures
required for the implementation of the right to development as an integral part of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and also while urging all Sta tes to expand
and deepen mutually beneficial cooperation in ensuring development and eliminating
obstacles to development in the context of promoting effective international
cooperation for the realization of the right to development, bearing in mind that
lasting progress towards the implementation of the right to development requires
effective development policies at the national level and a favourable economic
environment at the international level;
(d) To consider ways and means to continue to ensure the operationalization
of the right to development as a priority, including in the context of the response to
and the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, through equitable and fair access for
all countries, particularly the most vulnerable countries and cou ntries in special
situations, to vaccines and medicines as global public goods, sharing the benefits of
scientific progress, financial and technological support and debt relief;
(e) To mainstream the right to development into the policies and operational
activities of the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
system, as well as in the policies and strategies of the international financial and
multilateral trading systems, bearing in mind in this regard that the core principles of
the international economic, commercial and financial spheres, such as equity,
non-discrimination, transparency, accountability, participation and international
cooperation, including effective partnerships for development, are indispensable in
achieving the right to development and preventing discriminatory treatment arising
from political or other non-economic considerations in addressing the issues of
concern to the developing countries;
10. Encourages the Human Rights Council to continue to consider ho w to
ensure follow-up to the work of the former Subcommission on the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights on the right to development, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Commission on Human Rights and in compliance with decisions to be taken by the
Council;
11. Takes note of the convening, in 2022, of the fifth and sixth sessions the
Expert Mechanism on the Right to Development, established by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution 42/23, and noting the annual report of the Expert Mechanism;23
12. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on the right to development, 24 in which the Special Rapporteur
examines the response to and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic from the
perspective of the right to development at the international level;
13. Stresses that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a
complement to, North-South cooperation and hence should not result in a reduction
of North-South cooperation or hamper progress in fulfilling existing official
development assistance commitments, and encourages Member States and other
__________________
23
24

22-27607

A/HRC/51/36.
A/77/174.
31/116

A/77/463/Add.2

relevant stakeholders to incorporate the right to development into the design,
financing and implementation of cooperation processes;
14. Urges Member States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations system to provide the Special Rapporteur on the right to
development with all the assistance and support necessary for the fulfilment of his
mandate;
15. Reaffirms the commitment to implement the goals and targets set out in all
the outcome documents of the major United Nations conferences and summits and
their review processes, in particular those relating to the realization of the right to
development, recognizing that the realization of the right to development is critical
to achieving the objectives, goals and targets set out in those outcome documents;
16. Also reaffirms that the realization of the right to development is essential
to the implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, which
regards all human rights as universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
places the human person at the centre of development and recognizes that, while
development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, a lack of development may
not be invoked to justify the abridgement of internationally recognized human rights;
17. Further reaffirms that development contributes significantly to the
enjoyment of all human rights by all, and calls upon all countries to realize people centred development of the people, by the people and for the people;
18. Calls upon all States to spare no effort in promoting and protecting all
human rights for all, including the right to development, in particular while
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and responding to and
recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic, as it is conducive to the overall enjoyment
of human rights;
19. Stresses that the primary responsibility for the promotion and protection
of all human rights lies with the State, and reaffirms that States have the primary
responsibility for their own economic and social development and that the role o f
national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
20. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to create national and
international conditions favourable to the realization of the right to development, as
well as their commitment to cooperate with one another to that end;
21. Also reaffirms its commitment to international cooperation and
multilateralism and its strong support for the central role of the United Nations system
in the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic;
22. Further reaffirms its resolution 74/274 of 20 April 2020, in which it
recognized the importance of international cooperation and effective multilateralism
in helping to ensure that all States have in place effective national protective
measures, access to and flow of vital medical supplies, therapeutics, medicines and
vaccines, in order to minimize negative effects in all affected States and to avoid
relapses of the COVID-19 pandemic;
23. Calls upon Member States and relevant stakeholders to strengthen
international cooperation, as well as their support for multilateral efforts and for the
central role of the United Nations system, in order to mobilize a coordinated global
response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse social, economic and financial
impact on all societies that contributes to the realization of the right to development
and leaves no one behind;

32/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

24. Expresses concern about the increasing cases of human rights violations
and abuses by some transnational corporations and other business enterprises,
underlines the need to ensure that appropriate protection, justice and remedies are
provided to the victims of human rights violations and abuses resulting from their
activities, and underscores the fact that these entities must contribute to the means of
implementation for the realization of the right to development;
25. Reaffirms the need for an international environment that is conducive to
the realization of the right to development;
26. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing o bstacles
impeding the full realization of the right to development at both the national and
international levels, including in the context of the response to and the recovery from
the COVID-19 pandemic;
27. Reaffirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and challenges,
the process of globalization remains deficient in achieving the objectives of integrating
all countries into a globalized world, stresses the need for policies and measures at
the national and global levels to respond to the challenges and opportunities of
globalization if this process is to be made fully inclusive and equitable, and
recognizes that globalization has brought disparities between and within countries
and that issues such as trade and trade liberalization, the transfer of technology,
infrastructure development and market access should be managed effectively in order
to mitigate the challenges of poverty and underdevelopment and to make the right to
development a reality for everyone;
28. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the international
community, the gap between developed and developing countries remains unacceptably
wide, that most of the developing countries continue to face difficulties in
participating in the globalization process and that many risk being marginalized and
effectively excluded from its benefits;
29. Expresses its deep concern, in this regard, about the negative impact on
the realization of the right to development owing to the fu rther aggravation of the
economic and social situation, in particular of developing countries, as a result of the
effects of international energy, food and financial crises, as well as the increasing
challenges posed by global climate change and the loss o f biodiversity, which have
increased vulnerabilities and inequalities and have adversely affected development
gains, in particular in developing countries;
30. Encourages Member States to give particular consideration to the right to
development in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
and emphasizes that the 2030 Agenda promotes respect for all human rights, including
the right to development;
31. Recalls the commitment in the United Nations Millennium Declaration of
halving the number of people living in poverty by 2015, notes with concern that some
developing countries have failed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, and
in this regard invites Member States and the international community to take
proactive measures aimed at creating a conducive environment to contribute to the
effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in
particular increasing international cooperation, including partnership and commitment,
between developed and developing countries towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals;
32. Urges developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete
efforts towards meeting the targets of 0.7 per cent of their gross national product for
official development assistance to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of
their gross national product to the least developed countries, and encourages developing

22-27607

33/116

A/77/463/Add.2

countries to build on the progress achieved in ensuring that official development
assistance is used effectively to help to meet development goals and targets;
33. Recognizes the need to address market access for developing countries,
including in the sectors of agriculture, services and non -agricultural products, in
particular those of interest to developing countries;
34. Calls once again for the implementation of a desirable pace of meaningful
trade liberalization, including in areas under negotiation in the World Trade
Organization, the implementation of commitments on implementation -related issues
and concerns, a review of special and differential treatment provisions, with a view
to strengthening them and making them more precise, effective and operational, the
avoidance of new forms of protectionism, and capacity -building and technical
assistance for developing countries as important issues in making progress towards
the effective implementation of the right to development;
35. Recognizes the important link between the international economic,
commercial and financial spheres and the realization of the right t o development,
stresses in this regard the need for good governance and for broadening the base of
decision-making at the international level on issues of development concern and the
need to fill organizational gaps, as well as to strengthen the United Nat ions system
and other multilateral institutions, and also stresses the need to broaden and
strengthen the participation of developing countries and countries with economies in
transition in international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
36. Also recognizes that good governance and the rule of law at the national
level assist all States in the promotion and protection of human rights, including the
right to development, and agrees on the value of the ongoing efforts being made by
States to identify and strengthen good governance practices, including transparent,
responsible, accountable and participatory government, that are responsive and
appropriate to their needs and aspirations, including in the context of agreed
partnership approaches to development, capacity-building and technical assistance;
37. Further recognizes the important role and the rights of women and the
application of a gender perspective as a cross-cutting issue in the process of realizing
the right to development, and notes in particular the positive relationship between the
education of women and their equal participation in the civil, cultural, economic,
political and social activities of the community and the promotion of the right to
development;
38. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, girls and boys
alike, in all policies and programmes and for ensuring the promotion and protection
of those rights, especially in areas relating to health, education and the full
development of their capacities;
39. Recalls the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities
and Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030, adopted on 8 June 2021 at the high -level
meeting of the General Assembly on HIV and AIDS, 25 and underscores the
importance of enhanced international cooperation to support the efforts of Member
States to achieve health goals, including the target of ending the AIDS epidemic by
2030, implement universal access to health-care services and address health
challenges;
40. Also recalls the political declaration of the third high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the prevention and control of non -communicable diseases 26 and
the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
fight against tuberculosis,27 both adopted on 10 October 2018, with their particular
__________________

Resolution 75/284, annex.
Resolution 73/2.
27 Resolution 73/3.
25
26

34/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

focus on development and other challenges and social and economic determinants and
impacts, particularly for developing countries;
41. Further recalls the political declaration of the high-level meeting on
universal health coverage entitled “Universal health coverage: moving together to
build a healthier world”, as adopted in its resolution 74/2 of 10 October 2019, in
which it was reaffirmed that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator
of the social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development
and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
42. Recalls the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,28 which
entered into force on 3 May 2008, and General Assembly resolution 70/1 of
25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”, and, while recognizing persons with disabilities as agents and
beneficiaries of development, stresses the need to take into consideration the rights
of persons with disabilities and the importance of international cooperation in support
of national efforts in the realization of the right to development;
43. Stresses its commitment to indigenous peoples in the process of the
realization of the right to development, reaffirms the commitment to promote their
rights in the areas of education, employment, vocation al training and retraining,
housing, sanitation, health and social security, in accordance with recognized
international human rights obligations and taking into account, as appropriate, the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, a dopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 61/295 of 13 September 2007, and in this regard
recalls the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held in 2014;
44. Recognizes the need for strong partnerships with civil society organizations
and the private sector in pursuit of poverty eradication and development, as well as
for corporate social responsibility;
45. Emphasizes the urgent need to take concrete and effective measures to
prevent, combat and criminalize all forms of corruption at all levels, to prevent, detect
and deter in a more effective manner international transfers of illicitly acquired assets
and to strengthen international cooperation in asset recovery, consistent with the
principles of the United Nations Convention against Co rruption, 29 particularly
chapter V thereof, stresses the importance of a genuine political commitment on the
part of all Governments through a firm legal framework, and in this context urges
States to sign and ratify the Convention as soon as possible and States parties to
implement it effectively;
46. Also emphasizes the need to strengthen further the activities of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the promotion and
realization of the right to development, including by ensuring the effective use of the
financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its mandate, and calls upon the
Secretary-General to provide the Office with the necessary resources;
47. Reaffirms the request to the High Commissioner, in mainstreaming the
right to development, to effectively undertake activities aimed at strengthening the
global partnership for development among Member States, development agencies and
the international development, financial and trade institutions and to reflect those
activities in detail in his next report to the Human Rights Council;
48. Calls upon the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system to mainstream the right to development into their operational
programmes and objectives, and stresses the need for the international financial and
__________________
28
29

22-27607

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
35/116

A/77/463/Add.2

multilateral trading systems to mainstream the right to development into their policies
and objectives;
49. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States, United Nations organs and bodies, the specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, international
development and financial institutions, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions,
and non-governmental organizations;
50. Encourages relevant bodies of the United Nations system, within their
respective mandates, including the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations system, relevant international organizations, including the World
Trade Organization, and relevant stakeholders, including civil society organizations,
to give due consideration to the right to development in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to contribute further to the work of the
Working Group on the Right to Development and the Special Rapporteur on the right
to development and to cooperate with the High Commissioner in the fulfilment of his
mandate with regard to the implementation of the right to development;
51. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly
at its seventy-eighth session and an interim report to the Human Rights Council on
the implementation of the present resolution, including on efforts undertaken at the
national, regional and international levels in the pro motion and realization of the right
to development, taking into account the context of the response to and the recovery
from the COVID-19 pandemic, through equitable and fair access for all countries, in
particular the most vulnerable countries and countries in special situations, to safe,
quality, efficacious, effective, accessible and affordable vaccines and medicines as
global public goods, as well as to promote global extensive immunization against
COVID-19, sharing the benefits of scientific progress, financial and technological
support and debt relief, and invites the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group and
the Special Rapporteur to present an oral report with a similar scope and to engage in
an interactive dialogue with the Assembly at its seventy -eighth session.

36/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution III
Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as well as
relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,1 for enhancing genuine
cooperation among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recalling its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our
world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which the General
Assembly adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals,
Recalling also its adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration on
8 September 2000, 2 its resolution 76/159 of 16 December 2021, Human Rights
Council resolution 50/4 of 7 July 2022 3 and the resolutions of the Commission on
Human Rights on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights,
Recalling further the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August
to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to
24 April 2009, and the political declarations of the high -level meetings of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth 4 and twentieth 5 anniversaries of the adoption of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, and their role in the enhancement
of international cooperation in the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United
Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human rights,
Recognizing also that the promotion and protection of human rights should be
based on the principle of cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at
strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their human rights
obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Underlining that cooperation is not just a matter of relations of good neighbourliness, coexistence or reciprocity, but rather of a willingness to look beyond
mutual interests in order to advance the general interest,
Stressing the importance of international cooperation for improving the living
conditions of all in every country, including, in particular, in developing countries,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the field
of human rights could contribute greatly to the enhancement of international
cooperation in this field,

__________________

A/CONF. 157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution 55/2.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/77/53), chap. VIII, sect. A.
4 Resolution 66/3.
5 Resolution 76/1.
1
2

22-27607

37/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Reiterating the important role that genuine human rights dialogue can play in
the enhancement of cooperation in the field of human rights at the bilateral, regional
and international levels,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation and genuine
dialogue contributes to the effective functioning of the international human rights
system,
Emphasizing that human rights dialogue should be constructive and based on the
principles of universality, indivisibility, objectivity, non -selectivity, non-politicization,
mutual respect and equal treatment, with the aim of facilitating mutual understanding
and strengthening constructive cooperation, including through capacity -building and
technical cooperation between States,
Emphasizing also the need for further progress in the promotion and
encouragement of respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
through, inter alia, international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation,
transparency and confidence-building are important elements in all activities for the
promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the adoption of resolution 2000/22 of 18 August 2000, on the
promotion of dialogue on human rights issues, by the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-second session,6
Welcoming the upcoming thirtieth anniversary, in 2023, of the adoption of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action by the World Conference on Human
Rights, and stressing the need to strengthen efforts towards its implementation,
1.
Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the
responsibility of all Member States to promote, protect and encourage respect for all
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all through, inter alia, international
cooperation;
2.
Recognizes that, in addition to their separate responsibilities to their
individual societies, States have a collective responsibility to uphold the principles of
human dignity, equality and equity at the global level;
3.
Reaffirms that dialogue among cultures and civilizations facilitates the
promotion of a culture of peace, tolerance and respect for diversity, and welcomes in
this regard the holding of conferences and meetings at the national, regional and
international levels on dialogue among civilizations;
4.
Also reaffirms the duty of States to cooperate with one another in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations in the promotion of universal
respect for and observance of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
including with respect to the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and all
forms of religious intolerance;
5.
Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order
based on inclusion, justice, equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding
and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and universal human rights and to
reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance;
6.
Reaffirms the importance of the enhancement of international cooperation
for the promotion and protection of human rights and for the achievement of the
__________________
6

38/116

See E/CN.4/2001/2-E /CN.4/Sub. 2/2000/46, chap. II, sect. A.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

objectives of the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
7.
Considers that international cooperation in the field of human rights, in
conformity with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter and international
law, should make an effective and practical contribution to the urgent task of
preventing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
8.
Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all should be guided by the principles of
universality, non-selectivity, cooperation and genuine dialogue, objectivity and
transparency, in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles set out in the
Charter;
9.
Emphasizes the importance of the universal periodic review as a
mechanism based on cooperation and constructive dialogue with the objective of,
inter alia, improving the situation of human rights on the ground and promoting the
fulfilment of the human rights obligations and commitments undertaken by States;
10. Also emphasizes the need for a cooperative and constructive approach on
the part of all stakeholders to resolving human rights issues in international forums;
11. Further emphasizes the role of international cooperation in support of
national efforts and in increasing the capacities of Member States in the field of
human rights through, inter alia, the enhancement of their cooperation with human
rights mechanisms, including through the provision of technical assistance, upon the
request of and in accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned;
12. Calls upon Member States, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental
organizations to continue to carry out a constructive dialogue and consultations for
the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and protection of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and encourages non-governmental
organizations to contribute actively to this endeavour;
13. Urges States to take measures necessary to enhance bilateral, regional and
international cooperation aimed at addressing the adverse impact of consecutive an d
compounded global crises, such as financial and economic crises, food crises, climate
change and natural disasters, on the full enjoyment of human rights;
14. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and
procedures to continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation,
understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human
rights;
15. Encourages all Member States and the United Nations system to explore
and foster complementarities among North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation aiming at the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to consult States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations on ways and means, as well as on obstacles and
challenges and possible proposals to overcome them, for the enhancement of
international cooperation and genuine dialogue in the United Na tions human rights
machinery, including the Human Rights Council;
17.
session.

22-27607

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy -eighth

39/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution IV
Human rights and unilateral coercive measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on this subject, the most recent of which
was resolution 76/161 of 16 December 2021, and Human Rights Council decision
18/120 of 30 September 2011 1 and resolutions 24/14 of 27 September 2013,2 27/21
of 26 September 2014,3 30/2 of 1 October 2015,4 36/10 of 28 September 2017,5 37/21
of 23 March 2018,6 40/3 of 21 March 2019,7 43/15 of 22 June 2020,8 46/5 of 23 March
2021 9 and 49/6 of 31 March 2022,10 as well as previous resolutions of the Council
and the Commission on Human Rights,
Reaffirming the pertinent principles and provisions contained in the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States proclaimed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, in particular article 32 thereof, in
which it declared that no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political
or any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights,
Recalling the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions 52/120 of 12 December 1997 11 and 55/110 of 4 December
2000,12
Stressing that unilateral coercive measures and legislation are contrary to
international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States,
Recognizing the universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated character
of all human rights, and in this regard reaffirming the right to development as an
integral part of all human rights,
Recalling the Final Document of the Sixteenth Ministerial Conference and
Commemorative Meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Bali,
Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011, 13 the Final Document of the Eighteenth Summit
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Baku,
Azerbaijan, on 25 and 26 October 2019, 14 and the documents adopted at previous
summits and conferences, in which States members of the Movement agreed to
oppose and condemn unilateral coercive measures and their continued application,
persevere with efforts to effectively reverse them, urge other States to do likewise, as
called for by the General Assembly and other organs of the United Nations, and
request States applying those measures or laws to revoke them fully and immediately,
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and
corrigendum (A/66/53/Add. 1 and A/66/53/Add. 1/Corr.1), chap. III.
2 Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
3 Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1,
A/69/53/Add.1/Corr. 1 and A/69/53/Add. 1/Corr. 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
4 Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
5 Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
6 Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
7 Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
8 Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/75/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
9 Ibid., Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/76/53), chap. V, sect. A.
10 Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/77/53), chap. VI, sect. A.
11 A/53/293 and A/53/293/Add. 1.
12 A/56/207 and A/56/207/Add. 1.
13 A/65/896-S/2011/407, annex I.
14 A/74/548, annex.
1

40/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Recalling also that, at the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna
from 14 to 25 June 1993, States were called upon to refrain from any unilateral
measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter that creates
obstacles to trade relations among States and impedes the full realization of all human
rights 15 and also severely threatens the freedom of trade,
Bearing in mind all the references to this question in the Copenhagen Declara tion
on Social Development, adopted by the World Summit for Social Development on
12 March 1995,16 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, adopted by the
Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995, 17 the Quito Declaration
on Sustainable Cities and Human Settlements for All and the Quito implementation plan
for the New Urban Agenda, adopted by the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III) on 20 October 2016,18 and in the outcome
document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which
States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international law and
the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and
social development, particularly in developing countries,
Expressing concern about the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures
on international relations, trade, investment and cooperation,
Recognizing that unilateral coercive measures disproportionally affect people in
vulnerable situations, and in this regard expressing grave concern that, in some
countries, the situation of children is adversely affected by unilateral measures not in
accordance with international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade
relations among States, impede the full realization of social and economic
development and hinder the well-being of the population in the affected countries,
with particular consequences for women, children, including adolescents, the elderly
and persons with disabilities,
Deeply concerned that, despite the recommendations adopted on this question
by the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the Commission on Human
Rights and recent major United Nations conferences, and contrary to general
international law and the Charter, unilateral coercive measures continue to be
promulgated and implemented, with all their negative implications for the social
humanitarian activities and economic and social development of developing
countries, including their extraterritorial effects, thereby creating additional obstacles
to the full enjoyment of all human rights by peoples and individuals und er the
jurisdiction of other States,
Bearing in mind all the extraterritorial effects of any unilateral legislative,
administrative and economic measures, policies and practices of a coercive nature
against the development process and the enhancement of h uman rights in developing
countries, which create obstacles to the full realization of all human rights,

__________________

See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
17 Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
18 Resolution 71/256, annex.
15
16

22-27607

41/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Reaffirming that unilateral coercive measures are a major obstacle to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development 19 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recognizing that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is one of the
greatest global challenges in the history of the United Nations, and noting with deep
concern its impact on health and the loss of life, mental health and well-being, as well
as the negative impact on global humanitarian needs, the enjoyment of human rights
and across all spheres of society, including on livelihoods, food security and nutrition,
and education, the exacerbation of poverty and hung er, disruption to economies,
trade, societies and environments, and the exacerbation of economic and social
inequalities within and among countries,
Recognizing also that the poorest and those who may be vulnerable or in
vulnerable situations, within and among countries, are the hardest hit by the pandemic
and that the impact of the crisis will reverse hard-won development gains and hamper
progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as progress
with regard to the right to development,
Deeply concerned about the situation of States facing both unilateral coercive
measures, which are not in accordance with international law or the Charter, and the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and recognizing that such States have to
overcome additional obstacles derived from the application of unilateral coercive
measures in order to respond to and recover from the pandemic,
Recognizing the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures, which are not
in accordance with international law or the Charter, on global efforts to respond to
and recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and on the capacities of targeted countries
to have equal access to safe, quality, efficacious, effective, accessible and affordable
vaccines and other means to respond to and recover from the COVI D-19 pandemic,
Concerned about the fact that the frequency, type, target and scope of
application of unilateral coercive measures, which are not in accordance with
international law or the Charter, have expanded enormously in the international arena,
Recalling article 1, paragraph 2, common to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights 20 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,21 which provides, inter alia, that in no case may a people be deprived
of its own means of subsistence,
Noting the continuing efforts of the open-ended Working Group on the Right to
Development of the Human Rights Council, and reaffirming in particular its criteria,
according to which unilateral coercive measures are one of the obstacles to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
1.
Urges all States to cease adopting or implementing any unilateral measures
not in accordance with international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations
among States, in particular those of a coercive nature, with all their extraterritorial
effects, which create obstacles to trade relations among States, thus impeding the full
realization of the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 22 and
other international human rights instruments, in particular the right of individuals and
peoples to development;
__________________

Resolution 41/128, annex.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
21 Ibid.
22 Resolution 217 A (III).
19
20

42/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

2.
Strongly urges States to refrain from promulgating and applying any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international
law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of sustainable economic and
social development, particularly in developing countries;
3.
Condemns the inclusion of Member States in unilateral lists under false
pretexts, which are contrary to international law and the Charter, including false
allegations of terrorism sponsorship, considering such lists as instruments for political
or economic pressure against Member States, particularly developing countries;
4.
Urges all States not to adopt any unilateral measures not in accordance
with international law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of economic
and social development by the population of the affected co untries, in particular
children and women, that hinder their well-being and that create obstacles to the full
enjoyment of their human rights, including the right of everyone to a standard of
living adequate for his or her health and well-being and his or her right to food,
medical care and education and the necessary social services, as well as to ensure that
food and medicine are not used as tools for political pressure;
5.
Strongly objects to the extraterritorial nature of those measures which, in
addition, threaten the sovereignty of States, and in this context calls upon all Member
States neither to recognize those measures nor to apply them, as well as to take
administrative or legislative measures, as appropriate, to counteract the
extraterritorial applications or effects of unilateral coercive measures;
6.
Condemns the continuing unilateral application and enforcement by
certain Powers of unilateral coercive measures, and rejects those measures, with all
their extraterritorial effects, as being tools for political or economic pressure against
any country, in particular against developing countries, adopted with a view to
preventing those countries from exercising their right to decide, of their own free will,
their own political, economic and social systems, and because of the negative effects
of those measures on the realization of all the human rights of vast sectors of their
populations, in particular children, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities;
7.
Expresses grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children
is adversely affected by unilateral measures not in accordance with international law
and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations among States, impede the full
realization of social and economic development and hinder the well-being of the
population in the affected countries, with particular consequences for women,
children, including adolescents, the elderly and persons with disabilities;
8.
Reaffirms that essential goods such as food and medicines, including
vaccines, should not be used as tools for political coercion, in particular in the context
of global health challenges, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and that under no
circumstances should people be deprived of their own means of subsistence and
development;
9.
Also reaffirms its resolution 74/274 of 20 April 2020, in which it
recognized the importance of international cooperation and effective multilateralism
in helping to ensure that all States have in place effective national protective
measures, access to and flow of vital medical supplies, medicines and vaccines, in
order to minimize negative effects in all affected States and to avoid relapses of the
COVID-19 pandemic;
10. Recognizes the role of extensive immunization against COVID-19 as a
global public good for health in preventing, containing and stopping transmission in
order to bring the pandemic to an end, through safe, quality, efficacious, effective,
accessible and affordable vaccines for all, including countries affected by unilateral
coercive measures, which are not in accordance with international law or the Charter;
22-27607

43/116

A/77/463/Add.2

11. Welcomes the appeal made by the Secretary-General, on 26 March 2020,
on the waiving of sanctions that undermine countries’ capacity to respond to the
COVID-19 pandemic and the statement made by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, on 23 March, on the need to ease or suspend
sectoral sanctions in the light of their potentially debilitating impact on the health
sector and human rights;
12. Reaffirms its commitment to international cooperation and multilateralism
and its strong support for the central role of the United Nations system in the global
response to and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic;
13. Emphasizes that the COVID-19 pandemic has revealed the short- and longterm impacts of unilateral coercive measures, which are not in accordance with
international law or the Charter, on the enjoyment of all categories of civil, economic,
social and cultural rights;
14. Calls upon Member States that have initiated such measures to abide by the
principles of international law, the Charter, the declarations of the United Nations and
world conferences and relevant resolutions and to commit themselves to their
obligations and responsibilities arising from the international human rights instruments
to which they are parties by revoking such measures at the earliest possible time ;
15. Reaffirms, in this context, the right of all peoples to self-determination, by
virtue of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development;
16. Recalls that, according to the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and the relevant principles and provisions
contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, proclaimed by the
Assembly in its resolution 3281 (XXIX), in particular article 32 thereof, no State may
use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other type of measures to
coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its
sovereign rights and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
17. Rejects all attempts to introduce unilateral coercive measures, and urges
the Human Rights Council to take fully into account the negative impact of those
measures, including through the enactment and extraterritorial application of national
laws that are not in conformity with international law, in its task concerning the
implementation of the right to development;
18. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
discharging his functions relating to the promotion, realization and protection of the
right to development and bearing in mind the continuing impact of unilateral coercive
measures on the population of developing countries, to give priority to the present
resolution in his annual report to the General Assembly;
19. Underlines the fact that unilateral coercive measures are one of the major
obstacles to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 23 and in this regard calls upon all
States to avoid the unilateral imposition of economic coercive measures and the
extraterritorial application of national laws that run counter to the principles of free
trade and hamper the development of developing countries, as recognized by the openended Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights Council;

__________________
23

44/116

Resolution 70/1.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

20. Recognizes that, in the Declaration of Principles adopted at the first phase
of the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to
12 December 2003, 24 States were strongly urged to avoid and refrain from any
unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations in building the information society;
21. Reaffirms paragraph 30 of the outcome document of the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which
States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international law and
the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and
social development, particularly in developing countries;
22. Recalls the decision of the Human Rights Council, in its resolution 27/21,
to appoint a Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive
measures on the enjoyment of human rights, and welcomes the work done in
delivering her mandate;
23. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of
human rights; 25
24. Recalls the decision taken by the Human Rights Council, in its resolution
45/5, to extend, for a period of three years, the mandate of the Special Rapporteur as
set out in Council resolution 27/21;
25. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide all the human and financial resources
necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, and
also requests them, in discharging their functions in relation to the promotion and
protection of human rights, to pay due attention and to gi ve urgent consideration to
the present resolution;
26. Recalls that the Human Rights Council took note of the research -based
progress report of its Advisory Committee containing recommendations on
mechanisms to assess the negative impact of unilateral coe rcive measures on the
enjoyment of human rights and to promote accountability; 26
27. Also recalls the contribution of the first biennial panel discussion on the
issue of unilateral coercive measures and human rights organized by the Human
Rights Council in 2015 to increase awareness of the negative impact that unilateral
coercive measures have on the enjoyment of human rights in the targeted and
non-targeted countries, and invites the Council to follow up on the discussion at the
fourth panel discussion, in 2021;
28. Invites the Human Rights Council and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue paying attention to and explore ways to
address the negative impact of the application of unilateral coercive measures;
29. Reiterates its support for the invitation of the Human Rights Council to all
special rapporteurs and existing thematic mechanisms of the Council in the field of
economic, social and cultural rights to pay due attention, within the scope of their
respective mandates, to the negative impact and consequences of unilateral coercive
measures;
__________________

A/C.2/59/3, annex, chap. I, sect. A.
A/77/296.
26 A/HRC/28/74.
24
25

22-27607

45/116

A/77/463/Add.2

30. Takes note with interest of the proposals contained in the report of the
Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the
enjoyment of human rights, and requests the Special Rapporteur to include in her
report to the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session more information on the
process regarding the discussions of her proposals at the Human Rights Council;
31. Reaffirms the request of the Human Rights Council that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights organize a workshop on the
impact of the application of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human
rights by the affected populations, including in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic, in the States targeted;
32. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution and
on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the full enjoyment of human
rights, including in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and the access of targeted
countries to vaccines;
33. Invites Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of her mandate through, inter alia, the submission of comments and
suggestions on the implications and negative effects of unilateral coercive measures
on the full enjoyment of human rights;
34. Decides to examine the question on a priority basis at its seventy -eighth
session under the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.

46/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution V
Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of a democratic and
equitable international order, including resolution 76/165 of 16 December 2021, and
Human Rights Council resolutions 18/6 of 29 September 2011,1 33/3 of 29 September
2016, 2 36/4 of 28 September 2017, 3 39/4 of 27 September 2018, 4 42/8 of
26 September 2019,5 45/4 of 6 October 2020,6 48/8 of 8 October 2021 7 and 51/11 of
6 October 2022,8
Reaffirming the commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote
universal respect for, and observance and protection of, all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
other instruments relating to human rights and international law,
Affirming that the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion
and protection of all human rights for all should continue to be carried out in full
conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and international law, as
set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter, and with full respect for, inter alia,
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence, the non -use of force or the
threat of force in international relations and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State,
Recalling the Preamble to the Charter, in particular the determination to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human pers on and
in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small,
Reaffirming that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which
the rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 9 can
be fully realized,
Reaffirming also the determination expressed in the Preamble to the Charter to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources
of international law can be maintained, to promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom, to practise tolerance and good -neighbourliness
and to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples,
Stressing that the responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social
issues, including pandemics and other health-related global challenges, as well as
threats to international peace and security, must be shared among the nations of the
world and should be exercised multilaterally, and that in this regard the central role
must be played by the United Nations, as the most universal and representative
organization in the world,
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and
corrigendum (A/66/53/Add. 1 and A/66/53/Add. 1/Corr.1), chap. II.
2 Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add. 1 and
A/71/53/Add.1/Corr. 1), chap. II.
3 Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
4 Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
5 Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
6 Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/75/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
7 Ibid., Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/76/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
8 Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 53A (A/77/53/Add.1), chap. III.
9 Resolution 217 A (III).
1

22-27607

47/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Concerned about the continued abuse by Member States of the extraterritorial
application of their national legislation in a manner that affects the sovereignty of
other States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction and
the full enjoyment of human rights,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the
aspirations of all peoples for an international order based on the principles enshrined
in the Charter, including promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all and respect for the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law,
pluralism, development, better standards of living and solidarity,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United
Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human rights for all,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims that all
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any kind,
such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opi nion, national or
social origin, property, birth or other status,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that
democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine their own
political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all
aspects of their lives,
Recognizing that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based
on the principle of cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at strengthening the
capacity of Member States to comply with their human rights obligations for the
benefit of all human beings,
Emphasizing that democracy is not only a political concept, but that it also has
economic and social dimensions,
Recognizing that democracy, respect for all human rights, including the right to
development, transparent and accountable governance and administration in all
sectors of society and effective participation by civil society are an essential part of
the necessary foundations for the realization of social and people -centred sustainable
development,
Welcoming in this regard the upcoming thirtieth anniversary, in 2023, of the
adoption of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 10 by the World
Conference on Human Rights, and stressing the need to strengthen efforts towards its
implementation,
Noting with concern that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance may be aggravated by, inter alia, inequitable di stribution of wealth,
marginalization and social exclusion,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations could
contribute greatly to the enhancement of international cooperation at all levels,
Underlining the fact that it is imperative for the international community to
ensure that globalization becomes a positive force for all the world’s people and that
only through broad and sustained efforts, based on our common humanity in all its
diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable,
__________________
10

48/116

A/CONF. 157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Deeply concerned that the current global economic, financial, energy and food
crises, resulting from a combination of several major factors, including
macroeconomic and other factors, such as environmental degradation, desertification
and global climate change, natural disasters and the lack of financial resources and
the technology necessary to confront their negative impact in developing countries,
particularly in the least developed countries and small island developing States,
represent a global scenario that is threatening the adequate enjoyment of all human
rights and widening the gap between developed and developing countries,
Recognizing that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is one of the
greatest global challenges in the history of the United Nations, a nd noting with deep
concern its impact on health and the loss of life, mental health and well -being, as well
as the negative impact on global humanitarian needs, the enjoyment of human rights
and across all spheres of society, including on livelihoods, foo d security and nutrition,
and education, the exacerbation of poverty and hunger, disruption to economies,
trade, societies and environments, and the exacerbation of economic and social
inequalities within and among countries, which is reversing hard -won development
gains and hampering progress towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development11 and all its Goals and targets,
Reaffirming its commitment to international cooperation and multilateralism and
its strong support for the central role of the United Nations system, recognizing the
key leadership role of the World Health Organization in the global response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, and recognizing also that a democratic and equitable
international order enhances the capacities of all countries to respond to and recover
from the pandemic and other global challenges,
Recognizing the role of extensive immunization against COVID-19 as a global
public good for health in preventing, containing and stopping transmission in order
to bring the pandemic to an end, through global access to vaccines that are safe, of
quality, efficacious, effective and affordable for all countries,
Deeply concerned about the uneven access of developing countries to safe,
quality, efficacious, effective and affordable vaccines against COVID-19, and
emphasizing that a multilateral approach, based on a democratic and equitable
international order, enhances the capacities of all countries, in particular developing
countries, to have equal access to vaccines and other means to respond to and recover
from the pandemic,
Recognizing that a democratic and equitable order requires the reform of
international financial institutions, in order to widen and strengthen the level of
participation of developing countries in the interna tional decision-making process,
and a more transparent and open financial system, as well as adequate measures
against illicit financial flows, such as tax fraud, tax evasion, illegal capital flight,
money-laundering and the proceeds of corruption, and for improving tax transparency
worldwide,
Stressing that efforts to make globalization fully inclusive and equitable must
include policies and measures at the global level that correspond to the needs of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition and are formulated
and implemented with their effective participation,
Stressing also the need for adequate financing of, technology transfer to and
capacity-building in developing countries, in particular the least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, including to
support their efforts to adapt to climate change,
__________________
11

22-27607

Resolution 70/1.
49/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Having listened to the peoples of the world, and recognizing their aspirations to
justice, to equality of opportunity for all, to th e enjoyment of their human rights,
including the right to development, to live in peace and freedom and to equal
participation without discrimination in economic, social, cultural, civil and political
life,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 on institution-building of the
Council and 5/2 on the Code of Conduct for Special Procedures Mandate Holders of
the Council of 18 June 2007,12 and stressing that all mandate holders shall discharge
their duties in accordance with those resolutions and the a nnexes thereto,
Emphasizing the importance of the 2030 Agenda for the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order,
Resolved to take all measures within its power to secure a democratic and
equitable international order,
1.
Affirms that everyone is entitled to a democratic and equitable
international order;
2.
Also affirms that a democratic and equitable international order fosters the
full realization of all human rights for all;
3.
Takes note of the report of the Independent Expert of the Human Rights
Council on the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order; 13
4.
Calls upon all Member States to fulfil their commitment expressed in
Durban, South Africa, during the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to maximize the benefits of
globalization through, inter alia, the strengthening and enhancement of inte rnational
cooperation to increase equality of opportunities for trade, economic growth and
sustainable development, global communications through the use of new technologies
and increased intercultural exchange through the preservation and promotion of
cultural diversity,14 and reiterates that only through broad and sustained efforts to
create a shared future based upon our common humanity and all its diversity can
globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable;
5.
Reaffirms that democracy includes respect for all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all and is a universal value based on the freely expressed
will of people to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems
and their full participation in all aspects of their lives, and re-emphasizes the need for
universal adherence to and implementation of the rule of law at both the national and
international levels;
6.
Affirms that a democratic and equitable international order requires, inter
alia, the realization of the following:
(a) The right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they can
freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and
cultural development;
(b) The right of peoples and nations to permanent sovereig nty over their
natural wealth and resources;
(c)

The right of every human person and all peoples to development;

(d)

The right of all peoples to peace;

__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
13 A/HRC/51/32.
14 See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF. 189/12/Corr. 1, chap. I.
12

50/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

(e) The right to an international economic order based on equal participation
in the decision-making process, interdependence, mutual interest, solidarity and
cooperation among all States;
(f)

International solidarity, as a right of peoples and individuals;

(g) The promotion and consolidation of transparent, democratic, just and
accountable international institutions in all areas of cooperation, in particular through
the implementation of the principle of full and equal participation in their respective
decision-making mechanisms;
(h) The right to equitable participation of all, without any discrimination, in
domestic and global decision-making;
(i) The principle of equitable regional and gender-balanced representation in
the composition of the staff of the United Nations system;
(j) The promotion of a free, just, effective and balanced international
information and communications order based on international cooperation for the
establishment of a new equilibrium and greater reciprocity in the international flow
of information, in particular correcting the inequalities in the flow of informa tion to
and from developing countries;
(k) Respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all, since this
enhances cultural pluralism, contributes to a wider exchange of knowledge and
understanding of cultural backgrounds, advances the applicat ion and enjoyment of
universally accepted human rights across the world and fosters stable, friendly
relations among peoples and nations worldwide;
(l) The right of every person and all peoples to a healthy environment and to
enhanced international cooperation that responds effectively to the needs for
assistance of national efforts to adapt to climate change, particularly in developing
countries, and that promotes the fulfilment of international agreements in the field of
mitigation;
(m) The promotion of equitable access to benefits from the international
distribution of wealth through enhanced international cooperation, in particular in
international economic, commercial and financial relations;
(n) The enjoyment by everyone of ownership of the common h eritage of
humankind in connection to the public right of access to culture;
(o) The shared responsibility of the nations of the world for managing
worldwide economic and social development, including addressing pandemics and
other health-related global challenges, as well as threats to international peace and
security, which should be exercised multilaterally;
7.
Stresses the importance of preserving the rich and diverse nature of the
international community of nations and peoples, as well as respect for national and
regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds, in
the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights;
8.
Also stresses that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights globally
in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis, and
reaffirms that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and v arious
historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of
States, regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all;

22-27607

51/116

A/77/463/Add.2

9.
Reaffirms, among other principles, the sovereign equality of States,
non-intervention and non-interference in internal affairs;
10. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order
based on inclusion, social justice, equality and equity, human dignity, solidarity,
mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and
universal human rights and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
11. Reaffirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance
and strengthening of international peace and security and, to that end, should do their
utmost to achieve general and complete disarmament under effective international
control, as well as to ensure that the resources released by effective disarmament
measures are used for comprehensive development, in particular that of the
developing countries;
12. Underlines that attempts to overthrow legitimate Governments by force
disrupt the democratic and constitutional order, the legitimate exercise of power and
the full enjoyment of human rights, and reaffirms that every State has an inalienable
right to choose its political, economic, social and cultural system, without interference
in any form by other States;
13. Reaffirms the need to continue working urgently for the establishment of
a new international economic order based on equity, sovereign equality,
interdependence, common interest and cooperation among all States, irrespective of
their economic and social systems, which shall correct inequalities and redress
existing injustices, make it possible to eliminate the widening gap between the
developed and the developing countries and ensure steadily accelerating economic
and social development and peace and justice for present and future generations, in
accordance with relevant previous General Assembly resolutions, programmes of
action and major conferences and summits in the economic, social and related areas;
14. Also reaffirms that the international community should devise ways and
means to remove the current obstacles and meet the challenges to the full realization
of all human rights for all and to prevent the continuation of human rights violations
resulting therefrom throughout the world;
15. Urges States to continue their efforts, through enhanced international
cooperation, towards the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order;
16. Calls upon Member States to continue to support international cooperation
and multilateral efforts, under the leadership of the United Nations system and in
particular the World Health Organization, and to work with all relevant actors to
mobilize a coordinated global response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse
social, economic and financial impact on all societies that contributes to a more
democratic and equitable international order;
17. Affirms that a democratic and equitable international order, as prescribed
in the Charter of the United Nations, cannot be achieved only through the dere gulation
of trade, markets and financial services;
18. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide all the human and financial
resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mand ate of the Independent
Expert;
19. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Independent
Expert in his task, to supply all necessary information requested by him and to
consider responding favourably to the requests of the Independent Ex pert to visit their
countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more effectively;
52/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

20. Requests the Human Rights Council, the human rights treaty bodies, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the special
mechanisms extended by the Council and the Human Rights Council Advisory
Committee to pay due attention, within their respective mandates, to the present
resolution and to make contributions towards its implementation;
21. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to build upon the issue
of the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States, United Nations organs, bodies and components,
intergovernmental organizations, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and
non-governmental organizations and to disseminate it on the widest possible basis;
23. Requests the Independent Expert to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, and
on the role of a democratic and equitable international order in facilitating the
recovery of developing countries from the COVID-19 pandemic, including their equal
access to safe, quality, efficacious, effective and affordable vaccines;
24. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its seventy -eighth
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.

22-27607

53/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution VI
Promotion of peace as a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of
all human rights by all
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 65/222 of 21 December 2010, 67/173 of 20 December
2012, 69/176 of 18 December 2014, 73/170 of 17 December 2018 and 75/177 of
16 December 2020 and Human Rights Council resolutions 20/15 of 5 July 2012,1 23/16
of 13 June 2013, 2 27/17 of 25 September 2014, 3 30/12 of 1 October 2015, 4 35/4 of
22 June 2017 5 and 41/4 of 11 July 2019,6 entitled “Promotion of the right to peace”,
Recalling also its resolution 39/11 of 12 November 1984, entitled “Declaration
on the Right of Peoples to Peace”, and the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 7
Determined to foster strict respect for the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations is to achieve
international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Underlining, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, its full and active support for the United Nations and for the enhancement of
its role and effectiveness in strengthening international peace and security and justice
and in promoting the solution of international problems, as well as the development
of friendly relations and cooperation among States,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to settle their international disputes by
peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are
not endangered,
Emphasizing its objective of promoting better relations among all States and
contributing to setting up conditions in which their people can live in true and lasting
peace, free from any threat to or attempt against their security,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to refrain in their international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
Reaffirming its commitment to peace and security and justice and the continuing
development of friendly relations and cooperation among States,
Rejecting the use of violence in pursuit of political aims, and stressing that only
peaceful political solutions can ensure a stable and democratic future for all people
around the world,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring respect for the principles of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of States and
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigenda (A/67/53, A/67/53/Corr.1 and A/67/53/Corr.2), chap. IV, sect. A.
2 Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
3 Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1,
A/69/53/Add.1/Corr. 1 and A/69/53/Add. 1/Corr. 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
4 Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
5 Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. V, sect. A.
6 Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. V, sect. A.
7 Resolution 55/2.
1

54/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

non-intervention in matters that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State, in accordance with the Charter and international law,
Reaffirming also that all peoples have the right to self-determination, by virtue
of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic,
social and cultural development,
Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations,8
Recognizing that peace and development are mutually reinforcing, including in
the prevention of armed conflict,
Affirming that human rights include social, economic and cultural rights and the
right to peace, a healthy environment and development, and that development is in
fact the realization of those rights,
Underlining the fact that the subjection of peoples to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation constitutes a denial of fundamental rights, is contrary to
the Charter and is an impediment to the promotion of world peace and cooperation,
Recalling that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which
the rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 9 can
be fully realized,
Convinced of the aim of creating conditions of stability and well-being, which
are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principles of equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
Convinced also that life without war is the primary international prerequisite for
the material well-being, development and progress of countries and for the full
implementation of the rights and fundamental human freedoms proclaimed by the
United Nations,
Convinced further that international cooperation in the field of human rights
contributes to creating an international environment of peace and stability,
1.
Reaffirms the Declaration on the Right to Peace, 10 adopted by the General
Assembly on 19 December 2016, and invites States, agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
disseminate the Declaration and to promote universal respect and understanding thereof;
2.

Also reaffirms that the peoples of our planet have a sacred right to peace;

3.
Further reaffirms that the preservation of the right of peoples to peace and
the promotion of its implementation constitute a fundamental obligation of all States;
4.
Stresses that peace is a vital requirement for the promotion and protection
of all human rights for all;
5.
Also stresses that the deep fault line that divides human society between the
rich and the poor and the ever-increasing gap between the developed and developing
worlds pose a major threat to global prosperity, peace and security and stability;
6.
Emphasizes that the preservation and promotion of peace demand that the
policies of States be directed towards the elimination of the threat of war, particularly
nuclear war, the renunciation of the use or threat of use of force in international
__________________

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
Resolution 217 A (III).
10 Resolution 71/189, annex.
8
9

22-27607

55/116

A/77/463/Add.2

relations and the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means on the basis
of the Charter of the United Nations;
7.
Affirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security and an internation al system based
on respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter and the promotion of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, including the right to development and the
right of peoples to self-determination;
8.
Urges all States to respect and to put into practice the purposes and
principles of the Charter in their relations with other States, irrespective of their
political, economic or social system and of their size, geographical location or level
of economic development;
9.
Reaffirms the duty of all States, in accordance with the principles of the
Charter, to use peaceful means to settle any dispute to which they are party and the
continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, as a vital requirement for the promotion and protection of all human rights
of everyone and all peoples;
10. Underlines the vital importance of education for peace as a tool to foster
the realization of the right of peoples to peace, and encourages States, the spec ialized
agencies of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non -governmental
organizations to contribute actively to this endeavour;
11. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and
procedures to continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation,
understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human rights;
12. Decides to continue consideration of the question of the promotion of the
right of peoples to peace at its seventy-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.

56/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution VII
The right to food
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations and its importance for the
promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming also previous resolutions and decisions on the right to food adopted
within the framework of the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which provides that
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for her or his health and well being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and
Malnutrition,2 the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 3 in particular Millennium
Development Goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by 2015, and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 4 in particular the Sustainable
Development Goals on ending hunger, achieving food security and improved nutrition
and promoting sustainable agriculture and on ending poverty in all its forms
everywhere,
Recognizing that achieving the Sustainable Development Goals can help to
ensure the end of hunger in all its forms by 2030 and to achieve food security,
Recalling the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 5 in which the fundamental right of every person to be free from
hunger is recognized,
Bearing in mind the importance of the Rome Declaration on World Food
Security, the World Food Summit Plan of Action and the Declaration of the World
Food Summit: five years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002, 6
Reaffirming the importance of the recommendations contained in the Voluntary
Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in
the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004, 7
Acknowledging that the right to food has been recognized as the right of every
individual, alone or in community with others, to have physical and economic access at
all times to sufficient, adequate, nutritious food, in conformity with, inter alia, the
culture, beliefs, traditions, dietary habits and preferences of individuals, that is produced
and consumed sustainably, thereby preserving access to food for future generations,
Reaffirming the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food Security
contained in the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security, adopted in Rome
on 16 November 2009,8
Recalling the proclamation by the General Assembly at its seventy -second
session of 2019–2028 as the United Nations Decade of Family Farming and the close
links between family farming, the promotion and conservation of historical, cultural
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
3 Resolution 55/2.
4 Resolution 70/1.
5 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
6 A/57/499, annex.
7 E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.
8 See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
1
2

22-27607

57/116

A/77/463/Add.2

and natural heritage, traditional customs and culture, halting the loss of biodiversity
and the improvement of the living conditions of people living in rural areas,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated and that they must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on the
same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming also that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and
economic environment, at both the national and the international levels, is the
essential foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to food security,
improved nutrition and poverty eradication,
Reiterating, as set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security, the
Declaration of the World Food Summit and the Rome Declaration on Nutrition, 9 that
food should not be used as an instrument of political or economic pres sure, and
reaffirming in this regard the importance of international cooperation and solidarity,
as well as the necessity of refraining from unilateral measures that are not in
accordance with international law and the Charter and that endanger food and
nutrition security,
Expressing appreciation for the work of the United Nations system, in particular
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food
Programme, aimed at ending hunger and achieving food security and improved nutrition,
Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its resources
and capacities to achieve its individual goals in implementing the recommendations
contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food
Summit Plan of Action, as well as in the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the
Framework for Action, 10 and, at the same time, cooperate regionally and
internationally in order to organize collective solutions to global issues of food and
nutrition security in a world of increasingly interlinked institution s, societies and
economies where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities are essential,
Recognizing that, despite the efforts made and the fact that some positive results
have been achieved, the problems of hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition have a
global dimension, that there has not been sufficient progress in reducing hunger and
malnutrition and that these problems are increasing dramatically in some regions in
the absence of urgent, determined and concerted action,
Recognizing also the importance of traditional sustainable agricultural
practices, including traditional seed supply systems, as well as access to credit and
other financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health care, social services,
education, training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable technologies,
including efficient irrigation, the reuse of treated wastewater and water harvesting
and storage for Indigenous Peoples and others living in rural areas,
Recognizing further the complex character of food insecurity and its likely
recurrence due to a combination of several major factors, such as the effects of the
global financial and economic crisis, environmental degradation, desertification and
the adverse impacts of climate change, as well as poverty, natural dis asters, armed
conflicts, drought, volatility in commodity prices and the lack in many countries of
the appropriate technology, investment and capacity-building necessary to confront
its impact, particularly in developing countries, including the least deve loped
countries and small island developing States, and the need for coherence and
collaboration between international institutions at the global level,
__________________
9
10

58/116

World Health Organization, document EB136/8, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Noting with great concern that millions of people are facing famine or the
immediate risk of famine or are experiencing severe food insecurity in several regions
of the world, and noting also that poverty, armed conflicts, drought and the volatility
of commodity prices are among the factors causing or exacerbating famine and severe
food insecurity and that additional efforts, including international support, to respond,
prevent and prepare for increasing global food insecurity are urgently needed,
Noting the unprecedented surge in international food commodity prices which,
according to the Food Price Index of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, reached their highest peak in March 2022 since its inception in 1990,
in particular the rise in global prices of vegetable oil and grain, including wheat,
further affecting people in vulnerable situations,
Recalling its resolution 76/264 of 23 May 2022, entitled “State of global food
insecurity”, in which the General Assembly welcomed the initiative by the Secretary General to establish a Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance,
with a Steering Committee chaired by the Deputy Secretary -General, while also
taking note of other relevant initiatives aimed at promoting food security and
improved nutrition, including for those in vulnerable situations,
Noting the rise in fertilizer prices and the shortages caused by supply chain
disruptions, affecting crop yields and threatening future agricultural productivity and
production, especially of wheat, maize, millet, rice, sunflower o il and essential food,
Noting also the rise in energy and fuel prices, which is increasing food
commodity prices, narrowing fiscal space at a time when the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated pre-existing debt vulnerabilities and exposed
fragilities in the global financial architecture, with many developing countries at high
risk of or already in debt distress,
Recognizing that the COVID-19 pandemic is one of the greatest global challenges
in the history of the United Nations, and noting with deep concern its impact on health
and the loss of life, mental health and well-being, as well as the negative impact on
global humanitarian needs, the enjoyment of human rights and across all spheres of
society, including on livelihoods, food security and nutrition, and education, the
exacerbation of poverty and hunger, disruption to economies, trade, societies and
environments, and the exacerbation of economic and social inequalities within and
among countries, which is reversing hard-won development gains and hampering
progress towards achieving the 2030 Agenda and all its Goals and targets,
Recognizing also that the poorest and those who may be vulnerable or in
vulnerable situations are the hardest hit by the pandemic and that the impact of th e
crisis will reverse hard-won development gains and the fulfilment of the right to food
for all, and hamper progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
including Goal 2, which aims to end hunger, achieve food security and improved
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture,
Recognizing further that the COVID-19 global pandemic requires a global
response based on unity, solidarity and multilateral cooperation,
Expressing its deep concern over the negative effects of armed conflicts on the
enjoyment of the right to food,
Recognizing that armed conflict impacts on food security can be direct, such as
displacement from land, livestock grazing areas and fishing grounds or destruction of
food stocks and agricultural assets, or indirect, such as disruptions to food systems
and markets, leading to increased food prices or decreased household purchasing
power, or decreased access to supplies that are necessary for food preparation,
including water and fuel,
22-27607

59/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Stressing the obligation of all States and parties to an armed conflict to protect
civilians, in accordance with international humanitarian law, and calling upon
Member States, the United Nations and other relevant organizations to take further
steps to provide a coordinated emergency response to the food and nutrition needs of
affected populations, while aiming to ensure that such steps are supportive of national
strategies and programmes aimed at improving food security and nutrition,
Reaffirming that starvation of civilians as a method of combat is prohibited
under international humanitarian law and that it is therefore prohibited to attack,
destroy, remove or render useless, for that purpose, objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population, such as foodstuffs, agricultu ral areas for the
production of foodstuffs, crops, livestock, drinking water installations and supplies
and irrigation works,
Resolved to act to ensure that the promotion, protection and fulfilment of all
human rights and the human rights perspective are taken into account at the national,
regional and international levels in measures to address the realization of the right to
food,
Stressing the possible benefits of international trade to improve food and
nutrition availability,
Stressing also that improving access to productive resources and investment in
rural development is essential for eradicating hunger and poverty, in particular in
developing countries, through, inter alia, the promotion of investments in appropriate
small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order to reduce
vulnerability to droughts and tackle water scarcity, as well as in programmes,
practices and policies to scale up sustainable agroecological practices,
Recognizing the importance of sustainable food systems that are fit to meet
environmental, economic and social challenges, in order to guarantee food security
and nutrition for all,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters,
diseases and pest infestations, as well as the negative impact of climate change, and
their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted in substantial loss of life
and livelihood and threatened agricultural production and food and nutrition security,
in particular in developing countries,
Concerned that the adverse impacts of climate change and natural disasters are
harming agricultural productivity, food production and cropping patterns, thus
contributing to food availability shortfalls, and that such impacts are expected to
increase with future climate change,
Emphasizing that a multisectoral approach that integrates nutrition across all
sectors, including agriculture, health, water and sanitation, social protection and
education, as well as a gender perspective, is critical to achieving global food security
and improved nutrition and the realization of the right to food,
Recalling the endorsement of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible
Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food
Security 11 by the Committee on World Food Security at its thirty-eighth session, held
on 11 May 2012, and by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations at its 144th session,

__________________
11

60/116

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20),
appendix D.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Recalling also the Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and
Food Systems,12 which were endorsed by the Committee on World Food Security at
its forty-first session, held from 13 to 18 October 2014,
Stressing the importance of the Second International Conference on Nutrition,
hosted by the World Health Organization and the Food an d Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations in Rome from 19 to 21 November 2014, and of its outcome
documents, the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action,
Stressing also the need to increase official development assistance devoted to
sustainable agriculture and nutrition,
Recognizing that small and medium-sized farmers in developing countries need
to receive technical, technology transfer and capacity-building support,
Recognizing also the importance of the protection and preservation of
agrobiodiversity in guaranteeing food security and nutrition and the right to food for
all,
Noting the cultural values of dietary and eating habits in different cultures, and
recognizing that food plays an important role in defining the identity of individuals
and communities and is a cultural component that describes and gives value to a
territory and its inhabitants,
Recognizing the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations as the key United Nations agency for rural and agricultural development and
its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to achieve the full realization of
the right to food, including through its provision of technical assistance to developing
countries in support of the implementation of national priority frameworks,
Recognizing also the role of the Committee on World Food Security as an
inclusive international and intergovernmental platform for a broad range of
committed stakeholders to work together in a coordinated manner and in support o f
country-led processes towards the elimination of hunger and ensuring food security
and nutrition for all human beings,
Taking note with appreciation of the United Nations Food Systems Summit,
convened by the Secretary-General and held on 23 and 24 September 2021, and of
the Nutrition for Growth Summit, held in Tokyo on 7 and 8 December 2021,
Acknowledging the contribution of parliamentarians nationally and regionally
to the reduction of hunger and malnutrition and ultimately to the realization of the
right to food, and in this regard recognizing the convening of the first Global
Parliamentary Summit against Hunger and Malnutrition, held in Madrid on 29 and
30 October 2018,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, and recalling the
commitment therein to work together to promote sustained and inclusive economic
growth, social development and environmental protection and thereby to benefit all,
endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012,
Recalling also the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–203013
and its guiding principles, which, inter alia, recognize the importance of promoting
regular disaster preparedness and response and recovery exercises, with a view to
ensuring rapid and effective response to disasters and related displacement, including
access to essential food and non-food relief supplies, as appropriate to local needs, as
__________________
12
13

22-27607

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/20, appendix D.
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
61/116

A/77/463/Add.2

well as of fostering collaboration across global and regional mechanisms and
institutions for the implementation and coherence of instruments and tools relevant
to disaster risk reduction, such as for climate change adaptation, biodiversity,
sustainable development, poverty eradication, environment, agriculture, health, food
and nutrition and others, as appropriate,
Recalling further the proclamation at its seventieth session of 2016–2025 as the
United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition, and stressing the opportunity the
Decade represents to bring together initiatives and efforts to eradicate hunger and
prevent all forms of malnutrition,
Acknowledging the work done by the High-level Task Force on Global Food and
Nutrition Security established by the Secretary-General, and supporting the
Secretary-General in his continuing efforts in this regard, including continued
engagement with Member States and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on the right to food,
1.
Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human
dignity and therefore requires the adoption of urgent measures at the national,
regional and international levels for its elimination;
2.
Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient,
nutritious and sustainably produced food, consistent with the right to adequate food
and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully
develop and maintain his or her physical and mental capacities;
3.
Expresses its concern at the fact that the effects created by the world food
crisis still continue to have serious consequences for the poorest and most vulnerable
people, particularly in developing countries, which have been further aggravated by
the impacts of the world financial and economic crisis, and at the particular effects of
the crisis on many net food-importing countries, especially the least developed
countries;
4.
Expresses particular concern at the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
the fulfilment of all human rights for all, including the right to food, underlines that
the pandemic is exacerbating existing high levels of acute food insecurity, and calls
upon Member States and other relevant stakeholders to consider the fulfilment of the
right to food as part of the response to and recovery from the pandemic by, inter alia,
keeping food and agriculture supply chains functioning, ensuring the continued trade
in and movement of food and livestock, products and inputs essential for agricultural
and food production to markets, minimizing food loss and waste, supporting workers
and farmers, including women farmers, in agriculture and food supply chains to
continue their essential work, including cross-border, in a safe manner, mobilizing
and allocating adequate resources and enhancing institutional and training capacities
for an accelerated implementation of sustainable agriculture and food systems,
providing continued access to adequate, safe, affordable and nutritious food, and
providing adequate social safety nets and assistance to minimize the negative effects
of loss of livelihoods and increasing food prices on food insecurity and malnutrition;
5.
Expresses its deep concern that, according to the report of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations entitled The State of Food Security
and Nutrition in the World 2022: Repurposing food and agricultural policies to make
healthy diets more affordable, the number of hungry people in the world is growing,
the vast majority of hungry people live in develo ping countries and over 2.3 billion
people in the world experience moderate or severe food insecurity;
6.
Considers it alarming that, as estimated by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, in 2021, the number of people who did not ha ve

62/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

access to adequate food rose by 112 million, to 3.1 billion, and that between 702
million and 828 million people faced hunger in 2021;
7.
Expresses its deep concern that, while women contribute more than 50 per
cent of the food produced worldwide, they also account for 70 per cent of the world’s
hungry, that women and girls are disproportionately affected by hunger, food
insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender inequality and discrimination, that
in many countries girls are twice as likely as boys to die from malnutrition and
preventable childhood diseases, and that it is estimated that almost twice as many
women as men suffer from malnutrition;
8.
Encourages all States to mainstream a gender perspective in food security
programmes and to take action to address de jure and de facto gender inequality and
discrimination against women, in particular when they contribute to the malnutrition
of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and equal realization of the
right to food and that women have equal access to resources, including income, land
and water and their ownership and agricultural inputs, as well as full and equal access
to health care, education, science and technology, to enable them to feed themselves
and their families, and in this regard stresses the need to empower women and
strengthen their role in decision-making;
9.
Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
right to food to continue to mainstream a gender perspective in the fulfilment of his
mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and all other United Nations bodies and mechanisms addressing the right to
food and food insecurity and malnutrition to continue to integrate a gender
perspective into their relevant policies, programmes and activities;
10. Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and
nutritious food are inclusive of and accessible to persons with disabilities;
11. Stresses that the primary responsibility of States is to promote and protect
the right to food and that the international community should provide, through a
coordinated response and upon request, international cooperation in support of
national and regional efforts by providing the assistance necessary t o increase food
production and access to food, including through agricultural development assistance,
the transfer of technology, food crop rehabilitation assistance and food aid, ensuring
food security, with special attention to the specific needs of wome n and girls, and
promoting innovation, support for agricultural training and the development of
adapted technologies, research on rural advisory services and support for access to
financing services, and ensure support for the establishment of secure land tenure
systems;
12. Calls upon all States and, if appropriate, relevant international
organizations to take measures and support programmes that are aimed at combating
undernutrition in mothers, in particular during pregnancy and breastfeeding, and in
children, and the irreversible effects of chronic undernutrition in early childhood, in
particular from birth to the age of 2 years;
13. Also calls upon all States and, where appropriate, relevant international
organizations to implement policies and programmes to reduce and eliminate
preventable mortality and morbidity, as a result of malnutrition, of children under 5
years of age, and in this regard urges States to disseminate the technical guidance
prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,

22-27607

63/116

A/77/463/Add.2

in collaboration with the World Health Organization, 14 and to apply it, as appropriate,
in the design, implementation, evaluation and monitoring of laws, policies,
programmes, budgets and mechanisms for remedy and redress aimed at eliminating
preventable mortality and morbidity of children under 5 years of ag e;
14. Encourages all States to take steps, with a view to progressively achieving
the full realization of the right to food, including steps to promote the conditions for
everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to enjoy fully the right to
food, and to create and adopt national plans to combat hunger;
15. Recognizes the advances made through South-South cooperation in
developing countries and regions in connection with food security and the
development of agricultural production for the full realization of the right to food;
16. Stresses that improving access to productive resources and responsible
public investment in rural development, taking into consideration the Principles for
Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems, as endorsed by the
Committee on World Food Security, is essential for eradicating hunger and poverty,
in particular in developing countries, including through the promotion of investment,
including private investment, in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water
management technologies in order to reduce vulnerability to droughts and to tackle
water scarcity;
17. Recognizes the critical contribution made by the fisheries sector to the
realization of the right to food and to food security and the contrib ution of small-scale
fishers to the local food security of coastal communities;
18. Also recognizes that 70 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas, where
nearly half a billion family farmers are located, and that these people are especially
vulnerable to food insecurity, given the increasing cost of inputs and the fall in farm
incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is an increasing
challenge for poor producers; that sustainable and gender-sensitive agricultural
policies are important tools for promoting land and agrarian reform, rural credit and
insurance, technical assistance and other associated measures to achieve food security
and rural development; and that support by States for small farmers, fishing
communities and local enterprises, including through the facilitation of access for
their products to national and international markets and empowerment of small
producers, particularly women, in value chains, is a key element for food security and
the provision of the right to food;
19. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including through
national efforts supported by international partnerships to stop desertification and
land degradation and through investments and public policies that are sp ecifically
appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this regard calls for the full implementation
of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa; 15
20. Urges States that have not yet done so to favourably consider becoming
parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity 16 and to consider becoming parties
to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 17 as
a matter of priority;
__________________

A/HRC/27/31; see also Human Rights Council resolution 33/11 (see Official Records of the
General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1
and A/71/53/Add. 1/Corr. 1), chap. II).
15 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
16 Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
17 Ibid., vol. 2400, No. 43345.
14

64/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

21. Recognizes the important role of Indigenous Peoples and their traditional
knowledge and seed supply systems, as well as the important role of new
technologies, in the conservation of biodiversity and in aiming to ensure food security
and improved nutrition;
22. Recalls the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples,18 acknowledges that many Indigenous organizations and representatives of
Indigenous Peoples have expressed in different forums their deep concerns over t he
obstacles and challenges they face in achieving the full enjoyment of the right to food,
and calls upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the
disproportionately high level of hunger and malnutrition among Indigenous Peoples
and the continuous discrimination against them;
23. Also recalls the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held
on 22 and 23 September 2014,19 and the commitment to developing, in conjunction
with the Indigenous Peoples concerned and where appropriate, policies, programmes
and resources to support Indigenous Peoples’ occupations, traditional subsistence
activities, economies, livelihoods, food security and nutrition;
24. Notes the need to further examine various concepts, such as “food
sovereignty”, and their relation to food security and the right to food, bearing in mind
the need to avoid any negative impact on the enjoyment of the right to food for all
people at all times;
25. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international
organizations, within their respective mandates, to take fully into account the need to
promote the effective realization of the right to food for all;
26. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment, as well as
international assistance, upon the request of and in cooperation with the affected
countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to food, and in
particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their
homes and land because of hunger or humanitarian emergencies affecting their
enjoyment of the right to food;
27. Takes note with appreciation of the growing movement, in different
regions of the world, towards the adoption of framework laws, national strategies and
measures in support of the full realization of the right to food for all;
28. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the allocation
and utilization of technical and financial resources from all sources, including
external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce national actions to
implement sustainable food security policies;
29. Calls for a successful, development-oriented outcome of the trade
negotiations of the World Trade Organization, in particular on the remaining issues
of the Doha Development Round, as a contribution to the creation of international
conditions permitting the full realization of the right to food;
30. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their
international policies of a political and economic nature, including international trade
agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to food in other countries;
31. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action against
Hunger and Poverty, and recommends the continuation of efforts aimed at identifying
__________________
18
19

22-27607

Resolution 61/295, annex.
Resolution 69/2.
65/116

A/77/463/Add.2

additional sources of financing for the fight against hunger and poverty, as well as
non-communicable diseases;
32. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in 1996 to
halve the number of persons who are undernourished are not being fulfilled, while
recognizing the efforts of Member States in this regard, and once again invites all
international financial and development institutions, as well as the relevant United
Nations agencies and funds, to give priority to and provide the funding necessary to
realize the right to food, as set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security,
and to achieve the aims of Goal 2 of the 2030 Agenda for Sust ainable Development
and other food and nutrition-related targets;
33. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the goal that
all people at all times will have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life, is part of a
comprehensive effort to improve public health, alongside the response to the spread
of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other communicable diseases;
34. Urges States to give priority in their development strategies and
expenditures to the realization of the right to food;
35. Stresses the importance of international cooperation and development
assistance as an effective contribution to the sustainable expansion and improvement
of agriculture and, in particular, its environmental sustainability, food production,
breeding projects on diversity of crops and livestock and institutional innovations
such as community seed banks, farmer field schools and seed fairs, and to the
provision of humanitarian food assistance in activities related to emergency situations
for the realization of the right to food and the achievement of sustainable food
security, while recognizing that each country has the primary responsibility for
ensuring the implementation of national programmes and strategies in this regard;
36. Calls upon Member States and relevant stakeholders to strengthen
international cooperation, as well as their support for multilateral efforts and for the
central role of the United Nations system, in order to mobilize a coordinated global
response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse social, economic and financial
impact on all societies, including on the right to food, that contributes to the full
realization of this right for all and leaves no one behind;
37. Stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights should consider implementing
that agreement in a manner that is supportive of food security;
38. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant
stakeholders to support national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to the food crises
currently occurring across different regions, and expresses its deep concern that
funding shortfalls are forcing the World Food Programme to cut operations across
different regions;
39. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations, humanitarian and
development organizations and other relevant actors to urgently and effectively
respond to, prevent and prepare for rising global food insecurity affecting millions of
people, especially those who are facing famine or the immediate risk of famine,
including by enhancing humanitarian and development cooperation and providing
urgent funding to respond to the needs of the affected population, and calls upon
Member States and parties to armed conflicts to respect international humanitarian
law and ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access;

66/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

40. Calls upon States to heed the urgent United Nations humanitarian appeal
to assist countries facing drought, starvation and famine with emergency aid and
urgent funding;
41. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, to continue to promote policies and projects
that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that part ners respect the
right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support strategies of
Member States aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to avoid any actions
that could have a negative impact on its realization;
42. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur,20 which is focused on emerging issues concerning the realization of the
right to food, in particular in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its
impact on food security and nutrition;
43. Recognizes the importance of giving due consideration to the adverse
impacts of climate change and to the full realization of the right to food, recalls the
Paris Agreement, adopted at the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Paris from
30 November to 13 December 2015,21 and also recalls the holding of the twentysecond session of the Conference of the Parties in Marrakech, Morocco, from 7 to
18 November 2016;
44. Also recognizes the impacts of climate change and of the El Niño
phenomenon on agricultural production and food security around the world and the
importance of designing and implementing actions to reduce its effects, in particular
on vulnerable populations, such as rural women, bearing in mind the role that they
play in supporting their households and communities in achieving food and nutrition
security, generating income and improving rural livelihoods and overall well -being;
45. Reiterates its support for the realization of the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur, and requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide all the human and financial
resources necessary for its effective fulfilment;
46. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in promoting the right to adequate food, in particular its general
comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food (article 11 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), 22 in which the Committee
affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate food is indivisibly linked to the inherent
dignity of the human person, indispensable for the fulfilment of other human rights
enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights and inseparable from social
justice, requiring the adoption of appropriate economic, environmental and social
policies, at both the national and the international levels, oriented to the eradication
of poverty and the fulfilment of all human rights for all;
47. Takes note with appreciation of the work done by the Committee on World
Food Security in order to contribute to achieving and guaranteeing global food
security;
48. Recalls general comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights on the right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the Covenant), 23
__________________

A/77/177.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add. 1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
22 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and
corrigendum (E/2000/22 and E/2000/22/Corr. 1), annex V.
23 Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.
20
21

22-27607

67/116

A/77/463/Add.2

in which the Committee noted, inter alia, the importance of ensuring sustainable
access to water resources for human consumption and agriculture in realization of the
right to adequate food;
49. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security,
adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations in November 2004, represent a useful tool to promote the realization of the
right to food for all, contribute to the achievement of food security and thus provide
an additional instrument in the attainment of internationally agreed development
goals and to support national Governments in the implementation of food security
and nutrition policies, programmes and legal frameworks;
50. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in his task, to supply all necessary information reques ted by him and to
give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of the Special
Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more effectively;
51. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session an interim report on the implementation of the present
resolution and to continue his work, including by examining the emerging issues with
regard to the realization of the right to food that are within his mandate, in p articular
in the context of the response to and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic;
52. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, treaty bodies, civil society actors and non -governmental organizations,
as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of his mandate through, inter alia, the submission of comments and
suggestions on ways and means of realizing the right to food;
53. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its seventy-eighth
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.

68/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution VIII
Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which guarantees the
right to life, liberty and security of person, the relevant provisions of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and other relevant human rights conventions,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, as set out in Council resolution 44/5
of 16 July 2020,3
Welcoming the universal ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, 4 which, alongside international human rights law, provide important legal
frameworks of accountability in relation to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions during armed conflict,
Recalling all its resolutions on the subject of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions as well as the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and the
Human Rights Council on the subject, and emphasizing the importance of their full
and effective implementation,
Recognizing the positive role that governments, regional human rights systems,
national human rights institutions, civil society and human rights defenders play in
the protection against arbitrary deprivation of life,
Acknowledging the importance of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development 5 and its implementation for the promotion and protection of the
enjoyment by all persons of human rights, gender equality and the empowerment of
all women and girls, access to justice for all and democrac y, including effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels,
Recognizing the work of the treaty bodies and special procedure mandate
holders that have addressed human rights issues related to extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions within the framework of their respective mandates,
Noting with deep concern that impunity continues to be a major cause of the
perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, especially with regard to the gender-related killing of women
and girls, also known as femicide,
Noting the importance of keeping accurate records to enable the identification
of dead bodies or human remains and the prompt, effective, exhaustive, thorough,
independent, impartial and transparent investigation of deaths of persons, which may
have been unlawful, including determining their identity,
Noting also that enforced disappearances can end in extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, recalling the importance in this re gard of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 6 and
calling upon all States which have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying
or acceding to the Convention,
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/75/53), chap. V, sect. A.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
5 Resolution 70/1.
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
1
2

22-27607

69/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Acknowledging that international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are complementary and mutually reinforcing,
Noting with alarm the growing number of civilians and persons hors de combat
killed in situations of armed conflict and internal strife and strongly condemning such
executions when they take place, and that women and girls and persons with
disabilities are disproportionately affected by conflict, as recognized in Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 on women and peace and security,
Council resolution 2475 (2019) of 20 June 2019 on the protection of persons with
disabilities in conflict and other resolutions on the matter,
Noting with deep concern the continuing instances of the arbitrary deprivation
of life, resulting from, inter alia, the imposition and implementation of capital
punishment when carried out in a manner that violates international law,
Recalling the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) 7 and the adoption
of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the
Nelson Mandela Rules),8
Deeply concerned about acts that can amount to extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions committed against persons exercising their rights to peaceful
assembly, freedom of religion or belief and freedom of expression and against human
rights defenders in all regions of the world,
Deeply concerned also about extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary killings,
including killings of children, committed by non-State actors, including terrorist
groups and criminal organizations, which may amount to abuses of international
human rights law and violations of international humanitarian law,
Acknowledging that extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions may under
certain circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes, as
defined in international law, including in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, 9 and recalling in this regard that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its populations from such crimes, as set out by the General
Assembly in its resolutions 60/1 of 16 September 2005 and 63/308 of 14 September
2009,
Convinced of the need for effective action to address the root causes of, prevent,
combat and eliminate the abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, which represent flagrant violations of intern ational human rights law,
particularly the right to life, as well as of international humanitarian law,
Recognizing the potential role of new, accessible technologies in widening the
space for the promotion and protection of human rights, including the ri ght to life,
and in helping to monitor and to prevent persecution and discrimination and therefore
contribute to the prevention of extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary executions and
accountability,
Underlining the need to ensure that the development and use of new
technologies, including artificial intelligence, contribute to the promotion and
protection of and respect for human rights, including the right to life, and that their
use does not result in discriminatory outcomes or constitute a violation of human
rights,
__________________

Resolution 65/229, annex.
Resolution 70/175, annex.
9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
7
8

70/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

1.
Reiterates its strong condemnation of all the extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions that continue to occur throughout the world;
2.
Demands that all States ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions is brought to an end and that they take effective action to
prevent, combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its forms and manifestations;
3.

Reiterates that all States:

(a) Must conduct prompt, effective, exhaustive, thorough, ind ependent,
impartial and transparent investigations, exercising due diligence, in line with
international standards and forensic best practices, and in this regard takes note of the
Revised United Nations Manual on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of
Extralegal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, 10 with reference to as much forensic
expertise as necessary, into all suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, identify and bring to justice those responsible, while ensuring the r ight of
every person to a fair hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
established by law, grant adequate compensation within a reasonable time to the
victims or their families and adopt all measures, including legal and judicial
measures, necessary to put an end to impunity;
(b) Conduct such investigations, bearing in mind the need for gender equality
in access to justice, particularly with regard to the gender-related killing of women
and girls, also known as femicide, and the report of the Special Rapporteur on
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions submitted to the Human Rights
Council at its thirty-fifth session 11 regarding a gender-sensitive approach to
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary killings, which points to the links between the
arbitrary deprivation of life and systemic discrimination, such as gender-based and
racial discrimination, and the greater rates of homicide among Indigenous women and
girls and women and girls with disabilities, and extrajudicial, summary or a rbitrary
executions of refugees and migrants and humanitarian workers, and prevent the
further occurrence of such executions, as recommended in the Principles on the
Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extralegal, Arbitrary and Summary
Executions,12 fully consistent with their obligations under international law;
4.
Calls upon Governments, and invites intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to actively support and pay greater attention to the
work of national-level commissions of inquiry into extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, with a view to ensuring the effective contribution of these
commissions to accountability and to combating impunity;
5.
Calls upon all States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, to comply with their obligations under the relevant provisions
of international human rights instruments, and also calls upon States which retain the
death penalty to pay particular regard to the provisions contained in articles 6, 14 and
15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, articles 37 and 40 of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child 13 and articles 12, 13 and 14 of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 14 bearing in mind the
safeguards and guarantees set out in Economic and Social Council resolutions
1984/50 of 25 May 1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989 and taking into account the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur in reports to the Council and the General
__________________

The Minnesota Protocol on the Investigation of Potentially Unlawful Death (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.17.XIV.3).
11 A/HRC/35/23.
12 Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/65, annex.
13 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
14 Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
10

22-27607

71/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Assembly, including the report submitted to the Assembly at its sixty -seventh
session, 15 regarding the need to respect all safeguards and restrictions, including
limitation to the most serious crimes, stringent respect of due process and fair trial
safeguards and the right to seek pardon or commutation of sentence;
6.
Emphasizes that to prevent extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
States should take necessary steps to adopt such laws or other measures as may be
necessary to give effect to the right to life in accordance with international law and
that everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law;
7.

Urges all States:

(a) To take all measures required by international human rights law and
international humanitarian law to prevent loss of life, in particular that of children,
during detention, arrest, public demonstrations, internal and communal violence, civil
unrest, public emergencies or armed conflicts and to ensure that the police, law
enforcement agents, armed forces and other agents acting on behalf of or with the
consent or acquiescence of the State, including private security providers, act with
restraint and in conformity with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including the principles of proportionality and necessity, and in this
regard to ensure that police and law enforcement officials are guided by the Code of
Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials 16 and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force
and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials; 17
(b) To ensure the effective protection of the right to life of all persons, to
conduct, when required by obligations under international law, prompt, exhaustive
and impartial investigations into all killings, including those targeted at specific
groups of persons, such as racially motivated violence leading to the death of the
victim, killings of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities or because of their sexual orientation or gender identity, killings of persons
affected by terrorism or hostage-taking or living under foreign occupation, killings of
refugees, internally displaced persons, migrants, street children or members of
Indigenous communities, killings of persons for reasons related to their activities as
human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists or demonstrators, killings committed in
the name of passion or in the name of honour and killings committed for
discriminatory reasons on any basis, to bring those responsible to justice before a
competent, independent and impartial judiciary at the national or, where appropriate,
international level and to ensure that such killings, including those committed by
security forces, police and law enforcement agents, paramilitary groups or private
forces, are neither condoned nor sanctioned by State officials or personnel;
8.
Affirms the obligation of States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions, to protect the lives of all persons deprived of their liberty in
all circumstances and to investigate, respond to and ensure combat against impunity
for deaths in custody, including in institutions;
9.
Encourages States, taking into account the relevant recommendations of
the United Nations and of regional human rights systems, to review, where necessary,
their domestic laws and practices with regard to the use of force in law enforcement
in order to ensure that these laws and practices are in conformity with their
international obligations and commitments;
__________________

A/67/275.
Resolution 34/169, annex.
17 See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.
15
16

72/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

10. Emphasizes that, to prevent extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, States should take effective measures to ensure that the use of force by
law enforcement officials is in conformity with internationa l obligations and the
principles of legality, precaution, necessity, proportionality and accountability, as
well as their national legislation;
11. Reaffirms that the same human rights that people have offline must also be
protected online, in order to help to prevent extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions;
12. Encourages States, in order to support the protection of the right to life, to
make appropriate protective equipment and less-lethal weapons available to their
officials exercising law enforcement duties, while pursuing efforts to regulate and
establish protocols for the training and use of less-lethal weapons and in this regard
strengthening international cooperation, bearing in mind that even less -lethal
weapons can result in risk to life or serious injury;
13. Also encourages States to accelerate the work on fulfilling the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, bearing in mind the importance of the full
enjoyment of human rights and access to justice for all and effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions at all levels, as well as the systematic mainstreaming and
integration of a gender perspective;
14. Urges all States to ensure that all persons deprived of their liberty are
treated humanely and with full respect for internation al law and that their treatment,
including judicial guarantees and conditions, conforms to, as appropriate, the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules), as well as the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners
and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) and, where
applicable, the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and the Additional Protocols
thereto of 8 June 1977,18 as well as other pertinent international instruments;
15.

Welcomes:

(a) The International Criminal Court as an important contribution to ending
impunity concerning extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and, noting the
growing awareness of the Court worldwide, as highlighted during the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute of the Court, calls upon those States
that are under an obligation to cooperate with the Court to provide such cooperation
and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrend er, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences;
(b) The fact that 123 States have ratified or acceded to and 137 States have
signed the Rome Statute, and calls upon all those States that have not ratified or
acceded to the Rome Statute and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of
the International Criminal Court 19 to give serious consideration to doing so;
16. Acknowledges the importance of ensuring the protection of witnesses for
the prosecution of those suspected of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
urges States to intensify efforts to establish and implement effective witness
protection programmes or other measures, and in this regard encourages the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop practical tools,
including gender-responsive tools, designed to encourage and facilitate greater
attention to the protection of witnesses;
__________________
18
19

22-27607

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
Ibid., vol. 2271, No. 40446.
73/116

A/77/463/Add.2

17. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to organize training programmes and capacity -building and to support
projects with a view to training or educating military forces, law enforcement officers,
government officials and forensic specialists, as well as private personnel acting on
behalf of the State, in international humanitarian and human rights law connected
with their work, to include a gender, disability and child rights perspective, as well as
information on the role of journalists and media workers, in such training and to
require, where appropriate, that all private security providers have vetting and
training procedures in place, including mandatory appropriate weapons training, that
include human rights norms and principles, and appeals to the international
community and requests the Office of the High Commissioner to support endeavours
to that end;
18. Urges States to promote and apply an approach that respects human rights
obligations and is gender-responsive in the design, development and use of new
technologies on the basis of a multi-stakeholder approach and to regulate new and
existing technologies in a manner that ensures that the development and use of such
technologies promote, protect and respect human rights, including the right to life,
and makes sure that new technologies are not discriminatory and are not used to
violate human rights;
19. Recognizes the need for international and multi-stakeholder cooperation in
building capacity and ensuring technical assistance to address technological change
and to bridge digital divides in order for all States, especially developing countries
and the least developed countries, to benefit from opportunities and to address
extrajudicial, arbitrary or summary executions properly;
20. Strongly urges all States to take the necessary measures to ensure the
safety and security of national and international humanitarian personnel;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration with the
High Commissioner and in conformity with the mandate of the High Commissioner,
established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993,
to ensure that personnel specialized in international humanitarian and human rights
law, including in provisions related to gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls, form part of United Nations missions, where appropriate, in order
to deal with serious violations of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions;
22. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Special Rapporteur to
the General Assembly 20 and the Human Rights Council, and invites States to take due
consideration of the recommendations contained therein;
23. Commends the important role that the Special Rapporteur plays in the
elimination and prevention of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and
encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue, within the mandate, to collect
information, including data disaggregated by sex, age and disability, from all
concerned, to respond effectively to reliable information that comes before the
Special Rapporteur, to follow up on communications and country visits and to seek
the views and comments of Governments and to reflect them, as appropriate, for
example, in reports, as well as to identify relevant issues, provide advice and
recommendations and share experiences and best practices to prevent extrajudicial,
summary and arbitrary executions;
24. Acknowledges the important role of the Special Rapporteur in identifying
cases where extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions could amount to genocide
__________________
20

74/116

See A/76/264 and A/77/270.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

and crimes against humanity or war crimes, and urges the Special Rapporteur to
collaborate with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and, as
appropriate, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide in addressing situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
that are of particularly serious concern or in which early action might prevent further
deterioration;
25. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur and
other United Nations mechanisms and procedures in the field of human rights, and
encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue efforts in that regard;
26. Urges all States, in particular those that have not done so, to cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur so that the mandate can be carried out effectively,
including by favourably and rapidly responding to requests for visits, mindful th at
country visits are one of the essential tools for the fulfilment of the mandate, and by
responding in a timely manner to communications and other requests transmitted to
them by the Special Rapporteur;
27. Expresses its appreciation to those States that have received the Special
Rapporteur, asks them to examine the Special Rapporteur’s recommendations
carefully, invites them to inform the Special Rapporteur of the actions taken on those
recommendations, and urges other States to cooperate in a similar way;
28. Once again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best
endeavours in cases where the minimum standards of legal safeguards provided for
in articles 6, 9, 14, 15 and 16 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights appear not to have been respected;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
adequate human, financial and material resources to enable the mandate to be carried
out effectively, including through country visits;
30. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly, at its
seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth sessions, a report on the situation worldwide with
regard to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and recommendations for
more effective action to combat this phenomenon;
31.
session.

22-27607

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy -ninth

75/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution IX
Human Rights in the Administration of Justice
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1
and the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocols thereto, 2 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 3 the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Optional Protocol thereto, 4 the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance,5 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,6 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 8 as well as all other relevant international
treaties,
Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of the
administration of justice,
Recalling all the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council that
are relevant to the subject of human rights in the administration of justice, including
General Assembly resolution 75/185 of 16 December 2020 and Human Rights
Council resolutions 37/22 of 23 March 2018 9 and 42/11 of 26 September 2019,10
Recalling also its resolution 74/306 of 11 September 2020, recognizing the
primary responsibility of Governments to adopt and implement responses to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that are specific to their national context,
and that emergency measures, policies and strategies put in place by countries to
address and mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 must be targeted, necessary,
transparent, non-discriminatory, time-bound, proportionate and in accordance with
their obligations under applicable international human rights law, and reaffirming the
obligation of States in this regard, in accordance with article 4 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening and coordinating United Nations rule of law activities, 11
Reaffirming the importance of international standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice, including in relation to drug-related crimes, as
recognized by Member States in the outcome document of the thirtieth special session
of the General Assembly, entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively addressing
and countering the world drug problem”, 12

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex; and United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1642, No. 14668.
3 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 1465 and 2375, No. 24841.
5 Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
6 Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
7 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8 Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
9 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
10 Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
11 A/77/213.
12 Resolution S-30/1, annex.
1
2

76/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Welcoming the work of all special procedures of the Human Rights Council that
address human rights in the administration of justice in the discharge of their
mandates,
Taking note of the work of the human rights treaty body mechanisms on human
rights in the administration of justice, inter alia, of general comments No. 21 (1992)
on humane treatment of persons deprived of their liberty, 13 No. 32 (2007) on the right
to equality before courts and tribunals and to a fair trial 14 and No. 35 (2014) on liberty
and security of person,15 adopted by the Human Rights Committee, general comments
No. 13 (2011) on the right of the child to freedom from all forms of violence 16 and
No. 24 (2019) on children’s rights in the child justice system, 17 adopted by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, general recommendation No. 31 (2005) on the
prevention of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the
criminal justice system,18 adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, general recommendation No. 33 (2015) on women’s access to
justice, 19 adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, and general comments No. 1 (2014) on equal recognition before the law, 20
No. 6 (2018) on equality and non-discrimination 21 and No. 7 (2018) on the
participation of persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, through
their representative organizations, in the implementation and monitoring of the
Convention,22 adopted by the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
Noting with appreciation the important work in the field of the administration
of justice of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Department of Peace Operations
of the Secretariat and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equal ity and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), as well as the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Taking note with appreciation of the International Principles and Guidelines on
Access to Justice for Persons with Disabilities, which are the product of joint work
by the Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities, the Committee
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Special Envoy of the Secretary General on Disability and Accessibility,
Recalling the adoption of the Kyoto Declaration on Advancing Crime
Prevention, Criminal Justice and the Rule of Law: Towards the Achievement of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 23 adopted at the Fourteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Kyoto, Japan,
from 7 to 12 March 2021,
Encouraging continued regional and cross-regional efforts, the sharing of best
practices and the provision of technical assistance in the field of child justice, and
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/47/40),
annex VI.B.
14 Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/62/40), vol. I, annex VI.
15 CCPR/C/GC/35.
16 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/67/41),
annex V.
17 CRC/C/GC/24.
18 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/60/18), chap. IX.
19 CEDAW/C/GC/33.
20 CRPD/C/GC/1 and CRPD/C/GC/1/Corr.1.
21 CRPD/C/GC/6.
22 CRPD/C/GC/7.
23 Resolution 76/181, annex.
13

22-27607

77/116

A/77/463/Add.2

noting in this regard the panel discussion on “Upholding the human rights of
prisoners, including women prisoners and offenders: enhancing technical cooperation
and capacity-building in the implementation of the Nelson Mandela Rules and the
Bangkok Rules”, held during the forty-fourth session of the Human Rights Council,
Recognizing the needs of women and girls in detention or imprisonment,
including their health-care needs, and noting the importance of gender- and agesensitive justice systems and a victim- and survivor-centred approach in addressing
all forms of violence, including sexual and gender-based violence,
Convinced that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and the
integrity of the judicial system, as well as an independent legal profession, are
essential prerequisites for the protection of human rights, the rule of law, good
governance and democracy and for ensuring that there is no discrimination in the
administration of justice and should therefore be respected in all circumstances,
Recalling that every State should provide an effective framework of remedies
to redress human rights grievances or violations and to challenge the lawfulness of
detention before a court,
Emphasizing that the equal right to access to justice for all, which could include
access to legal aid, forms an important basis for strengthening the rule of la w through
the administration of justice,
Underlining the importance of implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,24 and recognizing the role of the relevant Sustainable Development
Goals for eliminating discrimination in the administration of justice,
Mindful of the importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and human
rights in the administration of justice as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity,
Recognizing the rapid advances in the design, development and use of digital
technologies in various aspects of criminal justice systems, including the pretrial
stage, during trials as well as after convictions,
Encouraging law enforcement, criminal justice and other relevant institutions
to effectively and appropriately employ new and advanced technologies as tools
against crime with adequate and effective safeguards to prevent the misuse and abuse
of these technologies in this regard,
Recognizing the importance of the principle that, except for those lawful
limitations that are demonstrably necessitated by the fact of incarceration, persons
deprived of their liberty shall retain their non-derogable human rights and all other
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Concerned about the negative impact of overincarceration and overcrowding on
the enjoyment of human rights, and acknowledging that overincarceration constitutes
one of the major underlying causes of overcrowding,
Emphasizing that the penitentiary system should provide the possibility of
reform and social rehabilitation of the offender in all appropriate cases, and that
punishment should be dealt with in the larger framework of a criminal justice system
that provides the possibility of reinsertion and rein tegration of the offender into
society,
Recalling that the social rehabilitation and reintegration of persons deprived of
their liberty shall be among the essential aims of the criminal justice system, ensuring,
__________________
24

78/116

Resolution 70/1.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

as far as possible, that offenders are able to lead a law-abiding and self-supporting
life upon their return to society,
Underlining that, where persons are in vulnerable situations or marginalized,
prejudice and discrimination in the administration of justice may result in their
overincarceration and overrepresentation throughout the criminal justice system, and
recognizing the need for States to take measures, within the justice system,
particularly the criminal justice system, to prevent discrimination, inter alia, against
persons with disabilities and persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities and to increase their effective participation within the system,
Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the specific situation of
children, juveniles, women, persons with disabilities, older persons, Indigenous
Peoples, refugees, internally displaced persons and migrants, persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and people who are in vulnerable
situations in the administration of justice, in particular while they are deprived of
their liberty, and their risk of facing various forms of violence, abuse, injustice and
humiliation,
Reaffirming that children who are victims and witnesses of crime and violence
are particularly vulnerable and require special protection, assistance and support
appropriate to their age, level of maturity and needs, in order to prevent further
hardship and trauma that may result from their participation in the criminal justice
process,
Recognizing the specific situation and needs of children formerly associated
with armed forces or armed groups when accused of crimes under international law
allegedly committed while they were children associated with armed forces or armed
groups,
Reaffirming that the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration
in all actions concerning the child in the administration of justice, including in
relation to pretrial measures, as well as being an important consideration in all matters
concerning the child related to the sentencing of the parents, or, where applicable,
legal guardians or primary caregivers,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on human rights in the administration of justice, including on the situation of
women and girls; 25
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on violence, death and serious injury in situations
of deprivation of liberty, 26 as well as previous reports on human rights in the
administration of justice submitted to the Human Rights Council;
3.
Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all
United Nations standards on human rights in the administration of justice, and invites
States to assess their national legislation and practice against those standards;
4.
Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the relevant
United Nations entities and programmes in order to strengthen national capacities and
infrastructures in the field of the administration of justice;
5.
Expresses concern that persons with disabilities may experience
disproportionately high levels of unlawful and arbitrary deprivation of liberty, and
recalls that persons with disabilities should not be deprived of their liberty unlawfully
or arbitrarily, and that if persons with disabilities are deprived of their liberty through
__________________
25
26

22-27607

A/77/364.
A/HRC/42/20.
79/116

A/77/463/Add.2

any process, they are, on an equal basis with others, entitled to guarantees in
accordance with international human rights law, including by provision of reasonable
accommodation;
6.
Appeals to Governments to include, in their efforts to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and in their national development plans, the
effective administration of justice and equal access to justice for all as an integral part
of the development process, with a view to promoting and protecting human rights,
and to allocate adequate resources for effective, fair, humane and accountable justice
systems, including the provision of legal aid services, and invites the international
community to respond favourably to requests for financial and technical assistance
for the enhancement and strengthening of the administration of justice;
7.
Reaffirms the importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective into the
criminal justice system by promoting measures that address the speci fic needs of both
offenders and victims, including the protection of women and girls from
revictimization in criminal justice proceedings;
8.
Urges States, bearing in mind national priorities, to ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women at all levels, including in institutions of
governance and in the judicial system, and to secure their empowerment and full and
equal access to justice without discrimination, including through taking legislative
and practical measures to eliminate barriers, dismantle related stereotypes and ensure
the equality of women and girls in the administration of justice and maximum
protection for women and girls deprived of their liberty from all forms of violence;
9.
Stresses the special need for national capacity-building in the field of the
administration of justice, in particular through reform of the judiciary, the police and
the penal system, as well as juvenile justice reform, and through the encouragement
of independence, accessibility, accountability and transparency in the judiciary, in
order to establish and maintain stable societies and the rule of law in post -conflict
situations, and welcomes the role of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in supporting the establishme nt and functioning of
transitional justice mechanisms in post-conflict situations;
10. Reaffirms that no one should be unlawfully or arbitrarily deprived of
liberty, and notes that any deprivation should observe the principles of necessity and
proportionality in this regard;
11. Calls upon States to apply individual criminal responsibility and to refrain
from detaining persons based solely on their family ties with an alleged offender;
12. Also calls upon States to ensure that anyone who is deprived of liberty
through arrest or detention has prompt access to a competent court with the effective
power to determine the lawfulness of the detention and to order release if the detention
or imprisonment is determined not to be lawful and prompt access to legal counsel,
which could include legal aid schemes, in accordance with their international
obligations and commitments;
13. Calls upon all States to consider establishing, maintaining or enhancing
independent national mechanisms with the mandate to monitor all places of detention,
including by making unannounced visits, and to hold private interviews without
witnesses with all persons deprived of liberty, inter alia, in line with the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nel son Mandela
Rules);
14. Emphasizes the importance of States’ keeping under systematic review
rules, instructions, methods and practices on interviewing, as well as arrangements
for the custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, det ention or
80/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

imprisonment under their jurisdiction, including by taking into account, as
appropriate, the Principles on Effective Interviewing for Investigations and
Information Gathering (the Méndez Principles);
15. Calls upon States to ensure a proper file and data management system on
prisoners that allows the tracking of the number of persons deprived of their liberty,
their detention period, offences or grounds for detention, and developments regarding
the prison population, and encourages States to collect other up-to-date,
comprehensive and disaggregated data, including on women’s and children’s needs
and challenges in accessing justice, that allow for the identification and prevention of
discrimination in the administration of justice and overincarcera tion;
16. Affirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism, including in the administration of justice, complies with their obligations
under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law;
17. Recalls the absolute prohibition of torture in international law, and calls
upon States to address and prevent the detention conditions, treatment and
punishment of persons deprived of their liberty, including in police custody, that
amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
18. Calls upon States to investigate promptly, effectively and impartially all
alleged human rights violations suffered by persons deprived of their liberty, in
particular cases involving death, torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, to provide effective remedy to the victims, in accordance with their
international obligations and commitments, and to ensure that detention
administrations fully cooperate with the investigating autho rity and preserve all
evidence;
19. Urges States to endeavour to reduce, where appropriate, pretrial detention,
which should be a measure of last resort and for as short a period as possible, inter
alia, by adopting legislative and administrative measures and policies on its
preconditions, limitations, duration and alternatives and by taking measures aimed at
the implementation of existing legislation, as well as by ensuring access to justice and
legal advice and assistance, which could include legal aid s chemes;
20. Encourages States to address overcrowding in detention facilities, bearing
in mind the various impacts of COVID-19 on persons deprived of their liberty, by
taking effective measures, including through enhancing the availability and use of
alternatives to pretrial detention and custodial sentences, bearing in mind the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules) and
the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non -custodial
Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules), access to legal aid, mechanisms
for crime prevention, early release and rehabilitation programmes and the efficiency
as well as the capacity of the criminal justice system and its facilities, bearing in mind
the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal
Justice Systems;
21. Urges States to take all measures, including those related to the use of
digital technologies, necessary to prevent and eliminate discrimination in law and in
practice against persons who are in vulnerable situations or marginalized in the
administration of justice that may also result in their overincarceration and
overrepresentation throughout the criminal justice process;
22. Also urges States to pay special attention to the conditions of detention or
imprisonment of persons who are in vulnerable situations or marginalized and to their
particular needs;

22-27607

81/116

A/77/463/Add.2

23. Continues to encourage States to pay due attention to the Bangkok Rules
when developing and implementing relevant legislation, procedures, policies and
action plans, and invites relevant special procedure mandate holders, the Office of the
High Commissioner, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and all other
relevant organizations to take those rules into consideration in their activities;
24. Encourages States to review penal policies that can contribute to
overincarceration and overcrowding, in particular regarding so -called “zero-tolerance
policies”, such as the application of mandatory pretrial deten tion and mandatory
minimum sentences, especially for minor and/or non-violent crimes;
25. Recognizes that all children and juveniles alleged as, accused of or
recognized as having infringed the law, particularly those who are deprived of their
liberty, as well as child victims and witnesses of crimes, should be treated in a manner
consistent with their rights, dignity and needs, in accordance with international law,
bearing in mind relevant international standards on human rights in the administration
of justice, taking into account also the age, gender, social circumstances and
development needs of such children, and calls upon States parties to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and States parties to the Optional Protocols to the
Convention 27 to abide strictly by their principles and respective provisions;
26. Takes note with appreciation of the global study on children deprived of
liberty 28 and the leadership of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General on
Violence against Children in the follow-up to the study in cooperation with the other
entities in the United Nations inter-agency task force and the non-governmental
organization panel, and in this regard encourages Member States, United Nations
agencies, funds, programmes and offices, as well as other relevant stakeholders, to
consider the follow-up to and recommendations of the global study;
27. Encourages States that have not yet integrated children’s issues into their
overall rule of law efforts to do so and to develop and implement a comprehensive
and coordinated justice policy for children that prioritizes prevention and early
intervention to prevent and address juvenile delinquency and to address risks and
causes for children’s contact with the juvenile and/or criminal justice system by
providing necessary support through child protection systems that encompass social
protection, education and physical and mental health, as well as with a view to
promoting, inter alia, the use of alternative measures, such as diversion and
restorative justice, in cases where a child commits a crime, and complying with the
principle that deprivation of liberty of children should be used only a s a measure of
last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time, as well as to avoid, wherever
possible, the use of pretrial detention for children;
28. Stresses the importance of including reintegration strategies for former
child offenders in justice policies, in particular through the provision of gendersensitive education and life skills programmes, as well as treatment and services for
substance abuse and mental health needs, in line with relevant commitments and
obligations under international human rights law, with a view to their assuming a
constructive role in society;
29. Urges States to take all necessary and effective measures, including legal
reform where appropriate, to prevent and respond to all forms of violence against
children within the justice system, including within the informal justice system, where
it exists, and to consider applying the United Nations Model Strategies and Practical
Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime
__________________
27
28

82/116

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171, 2173 and 2983, No. 27531.
A/74/136.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Prevention and Criminal Justice, 29 as appropriate, in the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of laws, policies, programmes, budgets and mechanisms
aimed at eliminating violence against children in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice, and encourages States to support and to benefit, as appropriate, from
the programme proposed by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
United Nations Children’s Fund in this regard;
30. Also urges States to ensure that, under their legislation and practice,
neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without the possibility of release
nor corporal punishment is imposed for offences committed by persons under 18 years
of age, and encourages States to consider repealing all other forms of lif e
imprisonment for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age;
31. Encourages States not to set the minimum age of criminal responsibility
at too low an age level, bearing in mind the emotional, mental and intellectual
maturity of the child, and in this respect notes the recommendation of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child to increase the minimum age of criminal responsibility to
at least 14 years as the absolute minimum age, and to continue to increase it to a
higher age level; 30
32. Also encourages States to gather relevant information, including through
data collection and research, concerning children within their criminal justice systems
so as to improve their administration of justice, while being mindful of the children’s
right to privacy, with full respect for relevant international human rights instruments,
and bearing in mind applicable international standards on human rights in the
administration of justice;
33. Stresses the importance of paying greater attention to the impact on
children of imprisonment or other sentences imposed upon their parents, while noting
with interest the convening of and reports on all relevant meetings and panel
discussions on these issues held by the Human Rights Council; 31
34. Calls upon States to take effective and appropriate measures to remove all
barriers preventing persons with disabilities from having effective access to justice
on an equal basis with others and without discrimination;
35. Encourages States to ensure equal access to justice for persons with
disabilities through the provision of accessible information and communications,
physical accessibility to relevant premises, gender- and age-appropriate
accommodations that take into account their will and legal counselling, and, where
applicable, free or subsidized and accessible legal aid, and to deploy efforts to enable
the meaningful and equal participation of persons with disabilities throughout all
stages of the judicial process;
36. Calls upon States to ensure effective access to justice for persons with
disabilities when investigating, prosecuting and punishing persons responsible for
human rights violations and abuses committed against them, including by providing
effective remedies, taking into consideration, on an equal basis with o thers, the
specific circumstances of the person with disabilities, as well as by implementing
systemic changes, legal and policy reforms and capacity -building where needed in
order to ensure non-repetition;
37. Invites States to provide for tailored and interdisciplinary human rights
training, including anti-racist, anti-discriminatory, multicultural, disability-inclusive,
gender-sensitive and child rights training, as well as on the implications of the use of
__________________

Resolution 69/194, annex.
See CRC/C/GC/24.
31 A/HRC/21/31 and A/HRC/25/33.
29
30

22-27607

83/116

A/77/463/Add.2

digital technologies in the field of criminal justice in this regard, to all judges,
lawyers, prosecutors, social workers, immigration, correction and police officers and
other professionals concerned, including personnel deployed in international field
presences;
38. Also invites States, upon their request, to benefit from technical advice and
assistance provided by the relevant United Nations entities and programmes in order
to strengthen national capacities and infrastructures in the field of the administration
of justice;
39. Invites the Office of the High Commissioner and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to reinforce their technical assistance to States, upon request and
in accordance with their respective mandates, to strengthen the national capacity building of States in the field of the administration of justice, in particular in postconflict situations, and in this context to strengthen cooperation with relevant United
Nations entities;
40. Underlines the importance of rebuilding and strengthening structures for
the administration of justice and of respecting the rule of law and human rights,
including in post-conflict situations, as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity, and in this respect requests the Secretary -General to
further streamline and strengthen system-wide coordination and coherence of
programmes and activities of the relevant parts of the United Nations system,
including through the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary General and the global focal point arrangement for the police, justice and corrections
areas in the rule of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations;
41. Invites States, in the context of the universal periodic review mechanism
and in their reports under international human rights treaties , to consider addressing
the promotion and protection of human rights in the administration of justice;
42. Also invites States, when reviewing progress made in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to consider the possibility of
looking into the causes and effects of overincarceration and overcrowding, including,
where persons are in vulnerable situations or marginalized, with regard to
non-discrimination and persons who are in vulnerable situations or marginalized in
the administration of justice;
43. Invites relevant special procedure mandate holders of the Human Rights
Council, as well as relevant treaty bodies, to give special attention to questions
relating to the effective protection of human rights in the administration of justice,
and to provide, wherever appropriate, specific recommendations in this regard,
including proposals for advisory services and technical assistance measures;
44. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session a report on the latest developments, challenges and good
practices in human rights in the administration of justice, including on the application
of digital technologies in the administration of justice, and on the activities
undertaken by the United Nations system as a whole;
45. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of human rights in
the administration of justice at its seventy-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.

84/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution X
Missing persons
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes, principles and provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Guided also by the principles and norms of international humanitarian law, in
particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 1 and the Additional Protocols
thereto of 1977,2 as well as international standards and instruments of human rights,
in particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 3 the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,4 the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,5 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women,6 the Convention on the Rights of the Child7
and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,8
Recalling the accession by 68 States to the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 9 and calling upon States that
have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to it as a matter
of priority, as well as to consider the option provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the
Convention regarding the Committee on Enforced Disappearances,
Recalling also all previous relevant resolutions on missing persons adopted
by the General Assembly, as well as the resolutions and decisions adopted by the
Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, and Security
Council resolution 2474 (2019) of 11 June 2019,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 75/184 of 16 December 2020
as well as all previous resolutions and decisions adopted by the Commission on
Human Rights and the Human Rights Council on the right to the truth,
Noting with deep concern the growing number of armed conflicts in various
parts of the world, often resulting in serious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
Noting that the issue of persons reported missing in connection with
international or non-international armed conflicts, in particular those who are
victims of violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights
law, continues to have a negative impact on efforts to put an end to those conflicts
and inflicts grievous suffering on the families of missing persons, and stressing
in this regard the need to address the issue from, inter alia, a humanitarian and rule
of law perspective,
Expressing its concern about the dramatic increase since 2014 in persons
reported missing in connection with armed conflict, and recognizing that it is
critical for States to address the issue holistically, from prevention to the tracing,
location, identification and return of missing persons,
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
3 Resolution 217 A (III).
4 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5 Ibid.
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
7 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
1
2

22-27607

85/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Considering that the problem of missing persons may raise questions of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as appropriate,
Bearing in mind that cases of missing persons involve conduct that may
constitute criminal offences, and stressing the importance of ending impunity for
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law with
respect to missing persons,
Expressing its deep concern that thousands of migrants continue to die or go
missing each year along perilous routes on land and at sea, in transit and destination
countries, and recalling in this regard the adoption of the Progress Declaration of the
International Migration Review Forum 10 which, inter alia, requested the SecretaryGeneral to include actionable recommendations on strengthening cooperation on
missing migrants and providing humanitarian assistance,
Cognizant that States that are parties to an armed conflict have a
responsibility for countering the phenomenon of missing persons, taking all
appropriate measures to prevent persons from going missing, including, when
appropriate, effectively investigating the conditions relating to persons going
missing and determining the fate of missing persons, and for recognizing their
accountability as regards implementing the relevant mechanisms, policies and
laws, while noting the importance for States to take steps to ensure the forensic
recovery and identification of remains, where possible,
Noting that accountability, including the promotion of truth, justice, reparations
and guarantees of non-recurrence, is one of the key components of addressing the
issue of missing persons,
Bearing in mind the effective search for and identification of missing persons
using forensic sciences and other emerging technologies, and recognizing that great
technological progress has been made in this field, including DNA forensic analysis,
which can significantly assist efforts to identify missing persons and to investigate
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law,
Recognizing that the establishment and effective work of competent national
institutions can play a crucial role in clarifying the fate of missing persons in
connection with armed conflict,
Bearing in mind that the question of missing persons entails consequences
not only for the victims themselves, but also for their families, especially women,
children and older persons, and in this regard recognizing the importance of
addressing the legal situation of missing persons in connection with armed
conflict, supporting their family members through national policies that include a
gender perspective, as appropriate, and ensuring their participation in relevant
processes related to actions taken in response to cases of missing persons, as well as
their access to information and effective remedies,
Noting, in this regard, the progress made by coordination mechanisms,
established in different parts of the world, aiming at exchanging information and
identifying missing persons, which have contributed to informing families of the
fate and whereabouts of their missing relatives,
Recognizing that respect for and implementation of international
humanitarian law can reduce the number of cases of missing persons in armed
conflict, and in this regard stressing the importance of encouraging greater
understanding of and respect for international humanitarian law,
__________________
10

86/116

Resolution 76/266, annex.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Stressing the importance of measures to prevent persons from going missing in
connection with armed conflict, which may include enacting national legislation,
ensuring the registration of detainees and notification upon their detention and
allowing them to correspond with their families, ensuring the right to be treated with
humanity and respecting the human rights of all detainees and persons unaccounted
for, providing appropriate training for armed forces, producing and providing
proper means of identification, the establishment of information bureaux, grave
registration services and registers of deaths, ensuring accountability in cases of
missing persons and complying with obligations under international humanitarian
law regarding persons deprived of their liberty,
Noting that the adequate, respectful and dignified management of the dead and
good practices in casualty recording can complement efforts to prevent persons from
going missing and help to clarify the fate and whereabouts of persons unaccounted
for in armed conflict,
Stressing the need to raise public awareness of the problem of missing
persons in connection with armed conflict as an important concern, as well as relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law and human rights law,
Noting the Agreement on the Status and Functions of the International
Commission on Missing Persons, which established the Commission as an
international organization,
Noting with appreciation the ongoing international and regional efforts to
address the question of missing persons and the initiatives undertaken by
international and regional organizations in this field,
Noting the launch of the Global Alliance for the Missing with the aim of
collectively bringing to bear diplomatic, political and financial capacities and
influence to improve the prevention of, and response to, the issue of missi ng persons,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,11
1.
Urges States to strictly observe and to respect and ensure respect for
the rules of international humanitarian law, as set out in the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949 and, where applicable, in the Additional Protocols
thereto of 1977;
2.
Calls upon States parties to an armed conflict to take all appropriate
measures to prevent persons from going missing in connection with armed
conflict, to account for persons reported missing as a result of such a situation and, in
cases of missing persons, to take such measures, as appropriate, in order to ensure
thorough, prompt, impartial and effective investigations and the prosecution of
offences linked to missing persons, consistent with their obligations under
international law, with a view to full accountability;
3.
Calls upon States to take measures to prevent persons from going
missing in connection with armed conflict, including by fully implementing their
obligations and commitments under relevant international law;
4.
Urges States to avoid harm to civilians as an important factor in preventing
persons from going missing in connection with armed conflict, including in
minimizing the military use of civilian infrastructure, in accordance with applicable
international law;
5.
Reaffirms the right of families to know the fate of their relatives reported
missing in connection with armed conflict and the importance of ensuring their
__________________
11

22-27607

A/77/245.
87/116

A/77/463/Add.2

participation in relevant processes related to actions taken in response to cases of
missing persons;
6.
Also reaffirms that each party to an armed conflict, as soon as
circumstances permit and, at the latest, from the end of active hostilities, shall
search for persons who have been reported missing by an adverse party and ensure
that all relevant information on those who died as a result of armed conflict is
recorded;
7.
Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all necessary
measures, in a timely manner, to determine the identity and fate of persons
reported missing in connection with the armed conflict, without any adverse
distinction, and, to the greatest extent possible, to provide their family members,
through appropriate channels, with all relevant information that they have on their
fate, including their whereabouts or, if they are dead, the circumstances and cause
of their death;
8.
Recognizes the need for appropriate means of identification and for the
collection, protection and management of data on missing persons and unidentified
remains, consistent with applicable international and national law, and urges all
concerned States to cooperate with each other and with other concerned actors
working in this area by, inter alia, providing all relevant information related to
missing persons, including on their fate and whereabouts;
9.
Requests States to pay the utmost attention to cases of children reported
missing in connection with armed conflict and to take appropriate measures to
search for and identify those children and to reunite them with their families;
10. Invites States that are parties to an armed conflict to cooperate fully
with the International Committee of the Red Cross in establishing the fate of
missing persons and to adopt a comprehensive approach to this issue, including
all such legal and practical measures and coordination mechanisms as may be
necessary, based on humanitarian considerations only;
11. Urges States that are parties to an armed conflict to cooperate,
consistent with their international obligations, in order to effectively solve cases
of missing persons, including by providing mutual assistance in terms of
information-sharing, victim assistance, location and identification of missing persons
and recovery, identification and return of human remains and, if possible, by
identifying, mapping and preserving burial sites;
12. Invites States to encourage interaction between competent organizations
and institutions, such as national commissions on missing persons, which play a
crucial role in clarifying the fate of persons missing in connection with armed
conflict and providing support to the families of the missing;
13. Urges States, and encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to take all necessary measures at the national, regional and
international levels to address the problem of persons reported missing in
connection with armed conflict without any adverse distinction and to provide
appropriate assistance, as requested by the concerned States, and welcomes in this
regard the establishment and efforts of commissions and working groups on
missing persons;
14. Calls upon States, without prejudice to their efforts to determine the
fate of persons reported missing in connection with armed conflict, to take
appropriate steps with regard to the legal situation of missing persons and the
individual needs and accompaniment of their family members, with particular
attention to the needs of women, children and older persons, in such fields as
88/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

social welfare, psychological and psychosocial support, financial matters, family
law and property rights;
15. Invites States, national institutions and, as appropriate, intergovernmental,
international and non-governmental organizations to further their engagement
in order to follow forensic best practices as they apply to preventing and resolving
cases of missing persons in connection with armed conflict;
16. Also invites States, national institutions and, as appropriate,
intergovernmental, international and non-governmental organizations to exchange
best practices and technical recommendations and to promote cooperation, as
appropriate, including between mechanisms related to missing persons, pertaining,
inter alia, to the search for and clarification of the fate and whereabouts of missing
persons, the use and development of digital tools, forensic analysis and identification
and addressing the needs of families;
17. Further invites States, national institutions and, as appropriate,
intergovernmental, international and non-governmental organizations to ensure the
development and proper management of archives pertaining to missing persons and
unidentified remains in connection with armed conflict, as well as access to those
archives, in accordance with relevant applicable laws and regulations;
18. Stresses the need to address the issue of missing persons as a part of
peace and peacebuilding processes, with reference to all justice and rule of law
mechanisms, including the judiciary, parliamentary commissions and truth-finding
mechanisms, on the basis of transparency, accountability and public involvement
and participation;
19. Welcomes the progress made in clarifying the fate of missing persons in
connection with armed conflict;
20. Invites relevant human rights mechanisms and procedures, as
appropriate, to address the problem of persons reported missing in connection with
armed conflict in their forthcoming reports to the General Assembly;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek further the views of
Member States and relevant agencies and to submit to the Human Rights Council
at its relevant session and to the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session a
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution, including
relevant practical recommendations;
22. Invites the President of the General Assembly to convene an informal
biennial meeting of the General Assembly, from the seventy-ninth session onward,
and requests the Secretary-General to brief the Assembly during such meetings on the
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution, to be followed
by a dialogue;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Governments, the competent United Nations bodies, the specialized
agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and international humanitarian
organizations;
24.

22-27607

Decides to consider the question at its seventy-ninth session.

89/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution XI
Freedom of religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Recalling article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1
article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 and other relevant human
rights provisions,
Recalling also its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it
proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling further its previous resolutions on freedom of religion or belief and
on the elimination of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion
or belief, including its resolution 76/156 of 16 December 2021 and Human Rights
Council resolution 49/5 of 31 March 2022,3
Recognizing the important work carried out by the Human Rights Committee in
providing guidance with respect to the scope of freedom of religion or belief,
Noting the conclusions and recommendations of the expert workshops organized
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
contained in the Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national,
racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, adopted in Rabat on 5 October 2012, 4
Considering that religion or belief, for those who profess either, is one of the
fundamental elements in their conception of life and that freedom of religion or belief,
as a universal human right, should be fully respected and guaranteed,
Seriously concerned by continuing acts of intolerance and violence based on
religion or belief against individuals, including against persons belonging to religious
communities and religious minorities around the world, and by the increasing number
and intensity of such incidents, which are often of a criminal nature and may have
international characteristics,
Deeply concerned by the limited progress that has been made in the elimination
of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion o r belief, and
believing that further intensified efforts are therefore required to promote and protect
the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief and to eliminate all
forms of hatred, intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief, as noted
at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September
2001, as well as at the Durban Review Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to
24 April 2009,
Recalling that States have the primary responsibility to promote and protect
human rights, including the human rights of persons belonging to religious minorities,
including their right to exercise their religion or belief freely,

__________________

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Resolution 217 A (III).
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/77/53), chap. VI, sect. A.
4 A/HRC/22/17/Add. 4, appendix.
1
2

90/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Concerned that State and non-State actors sometimes tolerate or encourage acts
of violence, or credible threats of violence, against persons belonging to religious
communities and religious minorities,
Concerned also by the increasing number of laws and regulations that limit the
freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief and by the implementation of
existing laws in a discriminatory manner,
Convinced of the need to urgently address the rapid rise in various parts of the
world of religious extremism that affects the human rights of individuals, in particular
persons belonging to religious communities and religious minorities, the situations of
violence and discrimination that affect many individuals, particularly women and
children, on the basis of or in the name of religion or belief or in accordance with
cultural and traditional practices, and the misuse of religion or belief for ends
inconsistent with the principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations and in
other relevant instruments of the United Nations,
Seriously concerned about all attacks on religious places, sites and shrines that
violate international law, in particular international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of relics an d
monuments, and including also those carried out in connection with incitement to
national, racial or religious hatred,
Emphasizing that States, regional organizations, national human rights
institutions, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies, the media and civil
society as a whole have an important role to play in promoting tolerance and respect
for religious and cultural diversity and in the universal promotion and protection of
human rights, including freedom of religion or belief,
Underlining the importance of education, including human rights education, in
the promotion of tolerance, which involves the acceptance by the public of and its
respect for diversity, including with regard to religious expression, and underlining
also the fact that education, in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful
way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion
or belief,
1.
Stresses that everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief, which includes the freedom to have or not to have, or to adopt, a
religion or belief of one’s own choice and the freedom, either alone or in community
with others and in public or private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in teaching,
practice, worship and observance, including the right to change one’s religion or
belief;
2.
Emphasizes that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion
or belief applies equally to all persons, regardless of their religion or belief and
without any discrimination as to their equal protection by the law;
3.
Strongly condemns violations of freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief, as well as all forms of intolerance, discrimination and violence
based on religion or belief;
4.
Recognizes with deep concern the overall rise in instances of
discrimination, intolerance and violence, regardless of the actors, directed against
members of many religious and other communities in various parts of the world,
including cases motivated by Islamophobia, antisemitism and Christianophobia and
prejudices against persons of other religions or beliefs;
5.
Reaffirms that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion or belief, as this may have adverse consequences for the enjoyment of the

22-27607

91/116

A/77/463/Add.2

right to freedom of religion or belief of all members of the religious communities
concerned;
6.
Strongly condemns continuing violence and acts of terrorism targeting
individuals, including persons belonging to religious minorities, on the basis of or in
the name of religion or belief, and underlines the importance of a comprehensive and
inclusive community-based preventive approach, involving a wide set of actors,
including civil society and religious communities;
7.
Recalls that States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent,
investigate and punish acts of violence, intimidation and harassment against a person
or a group of persons belonging to a religious minority, regardless of the perpetrator,
and that failure to do so may constitute a human rights violation;
8.
Emphasizes that freedom of religion or belief, freedom of opinion and
expression, the right to peaceful assembly and the right to freedom of association are
interdependent, interrelated and mutually reinforcing, and stresses the role that these
rights can play in the fight against all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based
on religion or belief;
9.
Strongly condemns any advocacy of hatred based on religion or belief that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the
use of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any other means;
10. Expresses concern at the persistence of institutionalized social intolerance
and discrimination practised against many on the grounds of religio n or belief, and
emphasizes that legal procedures pertaining to religious or belief -based groups and
places of worship are not a prerequisite for the exercise of the right to manifest one’s
religion or belief and that such procedures, when legally required at the national or
local level, should be non-discriminatory in order to contribute to the effective
protection of the right of all persons to practise their religion or belief, either
individually or in community with others and in public or private;
11. Recognizes with concern the challenges that persons in vulnerable
situations, including persons deprived of their liberty, refugees, asylum-seekers and
internally displaced persons, children, persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities and migrants, as well as women, are facing as
regards their ability to freely exercise their right to freedom of religion or belief;
12. Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee,
restrictions on the freedom to manifest one’s religion or belief are permitted only if
limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety, order, health
or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, are non -discriminatory
and are applied in a manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief;
13. Expresses deep concern at continued obstacles to the enjoyment of the
right to freedom of religion or belief, as well as the increasing number of instances of
intolerance, discrimination and violence based on religion or belief, including:
(a) Acts of violence and intolerance directed against individuals based on their
religion or belief, including religious persons and persons belonging to religious
minorities and other communities in various parts of the world;
(b) The rise of religious extremism in various parts of the world that affects
the human rights of individuals, including persons belonging to religious minorities;
(c) Incidents of hatred, discrimination, intolerance and violence based on
religion or belief, which may be associated with or manifested by the derogatory

92/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

stereotyping, negative profiling and stigmatization of persons based on their religion
or belief;
(d) Attacks on or the destruction of religious places, sites and shrines that
violate international law, in particular international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, as they have more than material significance for the
dignity and lives of persons holding spiritual or religious belie fs;
(e) Instances, both in law and practice, that constitute violations of the human
right to freedom of religion or belief, including of the individual right to publicly
express one’s spiritual and religious beliefs, taking into account the relevant arti cles
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as other
international instruments;
(f) Constitutional and legislative systems that fail to provide adequate and
effective guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief to all
without distinction;
14. Urges States to step up their efforts to protect and promote freedom of
thought, conscience and religion or belief, and to that end:
(a) To ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide
adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief to all without distinction by, inter alia, providing access to justice, including by
facilitating legal assistance and effective remedies in cases where the right to freedom
of thought, conscience and religion or belief or the right to freely choose and practise
one’s religion or belief is violated, paying particular attention to persons belonging to
religious minorities;
(b) To implement all accepted universal periodic review recommendations
related to the promotion and protection of freedom of religion or belief;
(c) To ensure that no one within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction
is deprived of the right to life, liberty and security of person becaus e of religion or
belief, to provide adequate protection to persons at risk of violent attack on the
grounds of their religion or belief, to ensure that no one is subjected to torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or arbitrary arrest or detention
on that account and to bring to justice all perpetrators of violations of these rights;
(d) To end violations of the human rights of women and girls and to devote
particular attention to appropriate measures modifying or abolishing ex isting laws,
regulations, customs and practices that discriminate against them, including in the
exercise of their right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, and to
foster practical ways to ensure gender equality;
(e) To ensure that existing legislation is not implemented in a discriminatory
manner or does not result in discrimination based on religion or belief, that no one is
discriminated against on the basis of his or her religion or belief when accessing, inter
alia, education, medical care, employment, humanitarian assistance or social benefits,
and that everyone has the right and the opportunity to have access, on general terms
of equality, to public services in their country, without any discrimination based on
religion or belief;
(f) To review, whenever relevant, existing registration practices in order to
ensure that such practices do not limit the right of all persons to manifest their religion
or belief, either alone or in community with others and in public or private;
(g) To ensure that no official documents are withheld from the individual on
the grounds of religion or belief and that everyone has the right to refrain from

22-27607

93/116

A/77/463/Add.2

disclosing information concerning their religious affiliation in such documents
against their will;
(h) To ensure, in particular, the right of all persons to worship, assemble or
teach in connection with a religion or belief, their right to establish and maintain
places for these purposes and the right of all persons to seek, receive and impart
information and ideas in these areas;
(i) To ensure that, in accordance with appropriate national legislation and in
conformity with international human rights law, the freedom of all persons and
members of groups to establish and maintain religious, charitable o r humanitarian
institutions is fully respected and protected;
(j) To ensure that all public officials and civil servants, including members of
law enforcement bodies, and personnel of detention facilities, the military and
educators, in the course of fulfilling their official duties, respect freedom of religion
or belief and do not discriminate for reasons based on religion or belief, and that they
receive all necessary and appropriate awareness-raising, education or training on
respect for freedom of religion or belief;
(k) To take all necessary and appropriate action, in conformity with
international standards of human rights, to combat hatred, discrimination, intolerance
and acts of violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by intolerance based on
religion or belief, as well as incitement to hostility and violence, with particular
regard to persons belonging to religious minorities in all parts of the world;
(l) To promote, through education and other means, mutual understanding,
tolerance, non-discrimination and respect in all matters relating to freedom of religion
or belief by encouraging, in society at large, a wider knowledge of the diversity of
religions and beliefs and of the history, traditions, languages and cultures of the
various religious minorities existing within their jurisdiction;
(m) To prevent any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on
religion or belief that impairs the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights
and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis and to detect signs of intolerance that
may lead to discrimination based on religion or belief;
15. Welcomes and encourages initiatives by the media to promote tolerance
and respect for religious and cultural diversity and the universal promotion and
protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or belief, and stresses the
importance of unhindered participation in the media and in public discourse for all
persons, regardless of their religion or belief;
16. Stresses the importance of a continued and strengthened dialogue in all its
forms, including among and within religions or beliefs, and with broader
participation, including of women, to promote greater tolerance, respect and mutual
understanding, and welcomes different initiatives in this regard, including the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations initiative and the programmes led by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
17. Welcomes and encourages the continuing efforts of all actors in society,
including national human rights institutions, non-governmental organizations and
bodies and groups based on religion or belief, to promote the implementation of the
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination
Based on Religion or Belief,5 and further encourages their work in promoting freedom
of religion or belief, in highlighting cases of religious intolerance, discrimination and
persecution and in promoting religious tolerance;
__________________
5

94/116

Resolution 36/55.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

18. Recommends that States, the United Nations and other actors, including
national human rights institutions, non-governmental organizations and bodies and
groups based on religion or belief, in their efforts to promote freedom of religion or
belief, ensure the widest possible dissemination of the tex t of the Declaration in as
many different languages as possible and promote its implementation;
19. Takes note with appreciation of the work and the interim report on freedom
of thought of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on freedom of
religion or belief; 6
20. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, to
respond favourably to her requests to visit their countries and to provide all
information and follow-up necessary for the effective fulfilment of her mandate;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special Rapporteur
receives the resources necessary to fully discharge her mandate;
22. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-eighth session;
23. Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance at its seventy-eighth session under the item entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”.

__________________
6

22-27607

See A/77/514.
95/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution XII
Moratorium on the use of the death penalty
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,3
Recalling the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, 4 and in this regard
welcoming the increasing number of accessions to and ratifications of the Second
Optional Protocol,
Recalling also its resolutions 62/149 of 18 December 2007, 63/168 of
18 December 2008, 65/206 of 21 December 2010, 67/176 of 20 December 2012,
69/186 of 18 December 2014, 71/187 of 19 December 2016, 73/175 of 17 December
2018 and 75/183 of 16 December 2020 on the question of a moratorium on the use of
the death penalty, in which the General Assembly called upon States that still maintain
the death penalty to establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing it,
Recalling further all relevant decisions and resolutions of the Human Rights
Council, the most recent of which was resolution 48/9 of 8 October 2021,5
Mindful that any miscarriage or failure of justice in the implementation of the
death penalty is irreversible and irreparable,
Convinced that a moratorium on the use of the death penalty contributes to
respect for human dignity and to the enhancement and progres sive development of
human rights, and considering that there is no conclusive evidence of the deterrent
value of the death penalty,
Noting ongoing local and national debates and regional initiatives on the death
penalty, as well as the readiness of an increasing number of Member States to make
available to the public information on the use of the death penalty, and also, in this
regard, the decision by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 26/2 of 26 June
2014 6 to convene biennial high-level panel discussions in order to further exchange
views on the question of the death penalty,
Recognizing the role of national human rights institutions and civil society in
contributing to ongoing local and national debates and regional initiatives on the
death penalty,
Noting the long-term reductions in reported executions, as well as the increase
in commutations of death sentences, and welcoming all measures taken by States
towards limiting the application of the death penalty,
Emphasizing the need to ensure that persons facing the death penalty have access
to justice without discrimination of any kind, including access to legal counsel, that they
are treated with humanity and with respect for their inherent dignity and in compliance
with their rights under international human rights law, and to improve conditions in
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
4 Ibid., vol. 1642, No. 14668.
5 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/76/53/Add. 1), chap. IV, sect. A.
6 Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. V, sect. A.
1
2

96/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

prisons in accordance with international standards, such as the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules),7
Noting with deep concern that, as shown in recent reports of the SecretaryGeneral, frequently, poor and economically vulnerable persons, foreign nationals,
persons exercising their human rights and persons belonging to religious or ethn ic
minorities are disproportionately represented among those sentenced to the death
penalty and the discriminatory application of the death penalty, to women, 8
Noting that transparent reporting and access to information regarding the use of
the death penalty and criminal prosecutions can expose discriminatory practices or
impact in the imposition and application of the death penalty, and recalling that,
particularly in cases of capital punishment, States must guarantee transparency in
order to ensure that all persons benefit from due process guarantees,
Noting also the negative impact that the imposition of the death penalty has on
the rights of children and youth whose parents or parental caregivers face the death
penalty, as well as other family members,
Noting further the technical cooperation among Member States, as well as the
role of relevant United Nations entities and human rights mechanisms, in supporting
State efforts to establish moratoriums on the death penalty,
Bearing in mind the work of the treaty bodies and special procedure mandate
holders that have addressed human rights issues related to the death penalty within
the framework of their respective mandates,
Welcoming the considerable movement towards the abolition of the death
penalty globally and the fact that many States with different legal systems, traditions,
cultures and religious backgrounds are applying a moratorium, including long standing moratoriums, either in law or in practice, on the use of the death penalty,
1.
Reaffirms the sovereign right of all countries to develop their own legal
systems, including determining appropriate legal penalties, in accordance with their
international law obligations;
2.
penalty;

Expresses its deep concern about the continued application of the death

3.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 75/183 and the recommendations contained therein; 9
4.
Also welcomes the steps taken by some States to reduce the number of
offences for which the death penalty may be imposed, as well as steps taken to limit
its application, including by commuting death sentences;
5.
Further welcomes initiatives and political leadership encouraging national
discussions and debates on the possibility of moving away from capital punishment
through domestic decision-making;
6.
Welcomes the decisions made by an increasing number of States from all
regions, at all levels of government, to apply a moratorium on executions, followed
in many cases by the abolition of the death penalty;
7.

Calls upon all States:

(a) To respect international standards that provide safeguards guaranteeing
protection of the rights of those facing the death penalty, in particular the minimum
__________________

Resolution 70/175, annex.
See, inter alia, A/73/260 and A/75/309.
9 A/77/274.
7
8

22-27607

97/116

A/77/463/Add.2

standards, as set out in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/50 of
25 May 1984, as well as to provide the Secretary-General with information in this regard;
(b) To comply with their obligations under article 36 of the 1963 Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations, 10 particularly the obligation of a receiving State
to, without delay, inform a sending State that a national of that State has been arrested
or committed to prison or to custody pending trial or is detained in any other manner,
if the person concerned so requests; and the obligatio n of a receiving State to inform
the person concerned without delay of their rights under article 36;
(c) To make available relevant information, disaggregated by sex, age,
disability, nationality and race, as applicable, and other applicable criteria, wi th
regard to their use of the death penalty, inter alia, the number of persons sentenced to
death, the number of persons on death row and the location of their detention, and the
number of executions carried out, the number of death sentences reversed or
commuted on appeal or in which amnesty or pardon has been granted, and according
to which procedure, as well as information on any scheduled execution, which can
contribute to possible informed and transparent national and international debates,
including on the obligations of States pertaining to the use of the death penalty;
(d) To ensure that any trial leading to the imposition of the death penalty
complies with internationally recognized fair trial guarantees, such as a fair and
public trial and the right to legal assistance, including adequate access to legal counsel
at every stage of the proceedings, without discrimination of any kind, including for
persons belonging to minorities and foreign nationals, bearing in mind that namely
failure to respect fair trial guarantees in proceedings resulting in the imposition of the
death penalty could constitute a violation of the right to life;
(e) To progressively restrict the use of the death penalty and not to impose
capital punishment for offences committed by persons below 18 years of age or whose
age above 18 years at the time of the commission of the crime cannot be accurately
determined, on pregnant women or on persons with mental or intellectual disabilities;
(f) To reduce the number of offences for which the death penalty may be
imposed, including by considering removing the mandatory application of the death
penalty;
(g) To ensure that those facing the death penalty can exercise their right to
apply for pardon or commutation of their death sentence by ensuring that clemency
procedures are fair and transparent and that prompt information is provided at all
stages of the process;
(h) To ensure that children whose parents or parental caregivers are on death
row, the inmates themselves, their families and their legal representatives are
provided, in advance, with adequate information about the location of their detention,
a pending execution, its date, time and location, to allow a last visit or communication
with the convicted person, the return of the body to the family for burial or to inform
on where the body is located, unless this is not in the best interests of the child;
(i) To provide access for persons sentenced to death to information related to
the method of execution, in particular the precise procedures to be followed;
(j) To ensure that the death penalty is not applied on the basis of
discriminatory laws, including laws which target individuals for exercising their
human rights, or as a result of discriminatory or arbitrary application of the law;
(k) To improve conditions in detention for those on trial for capital crimes or
on death row, by ensuring that all prisoners are treated with humanity and with respect
__________________
10

98/116

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

for their inherent dignity, and complying with international standards, such as t he
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson
Mandela Rules), in particular by evaluating, promoting, protecting and improving
their physical and mental health;
(l) To establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the
death penalty;
8.
Calls upon States which have abolished the death penalty not to
reintroduce it, and encourages them to share their experience in this regard;
9.
Encourages States which have a moratorium to maintain it and to share
their experience in this regard;
10. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider acceding to or
ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its seventy-ninth session
under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.

22-27607

99/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution XIII
Human rights and extreme poverty
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights,3 the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination,4 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 6 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 7 and all other human rights
instruments adopted by the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 47/196 of 22 December 1992, by which it declared
17 October the International Day for the Eradication of Pov erty, as well as its
resolution 75/175 of 16 December 2020 and its previous resolutions on human rights
and extreme poverty, in which it reaffirmed that extreme poverty and exclusion from
society constituted a violation of human dignity and an obstacle to the fulfilment of
all human rights and that urgent national and international action was therefore
required to eliminate them,
Recalling also its resolution 52/134 of 12 December 1997, in which it
recognized that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights was essential for the effective understanding, promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolutions 2/2 of 27 November 2006, 8
7/27 of 28 March 2008,9 8/11 of 18 June 2008,10 12/19 of 2 October 2009,11 15/19 of
30 September 2010, 12 17/13 of 17 June 2011, 13 26/3 of 26 June 2014, 14 35/19 of
22 June 2017 15 and 44/13 of 16 July 2020 16 on human rights and extreme poverty, and
in this regard underlining the imperative need for their full and effective
implementation,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 21/11 of 27 September 2012,17 by
which the Council adopted the guiding principles on extreme poverty and human
rights 18 as a useful tool for States in the formulation and implementation of poverty
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 Ibid.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
5 Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7 Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/62/53), chap. I, sect. A.
9 Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II, sect. A.
10 Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
11 Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and A/65/53/Corr.1),
chap. I, sect. A.
12 Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add. 1), chap. II.
13 Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. III, sect. A.
14 Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. V, sect. A.
15 Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. V, sect. A.
16 Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/75/53), chap. V, sect. A.
17 Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add. 1), chap. II.
18 A/HRC/21/39.
1
2

100/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

reduction and eradication policies, as appropriate, and encouraging States to
implement the guiding principles,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, and
its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions –
economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner,
Recognizing that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is one of the
greatest global challenges in the history of the United Nations, and noting with deep
concern its impact on health and the loss of life, mental health a nd well-being, as well
as the negative impact on global humanitarian needs, the enjoyment of human rights
and across all spheres of society, including on livelihoods, food security and nutrition,
and education, the exacerbation of poverty and hunger, disru ption to economies,
trade, societies and environments, and the exacerbation of economic and social
inequalities within and among countries, which is reversing hard -won development
gains and hampering progress towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainab le
Development and all its Goals and targets,
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets seek to build on
the Millennium Development Goals and complete what they did not achieve, and that
they seek to realize the human rights of all and to achieve gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, which
is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, supports and
complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commi tment to
address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels
for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming also the objectives and goals of the Third United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027) to accelerate global actions for a world
without poverty and to support, in an efficient and coordinated manner, the
internationally agreed development goals related to poverty eradication, including the
Sustainable Development Goals and their objective of leaving no one behind and
reaching the furthest behind first,
Reaffirming further the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 19 which
states the right to development, as established in the Declaration on the Right to
Development, 20 as a universal and inalienable right and an integral part of
fundamental human rights,
Acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the world in
combating extreme poverty, however, deeply concerned that progress t owards ending
extreme poverty has been reversed by three to four years at the global level and by
eight to nine years in low-income countries, because of the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic in all countries of the world, regardless of their economic, soci al and
cultural situation, and is particularly severe in developing countries, and that it
__________________
19
20

22-27607

A/CONF. 157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution 41/128, annex.
101/116

A/77/463/Add.2

extends to and manifests itself in, among other things, social exclusion, hunger,
discrimination, vulnerability to trafficking in persons, and disease, lack of adequ ate
shelter, lack of access to basic services, including access to safe drinking water and
sanitation, and the prevalence of illiteracy and hopelessness,
Remaining deeply concerned that progress has been uneven, inequality has
increased, the total number of persons living in extreme poverty remains unacceptably
high and a net increase of 89 million people in extreme poverty by the end of 2022 is
expected compared with pre-pandemic projections, and the non-income dimensions
of poverty and deprivation, such as access to inclusive and equitable quality education
or basic health services, and relative poverty remain major concerns,
Recognizing the need to tackle health inequities and inequalities within and
among countries through political commitment, policies and international cooperation,
including those that address social, economic and environmental determinants of
health,
Deeply concerned that gender inequality, gender-based violence and
discrimination exacerbate extreme poverty, disproportionally impact ing women and
girls, and that the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the social
and economic situation of women and girls is deepening already existing inequalities
and risks slowing down the progress towards achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls made in recent decades, while recognizing the
important role and contribution of women and girls in eradicating poverty, and
acknowledging the mutually reinforcing links between the achievement of gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and the eradication of poverty
in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty,
Recognizing the importance of supporting countries in their efforts to eradicate
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, and to promote
the empowerment of the poor and of people in vulnerable situations, including
women, children, young people, Indigenous Peoples, local communities, older
persons, persons with disabilities, migrants, refugees, internally displaced persons,
persons belonging to national, ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and people
of African descent,
Concerned by the challenges faced today, including those derived from the
ongoing impact of the financial and economic crisis, foo d insecurity, volatile food
prices and other ongoing concerns over global food security, epidemics and large
movements of refugees and migrants, as well as the increasing challenges posed by
climate change and the loss of biodiversity, and by the resulting increase in the
number of people living in extreme poverty, and their negative effect on the capacity
of all States, especially developing countries, to fight extreme poverty,
Bearing in mind that, in order to break the cycle of intergenerational poverty and
vulnerability, promote the well-being of all persons of all ages, including persons with
disabilities, boost development efforts, contribute to better outcomes for children and
address the feminization of poverty, positive action needs to be taken, in cluding in the
form of policies, at the national and international levels, that address existing inequalities
in the distribution of services, resources and infrastructure, as well as access to food,
health care, education and decent work in cities and oth er human settlements,
Recognizing that the eradication of extreme poverty is a major challenge within
the process of globalization that requires the coordination and continuation of
inclusive policies through decisive national action and international coo peration, and
recognizing also in this context the role of the private sector, including the corporate
sector, in the eradication of extreme poverty,

102/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Recalling the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, 21 endorsed by
the Human Rights Council in its resolution 17/4 of 16 June 2011,22 which established
a framework to prevent and address the adverse human rights impact of business
activities, based on the three pillars of the United Nations “Prote ct, Respect and
Remedy” Framework, and recognizing in this regard the efforts made to implement
the Guiding Principles by some States, business enterprises, international
organizations and members of civil society,
Recognizing that social protection systems make a critical contribution to the
realization of human rights for all, in particular for those who are in vulnerable or
marginalized situations and are trapped in poverty and subject to discrimination,
Recognizing also that persistent and growing inequalities within and among
countries are a major challenge to poverty eradication, particularly affecting those
who are living in extreme poverty and in vulnerable situations,
Stressing the necessity of better understanding and
multidimensional causes and consequences of extreme poverty,

addressing the

Reaffirming that, since the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the
full and effective enjoyment of all human rights and may, in some situations,
constitute a threat to the right to life, its immediate alleviation and eventual
eradication must remain a high priority for the international community,
Stressing that respect for all human rights, which are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, is of crucial importance for all policies and
programmes to fight extreme poverty,
Underlining the priority and urgency given by Heads of State and Government
to the eradication of extreme poverty, as expressed in the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and the full and effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing and that they contribute to the eradication of extreme poverty,
1.
Reaffirms that extreme poverty, deep inequality and exclusion constitute a
violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international action is
therefore required to eliminate them;
2.
Also reaffirms that it is essential for States to foster participation by the
poorest people in the decision-making process in the societies in which they live, in
the promotion of human rights and in efforts to combat extreme poverty and exclusion
and that it is essential for people living in and affected by poverty and in situations
of vulnerability to be empowered to organize themselves and to participate in all
aspects of political, economic, social, cultural and civic life, in particular the planning
and implementation of policies that affect them, thus enabling them to become
genuine partners in development;
3.
Emphasizes that extreme poverty is a major issue to be addressed by
Governments, the United Nations system and international financial institution s, the
private sector, including the corporate sector, civil society and community -based
social organizations, and in this context reaffirms that political commitment is a
prerequisite for the eradication of poverty;

__________________
21
22

22-27607

A/HRC/17/31, annex.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
103/116

A/77/463/Add.2

4.
Also emphasizes that all business enterprises, both transnational
corporations and other business enterprises, have a responsibility to respect all human
rights, and recognizes that proper regulation, including through national legislation,
of transnational corporations and other business enterprises and their responsible
operation can contribute to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of and respect
for human rights and assist in channelling the benefits of business towards
contributing to the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental f reedoms;
5.
Further emphasizes the need to accord due consideration and priority to
poverty eradication within the United Nations development agenda, while stressing
the importance of addressing the causes and systemic challenges of poverty through
integrated, coordinated and coherent strategies at the national, intergovernmental and
inter-agency levels, consistent with the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields;
6.
Calls upon Member States to design recovery strategies based on riskinformed, sustainable financing policies, supported by integrated national financing
frameworks in accordance with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, 23 to enact the policies
necessary to address the economic crisis and depression resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic, begin economic recovery and minimize the negative effects of the
pandemic on livelihoods, including targeted measures for poverty eradica tion, social
protection for formal and informal sector workers, increased access to finance and
capacity-building for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, financial inclusion
mechanisms, strong fiscal stimulus packages and supportive monetary polici es, and
calls upon donors and other stakeholders to support countries that lack the capacity
to implement such measures, in particular least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States, as well as low- and middleincome countries;
7.
Reaffirms that the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the
full and effective enjoyment of human rights, renders democracy and popular
participation fragile and can also create barriers to full and effective participatio n in
political and public life, in particular for women and girls and persons with
disabilities;
8.
Recognizes the need to respect and to realize human rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to address the most pressing social needs of people
living in poverty, including through the design and development of appropriate
mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
9.
Reaffirms the commitments contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,24 in particular to leave no one behind, to reach the furthest behind and
the most vulnerable and to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 1, including by
sparing no effort to fight against and eradicate extreme poverty, which is currently
measured as people living on less than 2.15 United States dollars a day, for all people
everywhere by 2030;
10. Also reaffirms its full commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as the blueprint for building back better after the COVID-19 pandemic,
and calls upon Member States to ensure that efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda
for all, by reaching all its Goals and targets, are strengthened and accelerated in this
decade of action for building more sustainable, peaceful, just, equitable, inclusive and
resilient societies where no one is left behind and to make sustainable long -term
investments to eradicate poverty in all its forms, including extreme poverty, as well
__________________
23
24

104/116

Resolution 69/313.
Resolution 70/1.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

as address inequalities and human rights abuses or violations, which have greatly
exacerbated vulnerabilities and increased the negative effects of the COVID-19
pandemic, and address climate change and the environmental crisis in order to build
a better future for all;
11. Further reaffirms the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to
eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development
and global prosperity for all, including women and girls; 25
12. Recalls that promoting universal access to social services and providing
social protection floors can make an important contribution to consolidating and
achieving further development gains and that social protection systems that address
and reduce inequality and social exclusion are essential for protecting the gains made
towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, and in this regard
takes note of the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), of the
International Labour Organization;
13. Encourages States, when designing, implementing, monitoring and
evaluating social protection programmes, to ensure gend er mainstreaming and the
promotion and protection of all human rights in accordance with their obligations
under international human rights law, throughout this process;
14. Calls upon States to implement gender-responsive social protection
policies, as well as fiscal policies that contribute to promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of all women and girls by, inter alia, facilitating greater access to
and inclusion in social protection and financial and business services, including
credit, for women, in particular women heads of household;
15. Encourages States to take all measures necessary to eliminate
discrimination against all persons, in particular those living in poverty, to refrain from
adopting any laws, regulations or practices denying or limiting the enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including economic, social and cultural
rights, and to ensure that people, in particular those living in poverty, have equal
access to justice;
16. Calls upon Member States, in taking measures to eliminate discrimination,
to ensure that their legal frameworks, where relevant, are non -discriminatory on the
basis of socioeconomic status and to address the need to effectively remove the
obstacles that people in poverty face in areas such as housing, employment,
education, health and other social services;
17. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen and support South -South
cooperation and triangular cooperation, recognizing their contributions to the efforts
of developing countries to collaborate in the eradication of poverty, and stresses that
South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North South cooperation;
18. Encourages the international community to strengthen its efforts to
address challenges that are contributing to extreme poverty, including those derived
from the ongoing impact of the financial and economic crisis, food insecurity, volatile
food prices and other ongoing concerns over global food security, epidemics and the
increasing challenges posed by climate change and the loss of biodiversity in all parts
of the world, especially in developing countries, by enhancing cooperation to help to
build national capacities;
19. Reaffirms the critical role of quality education and lifelong learning fo r all
in achieving poverty eradication and other development goals, as envisaged in the
__________________
25

22-27607

See resolution 60/1.
105/116

A/77/463/Add.2

2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular free, equitable and quality
primary and secondary education and training for eradicating illiteracy, efforts
towards expanded secondary and higher education as well as vocational education
and technical training, especially for girls and women, the creation of human resources
and infrastructure capabilities and the empowerment of those living in poverty, also
reaffirms in this context the Dakar Framework for Action, adopted at the World
Education Forum on 28 April 2000, 26 and the Incheon Declaration: Education 2030 –
towards inclusive and equitable quality education and lifelong learning for all,
adopted at the World Education Forum 2015, 27 and recognizes the importance of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization strategy for the
eradication of poverty, especially extreme poverty, in supporting the Education for
All programmes as tools for achieving Sustainable Development Goal 4 by 2030;
20. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to give high priority to the question of the relationship between extreme
poverty and human rights, and also invites his Office to pursue further work in this area;
21. Calls upon States, United Nations bodies, in particular the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Development Programme, intergovernmental organizations and non -governmental
organizations, to continue to give appropriate attention to the links between human
rights and extreme poverty, and encourages the private sector, including the corporate
sector, and international financial institutions to proceed likewise;
22. Takes note with appreciation of the guiding principles on extreme poverty
and human rights, adopted by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 21/11, as a
useful tool for States in the formulation and implementation of poverty reduction and
eradication policies, as appropriate;
23. Encourages Governments, relevant United Nations bodies, funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies, other intergovernmental organizations and
national human rights institutions, as well as non-governmental organizations and
non-State actors, and the private sector, including the corporate sector, to consider the
guiding principles in the formulation and implementation of their policies and
measures concerning persons affected by extreme poverty;
24. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to disseminate the guiding principles, as appropriate;
25. Welcomes the efforts of entities throughout the United Nations system to
incorporate the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals set out therein into their work;
26. Takes note of the work undertaken by the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on extreme poverty and human rights, including his reports submitted
to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth 28 and seventy-seventh sessions,29 and
notes the work of the Secretary-General to address the issues referred to therein;
27. Decides to consider the question further at its seventy-ninth session, under
the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches f or
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms” of the
item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
__________________

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
27 See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum 2015, Incheon, Republic of Korea, 19–22 May 2015 (Paris, 2015).
28 A/76/177.
29 A/77/157.
26

106/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution XIV
The role of Ombudsman and mediator institutions in the
promotion and protection of human rights, good governance and
the rule of law
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2 in which the Conference
reaffirmed the important and constructive role played by national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights,
Reaffirming its resolutions 65/207 of 21 December 2010, 67/163 of 20 December
2012, 69/168 of 18 December 2014, 71/200 of 19 December 2016, 72/186 of
19 December 2017 and 75/186 of 16 December 2020 on the role of Ombudsman and
mediator institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights, good
governance and the rule of law,
Recalling the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Prin ciples), welcomed by the
General Assembly in its resolution 48/134 of 20 December 1993 and annexed thereto,
Acknowledging the principles on the protection and promotion of the
Ombudsman institution (the Venice Principles),
Recalling its previous resolutions on national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights, in particular resolutions 66/169 of 19 December 2011,
68/171 of 18 December 2013, 70/163 of 17 December 2015, 74/156 of 18 December
2019 and 76/170 of 16 December 2021, as well as Human Rights Council resolutions
23/17 of 13 June 2013,3 27/18 of 25 September 2014,4 33/15 of 29 September 2016,5
39/17 of 28 September 2018,6 45/22 of 6 October 2020 7 and 51/31 of 7 October 2022,8
Reaffirming the functional and structural differences between national human
rights institutions, on the one hand, and Ombudsman and mediator institutions, on the
other, and underlining in this regard that reports on the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions on the role of the Ombudsman and mediator institutions by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights should be stand alone reports,
Noting with appreciation that some Ombudsman or mediator institutions have
been designated as national preventive mechanisms under the Optional Protocol to
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment,9
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF. 157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
4 Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1, A/69/53/Add. 1/
Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr. 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
5 Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1 and A/71/53/
Add.1/Corr. 1), chap. II.
6 Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
7 Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/75/53/Add. 1), chap. III.
8 Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/77/53/Add. 1), chap. II, sect. A.
9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2375, No. 24841.
1
2

22-27607

107/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Acknowledging the long history of Ombudsman institutions and the subsequent
extensive developments throughout the world in creating and strengthening
Ombudsman and mediator institutions, and recognizing the important role that these
institutions can play, in accordance with their mandate, in the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, promoting good governance
and respect for the rule of law by addressing the imbalance of power between the
individual and the providers of public services,
Welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in the creation and
strengthening of Ombudsman and mediator institutions, and recognizing the
important role that these institutions can play, in accordance with their mandate, in
support of national complaint resolution,
Encouraging Member States to establish independent Ombudsman and mediator
institutions and to strengthen existing institutions, including by ens uring their
independence, consistent with relevant principles, including the Venice Principles,
and to consider seeking the assistance of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in this regard,
Recognizing that the role of Ombudsman and mediator institutions, whether they
are national human rights institutions or not, is the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, promotion of good governance and respect for the
rule of law, as a separate and additional function, but also as an integral part to all
other aspects of their work,
Underlining the importance of autonomy and independence from the executive
or judicial branches of Government, its agencies or political parties, of Ombudsman
and mediator institutions, where they exist, in order to enable them to consider all
issues related to their fields of competence, without real or perceived threat to their
procedural ability or efficiency and without fear of reprisal, intimidation or
recrimination in any form, whether online or offline, that may threaten their
functioning or the physical safety and security of their officials,
Noting with serious concern that Ombudsman and mediator institutions, where
they exist, may be under threat, whether to their autono my or credibility, to their
budgets or to the physical safety and security of their officials,
Considering the role of Ombudsman and mediator institutions in promoting
good governance in public administrations and improving their relations with
citizens, in promoting respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and in
strengthening the delivery of public services, by promoting the rule of law, good
governance, transparency, accountability, and fairness,
Considering also the important role of the existing Ombudsman and mediator
institutions in contributing to the effective realization of the rule of law and respect
for the principles of justice and equality,
Acknowledging the importance of affording these institutions, as appropriate,
the necessary mandate, including the authority to assess, monitor and, where provided
for by national legislation, investigate matters on their own initiative, as well as
protection to allow action to be taken independently and effectively against unfairness
towards any person or group and the importance of State support for the autonomy,
competence and impartiality of the Ombudsman and of the process,
Stressing the importance of the financial and administrative independence and
stability of these institutions, and noting with satisfaction the efforts of those States
that have provided their Ombudsman and mediator institutions with more autonomy
and independence, including by giving them an investigative role or enhancing such
a role,
108/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Stressing also that these institutions, where they exist, can play an important
role in advising Governments with respect to drafting or amending existing national
laws and policies, ratifying relevant international instruments and bringing national
legislation and national practices into line with their States’ international human
rights obligations,
Stressing further the importance of international cooperation between
Ombudsman offices and mediators, and recalling the role played by regional and
international associations of Ombudsman and mediator institutions in promoting
cooperation and sharing best practices,
Encouraging the Ombudsman and mediator institutions to share best practices
on their work and functioning, and to continue engaging actively with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the International
Ombudsman Institute, the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions and
other regional networks and associations to exchange experiences, lessons learned
and best practices,
Noting with satisfaction the active continuing work of the global network of
Ombudsmen, the International Ombudsman Institute, and the close cooperation with
the active regional Ombudsman and mediator associations and networks, namely, the
Association of Mediterranean Ombudsmen, the Ibero-American Federation of
Ombudsmen, the Association of Ombudsmen and Mediators of la Francophonie, the
Asian Ombudsman Association, the African Ombudsman and Mediators Association,
the Arab Ombudsman Network, the European Mediation Network Initiative, the
Pacific Ombudsman Alliance, the Eurasian Ombudsman Alliance, and other active
Ombudsman and mediator associations and networks,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;10

2.

Strongly encourages Member States:

(a) To consider the creation or the strengthening of independent and
autonomous Ombudsman and mediator institutions at the national level and, where
applicable, at the regional or local level, consistent with the principles on the
protection and promotion of the Ombudsman institution (the Venice Principles), either
as national human rights institutions or alongside them;
(b) To endow Ombudsman and mediator institutions, where they exist, with
the necessary constitutional and legislative framework, as well as State support and
protection, adequate financial allocation for staffing and other budgetary needs, a
broad mandate across all public services, the powers necessary to ensure that they
have the tools they need to select issues, resolve maladministration, investigate
thoroughly and communicate results, and all other appropriate means, in order to
ensure the efficient and independent exercise of their mandate and to strengthen the
legitimacy and credibility of their actions as mechanisms for the promotion and
protection of human rights and the promotion of good governance and respect for the
rule of law;
(c) Where they exist, to take the appropriate steps to ensure that the means of
appointment of the Ombudsman or mediator respect the full independence and State
recognition of, as well as respect for, the Ombudsman and mediator institutions and
their work;
(d) To provide for the clear mandate of Ombudsman and mediator institutions,
where they exist, to enable the prevention and appropriate resolution of any unfairness
__________________
10

22-27607

A/77/248.
109/116

A/77/463/Add.2

and maladministration and the promotion and protection of human rights, and to
report on their activities, as may be appropriate, both generally and on specific issues;
(e) To ensure that the Ombudsman and mediator institutions and their staff
have appropriate protections from unwarranted and arbitrary abuses of legal process
in respect of matters carried out in connection with their lawful duties and obligations;
(f) To take the appropriate steps to ensure that adequate protection exists for
Ombudsman and mediator institutions, where they exist, against coercion, reprisals,
intimidation or threat, including from other authorities, and that these acts are
promptly and duly investigated and the perpetrators held accountable;
(g) To give due consideration to the principles relating to the status of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) 11
when assigning to the Ombudsman or the mediator institution the role of national
preventive mechanisms and national monitoring mechanisms;
(h) To develop and conduct, as appropriate, outreach activities at the national
level, in collaboration with all relevant stakeholders, in order to raise awareness of
the important role of Ombudsman and mediator institutions;
(i) To share and exchange best practices on the work and functioning of their
Ombudsman and mediator institutions, in collaboration with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and with the International Ombudsman
Institute and other international and regional Ombudsman organizations;
3.
Recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action, it is the right of each State to choose the framework for national
institutions, including those of the Ombudsman and the mediator, which is best suited
to its particular needs at the national level, in order to promote human rights in
accordance with international human rights instruments;
4.
Encourages Member States to ensure adequate protection for their
respective Ombudsman and mediator institutions against coercion, reprisals,
intimidation or threat;
5.
Also encourages Member States to ensure that adequate funding is
provided to their respective Ombudsman and mediator institutions to enable them to
discharge their mandates in an independent and efficient manner;
6.
Recognizes that the practical effectiveness of the chosen framework for
such national institutions should be monitored and assessed, consistent with
internationally accepted and recognized standards, and that this framework should
neither threaten the autonomy nor the independence of the institution nor diminish its
ability to carry out its mandate;
7.
Welcomes the active participation of the Office of the High Commissioner
in all international and regional meetings of Ombudsman and mediator institutions,
whether in person or, alternatively, by electronic means;
8.
Encourages Member States and regional and international Ombudsman
and mediator institutions to regularly interact, exchange information and share best
practices with the Office of the High Commissioner on all matte rs of relevance;
9.
Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner, through its advisory
services, to develop and support activities dedicated to the existing Ombudsman and
mediator institutions and to strengthen their role within national systems for hum an
rights protection;
__________________
11

110/116

Resolution 48/134, annex.
22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

10.

Encourages Ombudsman and mediator institutions, where they exist:

(a) To operate, as appropriate, in accordance with all relevant international
instruments, including the Paris Principles and the Venice Principles, in order to
strengthen their independence and autonomy and to enhance their capacity to assist
Member States in the promotion and protection of human rights and the promotion of
good governance and respect for the rule of law;
(b) To request, in cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner, their
accreditation by the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions, where
the Ombudsman or mediator institution is the national human rights institution, in
order to enable them to interact effectively with the relevant human rights bodies of
the United Nations system;
(c) To publicly report, in the interests of accountability and transparency, to
the authority that appoints the Ombudsman or the mediator of Member States on their
activities at least annually;
(d) To cooperate with relevant State bodies and develop cooperation with civil
society organizations, without compromising their autonomy or independence;
(e) To conduct awareness-raising activities on their roles and functions, in
collaboration with all relevant stakeholders;
(f) To engage with the International Ombudsman Institute, the Global Alliance
of National Human Rights Institutions and other regional networks and associations,
with a view to exchanging experiences, lessons learned and best practices;
11. Requests the President of the General Assembly to hold, within existing
resources, during the seventy-eighth session, a high-level panel on the theme “Public
accessibility and inclusivity: developing strategic initiatives to raise awareness on the
role and work of Ombudsman and mediator institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights, good governance and the rule of law” and prepare a
summary of the discussion for transmission to all Member States;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution, in particular
on the obstacles encountered by Member States in this regard, and on best practices
in the work and functioning of Ombudsman and mediator institutions, as well as on
solutions to promote the role and work of Ombudsman and mediator institutions in
the promotion and protection of human rights, good governance and the rule of law.

22-27607

111/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Draft resolution XV
Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization,
discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against
persons, based on religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter of the United
Nations to promote and encourage universal respect for and observance of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as to, inter alia, religion or
belief,
Welcoming Human Rights Council resolutions 16/18 of 24 March 2011,1 19/25
of 23 March 2012,2 22/31 of 22 March 2013,3 28/29 of 27 March 2015,4 31/26 of
24 March 2016, 5 34/32 of 24 March 2017, 6 37/38 of 23 March 2018, 7 40/25 of
22 March 2019,8 43/34 of 22 June 2020,9 46/27 of 24 March 2021 10 and 49/31 of
1 April 2022, 11 and General Assembly resolutions 67/178 of 20 December 2012,
68/169 of 18 December 2013, 69/174 of 18 December 2014, 70/157 of 17 December
2015, 71/195 of 19 December 2016, 72/176 of 19 December 2017, 73/164 of
17 December 2018, 74/164 of 18 December 2019, 75/187 of 16 December 2020 and
76/157 of 16 December 2021,
Reaffirming the obligation of States to prohibit discrimination and violence on
the basis of religion or belief and to implement measures to guarantee the equal and
effective protection of the law,
Reaffirming also that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated,
Reaffirming further that the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights 12 provides, inter alia, that everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief, which shall include freedom to have or to adopt a
religion or belief of one’s choice and freedom, either alone or in community with
others and in public or private, and to manifest one’s religion or belief in worship,
observance, practice and teaching,
Reaffirming the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression and full respect for the freedom to seek, re ceive and impart
information can play in strengthening democracy and combating religious
intolerance, and reaffirming further that the exercise of the right to freedom of
expression carries with it special duties and responsibilities, in accordance with
article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,

__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53),
chap. II, sect. A.
2 Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and A/67/53/Corr. 1),
chap. III, sect. A.
3 Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
4 Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
5 Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
6 Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
7 Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
8 Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
9 Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/75/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
10 Ibid., Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/76/53), chap. V, sect. A.
11 Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/77/53), chap. VI, sect. A.
12 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
1

112/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

Expressing deep concern at those acts that advocate religious hatred and thereby
undermine the spirit of tolerance and respect for diversity,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Condemning the criminal acts committed by terrorist and extremist groups and
movements against persons based on their religion or belief, and deeply regretting
attempts to link such acts to any one specific religion or belief,
Reaffirming that violence can never be an acceptable response to acts of
intolerance on the basis of religion or belief,
Recalling its adoption of resolutions 69/140 of 15 December 2014, 70/19 of
3 December 2015, 71/249 of 22 December 2016, 72/136 of 11 December 2017,
73/129 of 12 December 2018, 74/23 of 12 December 2019, 75/26 of 2 December 2020
and 76/69 of 9 December 2021 on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace, 69/312 of 6 July 2015 on the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and 67/104 of 17 December 2012, in which
the General Assembly proclaimed the period 2013–2022 as the International Decade
for the Rapprochement of Cultures,
Deeply concerned about continuing incidents of intolerance, discrimination and
violence against persons based on their religion or belief in all regions of the world,
Deploring any advocacy of discrimination or violence on the basis of religion
or belief,
Strongly deploring all acts of violence against persons on the basis of their
religion or belief, as well as any such acts directed against their homes, businesses,
properties, schools, cultural centres or places of worship,
Strongly deploring also all attacks on and in religious places, sites and shrines,
which are in violation of international law, in particular human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of reli cs and
monuments,
Deeply concerned about the prevalence of impunity in some instances, and the
lack of accountability in some cases, in addressing violence against persons on the
basis of religion or belief in public and private spheres, and stressing the importance
of making the necessary efforts to raise awareness to address the spread of hate speech
against persons on the basis of religion or belief,
Concerned about actions that wilfully exploit tensions or target individuals on
the basis of their religion or belief, in particular actions that seek to prevent their
exercise and full enjoyment of freedom of religion or belief,
Expressing deep concern at the instances of intolerance and discrimination and
acts of violence occurring in the world, including cases motivated by discrimination
against persons belonging to religious minorities, in addition to the negative
projection of the followers of religions and the enforcement of measures that
specifically discriminate against persons on the basis of religion or belief,
Expressing concern at the growing manifestations of intolerance based on
religion or belief, which can generate hatred and violence among individu als from
and within different nations and which may have serious implications at the national,
regional and international levels, and in this regard emphasizing the importance of
respect for religious and cultural diversity, as well as interreligious, inte rfaith and
intercultural dialogue aimed at promoting a culture of tolerance and respect among
individuals, societies and nations,

22-27607

113/116

A/77/463/Add.2

Recognizing the valuable contribution of people of all religions or beliefs to
humanity and the contribution that dialogue among religious groups can make
towards an improved awareness and understanding of the common values shared by
all humankind,
Underlining the fact that States, regional organizations, national human rights
institutions, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and the media have an
important role to play in promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural
diversity and in the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including
freedom of religion or belief,
Underlining also the importance of raising awareness about different cultures
and religions or beliefs and of education in the promotion of tolerance, which involves
the acceptance by the public of and its respect for religious and cultural diversity,
including with regard to religious expression, and underlining further the fact that
education, in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to promoting
tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or belief,
Underlining further that educational measures, youth forums, strategic plans
and public information and media campaigns, including online platforms, may
contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of negative
stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and violence
against persons, based on religion or belief,
Recognizing that working together to enhance the implementation of existing
legal regimes that protect individuals against discrimination and hate crimes,
increasing interreligious, interfaith and intercultural efforts and expanding human
rights education are important first steps in combating incidents of intolerance,
discrimination and violence against individuals on the basis of religion or belief,
Recalling its resolution 72/241, entitled “A world against violence and violent
extremism”, adopted by consensus on 20 December 2017, welcoming the leading role
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in promoting
intercultural dialogue, the work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizat ions, the
work of the Anna Lindh Euro-Mediterranean Foundation for the Dialogue between
Cultures in Alexandria, Egypt, and the work of the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna, and
recalling also its resolution 65/5 of 20 October 2010 on World Interfaith Harmony
Week, proposed by King Abdullah II of Jordan,
Welcoming in this regard all international, regional and national initiatives
aimed at promoting interreligious, intercultural and interfaith harmony and combating
discrimination against individuals on the basis of religion or belief, and recalling the
initiative of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide on the role of religious leaders in preventing incitement that could lead to
atrocity crimes and the declaration of its forum held in Fez, Morocco, on 23 and
24 April 2015, the Istanbul Process for Combating Intolerance, Discrimination and
Incitement to Hatred and/or Violence on the Basis of Religion or Belief, the
announcement on 6 October 2016 of the establishment by the United Arab Emirates
of the International Institute for Tolerance for promoting the value of tolerance among
nations, the Amman Declaration on Youth, Peace and Security adopted on 22 August
2015 and the sixth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, held in
Nur-Sultan on 10 and 11 October 2018, as well as the initiative of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and its outcome document, the
Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious

114/116

22-27607

A/77/463/Add.2

hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, adopted in
Rabat on 5 October 2012,13
Taking note with appreciation of the continuation of the organization of
workshops and meetings within the framework of the Istanbul Process and the
promotion of effective implementation of Human Rights Council resolution 16/18 to
counter global violence, religious discrimination and intolerance, in particular the sixth
implementation meeting of the Process, hosted by Singapore on 20 and 21 July 2016,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;14

2.
Expresses deep concern at the continued serious instances of derogatory
stereotyping, negative profiling and stigmatization of persons based on their religion
or belief, as well as programmes and agendas pursued by extremist individuals,
organizations and groups aimed at creating and perpetuating negative stereotypes
about religious groups, in particular when condoned by Governments;
3.
Expresses concern that the number of incidents of religious intolerance,
discrimination and related violence, as well as of negative stereotyping of individuals
on the basis of religion or belief, continues to rise around the world, which may have
serious implications at the national, regional and international levels, condemns, in
this context, any advocacy of religious hatred against individuals that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, and urges States to take effective
measures, as set forth in the present resolution and consistent with their obligations
under international human rights law, to address and combat such incidents;
4.
Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual
or electronic media or any other means;
5.
Recognizes that the open public debate of ideas, as well as interreligious,
interfaith and intercultural dialogue, at the local, national and international levels, can be
among the best protections against religious intolerance and can play a positive role in
strengthening democracy and combating religious hatred, and expresses its conviction
that a continuing dialogue on these issues can help to overcome existing misperceptions;
6.
Also recognizes the strong need for global awareness about the possible
serious implications of incitement to discrimination and violence, which may have
serious implications at the national, regional and international levels, and urges all
Member States to make renewed efforts to develop educational systems that promote
all human rights and fundamental freedoms that enhance tolerance for religious and
cultural diversity, which is fundamental to promoting tolerant, peaceful and
harmonious multicultural societies;
7.
Calls upon all States to take the following actions, as called for by the
Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to foster a domestic
environment of religious tolerance, peace and respect by:
(a) Encouraging the creation of collaborative networks to build mutual
understanding, promoting dialogue and inspiring constructive action towards shared
policy goals and the pursuit of tangible outcomes, such as servicing projects in the fields
of education, health, conflict prevention, employment, integration and media education;
(b) Creating an appropriate mechanism within Governments to, inter alia,
identify and address potential areas of tension between members of different religious
communities and assisting with conflict prevention and mediation;
__________________
13
14

22-27607

A/HRC/22/17/Add. 4, appendix.
A/77/487.
115/116

A/77/463/Add.2

(c) Encouraging the training of government officials in effective outreach
strategies;
(d) Encouraging the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities the
causes of discrimination and developing strategies to counter those causes;
(e) Speaking out against intolerance, including advocacy of religious hatred
that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence;
(f) Adopting measures to criminalize incitement to imminent violence based
on religion or belief;
(g) Understanding the need to combat denigration and the negative religious
stereotyping of persons, as well as incitement to religious hatred, by strategizing and
harmonizing actions at the local, national, regional and international levels through,
inter alia, education and awareness-raising;
(h) Recognizing that the open, constructive and respectful debate of ideas, as
well as interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue, at the local, national,
regional and international levels, can play a positive role in c ombating religious
hatred, incitement and violence;
8.

Also calls upon all States:

(a) To take effective measures to ensure that public functionaries, in the
conduct of their public duties, do not discriminate against individuals on the basis of
religion or belief;
(b) To foster religious freedom and pluralism by promoting the ability of
members of all religious communities to manifest their religion and to contribute
openly and on an equal footing to society;
(c) To encourage the representation and meaningful participation of
individuals, irrespective of their religion or belief, in all sectors of society;
(d) To make a strong effort to counter religious profiling, which is understood
to be the invidious use of religion as a criterion in conducting que stioning, searches
and other investigative law enforcement procedures;
9.
Further calls upon all States to adopt measures and policies to promote
full respect for and protection of places of worship and religious sites, cemeteries and
shrines and to take protective measures in cases where they are vulnerable to
vandalism or destruction;
10. Calls for strengthened international efforts to foster a global dialogue for
the promotion of a culture of tolerance and peace at all levels, based on respect for
human rights and diversity of religions and beliefs;
11. Encourages all States to consider providing updates on efforts made in this
regard as part of ongoing reporting to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and in this respect requests the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to include those updates in his reports to the Human
Rights Council;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session a report that includes information provided by the High
Commissioner on steps taken by States to combat intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons,
based on religion or belief, as set forth in the present resolution.

116/116

22-27607
