S/PV.8305

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8305th meeting

Monday, 9 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Löfven/Mr. Skoog/Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soría
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djedje
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wever-Croes
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Protecting children today prevents conflicts tomorrow
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2018/465)
Letter dated 21 June 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Sweden to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2018/625)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-21402 (E)
*1821402*

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of the Security Council, to
pay tribute to His Excellency Mr. Vassily Nebenzia,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Council for the month of June. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Nebenzia and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Protecting children today prevents
conflicts tomorrow
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2018/465)
Letter dated 21 June 2018 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Sweden to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/625)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Their presence underscores
the importance of the subject matter we will discuss
today. Before each member is a list of speakers who
have requested to take the floor in accordance with
rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice of the Council
in this regard. We propose that they be invited to
participate in today’s meeting.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in today’s meeting: Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta
Fore, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund; and Ms. Yenny Londoño, civil society
representative.
2/96

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

09/07/2018

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/465, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/625, which contains a letter dated
21 June 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Sweden to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2018/667, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by 95 Member States. The full list
of sponsors of the draft resolution will be reflected in
the official record of today’s meeting.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2427 (2018).
I now give the floor to Ms. Gamba.
Ms. Gamba: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
who is currently attending the African Union-United
Nations annual conference in Addis Ababa, I would
like to thank Sweden and its Prime Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Stefan Löfven, for taking the initiative
to hold today’s debate. In my own capacity, I would
also like to also thank Sweden for its exceptional
role as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed conflict and its dedicated
support for the children-and-armed-conflict mandate.
I also want to thank my close partners, in particular,
UNICEF, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Political Affairs and civil society.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

This is the second time I have had the honour
to address the Security Council in the Chamber on
the situation of children affected by armed conflict.
Over the course of these past 13 months, I have had
the opportunity to follow first hand the outstanding
work undertaken by child-protection actors on the
ground. These dedicated men and women are at the
forefront of documenting, addressing and preventing
grave violations against children in some of the most
difficult conditions imaginable. I would like to take
this opportunity to express my heartfelt gratitude for
their commitment.
Notwithstanding their efforts, I am profoundly
shocked by the appalling number of grave violations
perpetrated against children last year. Over 21,000
violations were documented by the United Nations,
representing a significant increase over the previous
year. Each and every one of these violations led to
unspeakable suffering for children, families and
entire communities. The majority of these despicable
acts were perpetrated by armed groups, although
Government forces and unknown armed actors played
an important part.
A sharp rise in the number of abductions,
coinciding with increased levels of recruitment and
use of both girls and boys, was of particular concern.
In Somalia, Al-Shabaab abducted over 1,600 children
by threatening entire communities or targeting
schools as places for recruitment. Surges in violence
also resulted in elevated numbers of children killed
or injured, including in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Iraq and Myanmar, while Boko Haram in
Nigeria and neighbouring countries continued to attack
both military and civilian targets by using children to
perpetrate suicide attacks.
Schools and hospitals continued to be directly
targeted or were damaged as a result of indiscriminate
attacks in densely populated areas, denying tens of
thousands of children access to education and health
care. Similarly, broad-based denials of humanitarian
access and attacks on humanitarian convoys and
personnel cut off children from essential aid, thereby
further increasing their vulnerability.
I am also concerned that children allegedly
associated with armed groups, particularly those using
tactics of extreme violence, continued to be detained in
harsh conditions, often without charge and for extended
periods. While those responsible for grave violations

S/PV. 8305

must be held to account, we also must not forget that
children who have been recruited should be treated
primarily as victims and that detention should be used
only as a last resort and for the shortest period of time. I
feel strongly that rehabilitation and reintegration — and
not retribution — must be the centrepiece of our efforts
when engaging with recruited girls and boys.
Urgent action is needed to address those issues if we
want to live up to our legal and moral responsibilities.
Recent commitments by parties to conflict are a source
of hope in that regard. Action plans were adopted in the
Central African Republic, Mali and Nigeria. The full
implementation of its action plan by the Government of
the Sudan and the advances in the protection of children
attained through the peace process in Colombia are
testament to what we can achieve when political will
and international support coincide. The Government of
Iraq set out to develop an action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children by the Popular
Mobilization Forces, and the coalition to restore
legitimacy in Yemen established a child-protection unit
at its headquarters. The ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict by the
Government of the Central African Republic in 2017
moved us one country closer to universal ratification.
Specific Member State initiatives, such as
the ministerial conference organized by France to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Principles and Commitments, the endorsement of the
Safe Schools Declaration by 15 States last year and
the adoption of the Vancouver Principles, continued
to shine a spotlight on the protection of children
affected by armed conflict and catalyse support for this
important agenda. I firmly believe that we must build
on those advances to move to an era of prevention.
Failing to assume this collective responsibility not
only puts boys and girls at risk but may also reduce
societies’ ability to overcome conflict and to build
peace. Preventing violations against children must
therefore be an integral part of any strategy to reach
and sustain peaceful settlements.
In that regard, I am happy to announce that,
following presidential statement S/PRST/2017/21,
adopted by the Council during last year’s open debate
(see S/PV.8082), my Office commenced a consultative
process with United Nations partners to compile good
practices and develop practical guidance on integrating

18-214023/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

child protection issues into peace processes. I am
glad to benefit from the support of the Government of
Sweden in that regard, for which I would like to thank
Prime Minister Löfven.
The tools that will be developed as the result will
aim at enhancing our ability to mainstream children’s
issues in such processes to give early guarantees for the
protection and reintegration of children, which may also
serve to build confidence between negotiating parties.
I am also encouraged by the process undertaken by the
Government of the Sudan to develop a broad national
strategy to prevent grave violations against children,
building on the gains of its action plan. Replicating that
initiative with Governments, as well as regional and
subregional actors, is a promising strategy to foster a
child-protection architecture focused on prevention and
ensure common approaches and standards.
Finally, resolution 2427 (2018), adopted by the
Council just a few minutes ago, provides childprotection actors with political space to engage parties
to conflict at an early stage, and is thus a milestone
in our common journey to make violations against
children a thing of the past.
Moving towards an era of prevention also requires
the provision of adequate resources. Over 10,000
children were formally released from armed forces or
groups last year, while over 12,000 children affected
by conflict were reached by reintegration support
provided by UNICEF and partners. Those 12,000 boys
and girls have been given an opportunity to overcome
their traumatic past and become forces for peace within
their communities.
However, many children formerly associated with
parties to conflict left those parties through informal
pathways. They often live in a state of heightened
vulnerability and are in urgent need of support. We
must ensure that actors in the field are provided with
predictable, sustained and flexible funding to enable
them to react to immediate reintegration needs and
sustain those efforts. I am currently working with
UNICEF and other child-protection actors to further
promote this idea. The Council will hear today from
Yenny Londoño about her experiences with the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo and about her general views on reintegration
needs from their standpoint.
Equally, there is a need to continue prioritizing
child-protection capacity in order to translate resources
4/96

09/07/2018

and opportunities into results, including by requesting
adequate capacity in the mandates of relevant peace
operations. In that regard, I am encouraged that regional
actors, such as the African Union and NATO, have
strengthened their child-protection capacity. I look
forward to engaging with other regional and subregional
organizations over the course of the coming months to
strengthen child-protection frameworks.
Finally, the level and severity of violations that fill
the pages of the latest annual report (S/2018/465) of the
Secretary-General serve as a reminder that we must
work in unison to change the tide of history. We cannot
further jeopardize our most precious resource through
inaction, but must increase our efforts to develop
preventive tools, utilize reintegration strategically to
break cycles of violence and address the cross-border
nature of violations through increased cooperation.
I began my statement by painting a grim picture of
several conflict situations — and I could have mentioned
many more. Yet we must not leave the Chamber today
in despair. The resolution adopted today is a further
step in strengthening the framework of child protection
provided by the Council, which has given us the tools to
engage in ways that would have been unthinkable just
a few years ago. Our capacity to jointly put those tools
to work will decide the fate of thousands of children,
and ultimately whether we are able to move closer to
ending forever the use and abuse of children in, and for,
armed conflict.
The President: I thank Ms. Gamba for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fore.
Ms. Fore: I appreciate the steadfast commitment
of the members of the Security Council to the plight of
children affected by armed conflict around the world.
Today, one in every four children lives in a country
affected by conflict or disaster. Like the statistics
detailed in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/465),
one in every four children is a number almost beyond
comprehension — almost, until you meet, as I have,
the children and young people whose lives are being
shattered by conflicts, for example in Yemen, Mali and
South Sudan; the children who are malnourished and
sick, at risk of being maimed or killed by a landmine
or by delivered attacks on schools and hospitals;
vulnerable to gender-based violence; recruited to
fighting; losing hope not only in their futures but in the
futures of their countries.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

UNICEF is sparing no effort to support these
children. In Iraq, for example, we reached 1.3 million
children on the move with life-saving supplies like
water and ready-to-eat rations, and almost 400,000
with psychosocial support last year. In South Sudan,
we reached 780,000 children under the age of five
with health, nutrition, water and sanitation for health,
education and protection services. With our partners,
we are also making progress in releasing children
from armed groups and armed forces and supporting
their reintegration. Last year, 12,000 children were
reintegrated into their communities. For example, in
the Central African Republic about 3,000 children
received interim care, psychosocial support and family
reunification services. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, UNICEF worked with partners to release
and reintegrate over 3,200 children from armed groups,
and so far this year 806 children have been released
from armed forces and groups in South Sudan and are
receiving reintegration services.
Our work must continue. Last year saw 21,000
verified violations against children — a dramatic
increase from the year before — more children killed or
maimed; more young survivors of rape; more recruited
to the fighting; more abducted. And these are just the
verified numbers. Our teams on the ground know that
the number of violations is in fact much higher.

S/PV. 8305

to endure — as they mark their country’s seventh year
of independence today. How can we prepare children to
shape peaceful futures if they do not know what peace
even looks like?
As we renew our call on these conflicts to stop,
we also call for zero tolerance of all violations against
children — violations that fuel grievances that enflame
and perpetuate conflicts across generations; violations
like attacks on hospitals and schools, which is why
we call again on States to endorse and implement
the Safe Schools Declaration; violations like the
deliberate targeting of children, which must stop;
and violations like detaining children for associating
with armed groups or armed forces. We commend the
Council’s strong resolution 2427 (2018) — proposed by
Sweden — on this issue. Too often, these children are
locked up with adults and without legal representation,
due process or contact with family members, all of
which is contrary to international humanitarian and
human rights law.

As a global community, we must ask ourselves
what will become of these young lives in both the short
and long terms. In the short term, children’s lives are
in immediate danger not only from the violence itself,
but also as basic services collapse. In Yemen, I visited
hospitals staffed by workers who have nOt been paid in
two years; where there are not enough respirators and
medicine to go around; where mothers hold their frail,
acutely malnourished children; where psychosocial
workers counsel terrified children about the horrors
they have witnessed and remembered.

Progress is possible. Just today, the Nigerian army
released 183 children — 175 boys and 8 girls — to
UNICEF’s care. These children had been detained for
alleged association with Boko Haram. Today’s action
was the result of intense effort and engagement for
their release. As we work for many more children to
be released, we must also support these young lives as
they reintegrate into their communities. Stigma is often
the single biggest barrier. As we reintegrate a child into
a community, we face difficult questions. How does
a community view a boy who was part of a raid that
killed a member of that community, or a girl who was
abducted or abused by an armed group and has never
been to school? We must invest in local solutions that
address community fears and concerns, while giving
these children the chance at a normal life that they
deserve, including through quality education, training
in life skills and work skills and psychosocial support.

These immediate costs of conflict come with longterm consequences. If we fail to prevent violations
against children today, we fail to prevent violence
against children tomorrow. Today’s children will grow
up to see violence and conflict as normal, acceptable
and inevitable. We need only think of the children
who have grown up knowing nothing but war. In his
lifetime, a seven-year old Syrian child has never known
a peaceful Syria; an Afghan teenager has never known
a peaceful Afghanistan. And let us consider what the
children of South Sudan have endured — and continue

We also believe that child protection and upholding
children’s rights are a fundamental part of any peace
process, which is why we welcome the Council’s recent
request to launch a process to compile guidance and
best practices on weaving children’s rights into peace
negotiations. In the Philippines, for example, over
the past decade UNICEF has worked closely with
commanders of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
to release more than 1,850 children from its ranks
and begin the process of reintegrating them into
their communities. This includes raising awareness

18-214025/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

with commanders and community members to end
recruitment and provide support, education and familyintervention plans for the released. This process not
only led to the group’s de-listing in the Secretary
General’s 2017 report (S/2017/821); most importantly,
it helped restart peace negotiations and it helped restart
young lives.
In Mali, children themselves are becoming agents
of peace in their communities and raising awareness of
the rights that every child has to protection, education,
birth registration and health. Last year, UNICEF trained
310 children as Peace Ambassadors who go door to
door in vulnerable communities to promote dialogue,
peacebuilding and the importance of keeping children
and young people — especially girls — in school.
And this year, as part of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, we have helped train 2,500
young people to promote peace in pastoral and farming
communities through local meetings, debates, radio
broadcasts and social media. These are two examples
of how children and young people are not just passive
recipients of peace and reconciliation efforts, but how
they can lead them.
But as conflicts increase in number and ferocity,
thousands of children are slipping through our safety
nets worldwide. Civilians and communities are being
targeted on a scale not seen since the Second World
War. Consequences for violations are small, if they are
imposed at all.
As most major conflicts are driven and perpetuated
by political conflict, addressing them demands building
political will — political will to increase resources to
reach children and young people with the support they
need, and build the human capital that every society
needs to shape a resilient and sustainable future;
political will to end to violations against children
now; political will for all parties to conflict to adhere
to humanitarian law and principles, not as a distant,
utopian dream but as a practical and necessary pathway
to a better future; and most of all, political will to end
these conflicts, urgently, and to place peace first by
placing children first.
When faced with the escalating consequences of
conflict to a generation of children who have never
known peace, we — All of us — have a duty to act
for the children and for the future of our world. Once
again, I thank the Council for the opportunity to
6/96

09/07/2018

shine a light on this important issue. I look forward to
its deliberations.
The President: I thank Ms. Fore for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Londoño.
Ms. Londoño (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I am
grateful for the opportunity that the Security Council
has given us to participate in such an important forum. I
express special thanks go to the Government of Sweden,
which invited us and helped us travel from Colombia, as
well as to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict.
I am speaking in the first person plural as I am
representing the Group of Young Consultants on
Childhood, Adolescence and Armed Conflict, and I
am also speaking on behalf of children and adolescents
who are tragically experiencing recruitment and
exploitation by armed groups and grave violations of
their rights in various parts of the world.
Under the slogan “Our Voices Count”, the Group
of Young Consultants was spawned by an initiative
of the civil society organization Benposta and relies
on the support of the European Union, which has
joined in recognizing, supporting and encouraging
other organizations, such as Oxfam International,
Humanidad Vigente and the Coalition Against
Involving Children in Armed Conflict in Colombia
and the Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict in
New York. In my particular case, I joined the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) at the age of 13. I cut ties with
the latter in very strange circumstances after having
seen combat, and subsequently went through various
programmes. Today I am pursuing a law degree and I
am currently in my ninth semester. In 2014, I had the
opportunity to travel to Havana and participate as a
victim of recruitment in a delegation at talks between
the Colombian Government and the FARC-EP.
I am grateful to the countries represented in the
Chamber for their representatives’ willingness to listen,
as my message is mainly addressed to States, which are
responsible for developing and implementing policies
aimed at the prevention and protection of children
and adolescents.
As the Secretary-General states in his recent report,
“Preventing violations against children
affected by conflict should be a primary concern
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

of the international community ... We must do
more to address this challenge by ensuring that
child protection is made an integral part of any
comprehensive strategy to prevent and resolve
conflict in view of enabling sustainable peace and
by promoting the close involvement of children
during the development of such strategies.”
(S/2018/465, para. 11)
In that regard, I am speaking as an advocate for the
following recommendations.
It is essential that the root causes that compelled us
to join such groups be resolved, as most of our pasts have
been marked by the violation of our rights, including
access to education, health care, housing, employment,
our families’ livelihoods, security, participation in
cultural life and sports and recreation, among others.
We are deeply concerned that the failure to change the
social and economic conditions of our families and
communities seriously hinders our social integration,
thereby giving way to our constant temptation to rejoin
those groups. We therefore underscore that the best way
to prevent the recruitment of children is by guaranteeing
their rights on the ground. Similarly, Governments
must ensure the relevant security conditions to protect
our physical, personal and psychological integrity.
Unfortunately, many children who have disassociated
themselves from such groups are currently facing
problems, including the threats that they receive when
they return to their local areas, and, often times,
institutional support from the Government is scarce or
non-existent.
It is also essential that, in the various phases
of the process of reintegration, we be given the
opportunity to express our opinion and decide our
lives, thereby ensuring our participation in developing
and implementing public policies related to our rights.
Educational programmes involving psychological
support, skills acquisition and comprehensive training
must consider our particularities and include a gender
and ethnic approach that allows us to exercise our right
to integration, social inclusion, education and housing,
among others, in decent conditions, while respecting
our professional aspirations.
It is important to address the specific needs of
girls in developing reintegration programmes, given
that the way in which we are affected is different from
that of boys. It must be remembered that, in terms of
reintegration, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to

S/PV. 8305

every case. We also recommend that our families be
included and, in as much as possible, participate in the
reintegration process, while trying to repair, rebuild and
strengthen the bonds between them and the community.
It is worrisome that schools and educational centres
are being affected and/or occupied by armed actors,
thereby seriously affecting the learning process of
children and their and their teachers and professors’
physical integrity. In that regard, we ask Governments
that have not yet signed the Safe Schools Declaration to
do so, and we have been waiting on a deferred response
from Colombia, among other countries, since 2015.
We call on Governments to fulfil their commitments
regarding children and adolescents, including their
right to be treated as victims and thereby entitled to
full reparations. In situations of conflict, when they
are implicated in the actions of armed groups, many
children are treated as delinquents and are unable to
acquire the status of crime victims and included in
Government protection programmes for children. On
the contrary, we wind up in detention centres. It is worth
highlighting that Colombia has enacted the victims
law, which constitutes an advanced and sophisticated
legal framework for the protection of victims. That
framework can contribute to the exchange of good
practices and lessons learned among countries that face
similar problems so as to ensure that all children are
treated primarily as victims.
Lastly, concerning full reparations, unfortunately,
several of our colleagues, after having left the group
more than 10 years ago and been acknowledged as
disassociated from it, have yet to receive the resources
due to them within the framework of the victims law in
Colombia. It is therefore important that all State actors
uphold their commitments with regard to children and
adolescent victims at risk. If that is not done, their life
ambitions will be seriously affected. In addition, they
will be revictimized and remain at risk.
Once again, we are grateful that the voice of
children and adolescent victims of armed conflict has
been heard in this forum, and we hope that they will
be considered. We ask that Governments not see us
as a problem, but provide us with an opportunity to
demonstrate to them our proactive abilities, embodied
by such entities as the Group of Young Consultants in
Colombia and what we are doing. I want to underscore
the happiness that I feel in sharing with everyone
present the experience that I underwent for 13 years

18-214027/96

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.8305

during my association with the FARC-EP. The reality
is that many of us live in very remote areas in which
there is no State presence, and therefore run the risk of
undergoing such experiences. It is not fair for children
to be seen as a sacrifice or crime, rather than as a hope
for the future. Given that I am currently pregnant, I
think I have the additional responsibility of changing
both my world and my daughter’s, so that she can live in
a better world. While that is my responsibility, I believe
that everyone here has the tools to help shape the lives
other children who do not have a voice.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Londoño

for

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of Sweden.
First, I would like to thank Special Representative
Gamba and Executive Director Fore for their important,
and at times difficult-to-listen-to, briefings to the
Security Council. Let me also thank Yenny Londoño for
sharing her inspirational story and adequate demands.
Childhood is not just the start of our life, it
is the foundation of it. It is the base from which we
reach our full potential and the base for peaceful
and prosperous societies. Put simply, ensuring the
care, safety and protection of children today prevents
conflicts tomorrow.
Yet we are not doing nearly enough to protect
our children. Approximately 350 million children are
affected by armed conflict today. They are at risk of
being killed, or maimed. They are at risk of becoming
victims of sexual violence. They are at risk of having
no other school than what war teaches them: loss, fear,
hatred and revenge.
While the need to do more is clear, our concerted
efforts are having an effect. Over the past two decades,
130,000 children have been released from armed
groups. In the last two years, more than 12,000 children
received United Nations assistance for reintegration.
With today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2427
(2018) we not only strengthen the children and armed
conflict agenda more broadly, but we also further the
prevention agenda. Let me highlight a few ways by
which that is done.
First, children’s needs are often overlooked when
peace is negotiated. Indeed, universal concern for
children may sometimes open the door to finding
new solutions. Today’s resolution emphasizes how
8/96

09/07/2018

the children and armed conflict agenda is integral to
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
Secondly, the resolution sets out a framework for
the reintegration of children associated with armed
forces or armed groups. Successful reintegration is in
the best interest of the child, but also in the best interest
of societies. The resolution places children as part of
the solution, not part of the problem.
Thirdly, the resolution recognizes that access
for all girls and boys to education and health care,
including mental health, in conflict is essential. Also,
for the first time, the resolution distinguishes between
girls and boys and makes the point that their needs and
vulnerabilities are different.
Fourthly, the resolution links the children and
armed conflict agenda to the Sustainable Development
Goals. To achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we can leave no child behind.
Fifthly, for the first time in a Council resolution,
it states the central principle that children in armed
conflict should be treated primarily as victims.
Sixthly, the resolution stresses accountability for
all violations and abuses against children — not just
the gravest crimes — thereby setting a new standard for
the prevention of human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law. There can be no
exceptions to humanity, and there can be no exceptions
to international humanitarian law.
Finally, the resolution addresses the need to also
consider the views of children. We must listen to
children and hear their perspectives, as well as their
proposals for solutions. In that vein, Sweden, together
with UNICEF and civil society partners, organized a
series of child consultations around the world focusing
on children as refugees and agents for peace, as well
as the reintegration of former child soldiers. We also
organized consultations in Sweden. All that resulted in
recommendations where the messages from children to
us, as decision makers, are clear: provide security and
safety; put food on the table; ensure education; provide
care for the sick or injured; and, above all else, end war.
We have agreed on today’s resolution; now we must
implement it. Special Representative Gamba is working
with partners to develop practical guidance and tools to
integrate child protection issues into peace processes.
Our responsibility for us in the Council is to consider
the effect of conflict on children in all our work and
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

in the renewal of mission mandates by ensuring every
mission has child protection advisers and by including
children’s perspectives in our discussions.
I can think of no better way to address the root
causes of conflict than by giving children a loving and
safe childhood and protecting them from the scourge
of war. It is up to us to live up to our responsibilities
and to deliver on the children’s demands. It is up to
us to prevent the conflicts of tomorrow by protecting
children today.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Prime Minister of Aruba, Kingdom of
the Netherlands.
Ms. Wever-Croes (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union, as well
as with the statement to be made by the Permanent
Representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their briefings.
I would like to say thank Ms. Yenny Londoño for
reminding us that today’s debate is not only about
shocking numbers and trends. Indeed, behind the
statistics are real-life individuals who can be empowered
to make a change in real-life situations.
Allow me to highlight three elements today: first,
the erosion of international humanitarian law and
the imperative of accountability; secondly, the vital
importance of child protection in conflict prevention
and sustaining peace; and, thirdly, the importance of
strong tools for an effective, credible and transparent
children and armed conflict mandate.
First, at last year’s open debate on children and
armed conflict (see S/PV.8082), the Kingdom of the
Netherlands expressed concern at the increased lack
of respect for international humanitarian law, and we
do so again today. The 30 per cent increase in grave
violations as identified under the children and armed
conflict mandate in 2017 is shocking. Together we must
do everything in our power to immediately turn the tide
of the erosion in respect for international humanitarian
law. That also includes commitments to binding
instruments, such as the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and to non-legally

S/PV. 8305

binding commitments such as the Paris Principles, the
Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.
Resolution 2427 (2018), which we adopted today,
calls on all States to put an end to impunity for the
most horrendous crimes perpetrated against children.
Importantly, it highlights the contribution of the
International Criminal Court in holding to account
those responsible for the most serious crimes. The
hardened pressure against the Court is undeniable,
however, which makes it all the more important to stand
firm and strongly resist all efforts to weaken the Court,
including by introducing ambiguities to language on its
role. Protecting populations at risk of mass atrocities is
a goal of both the International Criminal Court and the
Security Council, as is the prevention of conflict.
Secondly, the Council must also focus on preventive
measures in all phases of cycles of conflict. In that
regard, I thank Sweden for facilitating a resolution
that incorporates important gains. The Council now
recognizes that the protection of children affected by
armed conflict should be part of strategies to resolve
conflict and sustain peace. It recognizes the importance
of addressing root causes of conflict and violations of
human rights, as well as the importance of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in formulating an
integrated approach to conflict prevention.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
convinced that even more must be done. It is crucial
that the Council listen carefully to testimonies like
Ms. Londoño’s. The progress observed in Colombia
provides a strong case for how mainstreaming child
protection and prioritizing children’s issues in peace
processes can contribute to lasting peace.
My third point concerns the importance of strong
tools for an effective, credible and transparent mandate.
The mandate for children and armed conflict is equipped
with tools that have real and significant impact on the
ground. That includes the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the annual report by the SecretaryGeneral and its annexes that list parties committing
grave violations.
It is important to remember that the Council, in its
resolution 1612 (2005) of 13 years ago, underlined the
importance of timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information for those tools to remain effective. Timely
information enables the Council to act in an apt and

18-214029/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

swift manner. A high frequency of conclusions in
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the timely publication of the annual report of the
Secretary-General are crucial in that regard. Accurate
information is only possible if there are enough actors
on the ground to report and verify violations and if they
are assured proper access.
Objective and reliable information includes
transparency on listing criteria. That allows for
meaningful dialogue and safeguards the credibility and
impartiality of the children and armed conflict mandate.
The children and armed conflict mandate is unique
in its effectiveness and makes a distinctive difference
to children affected by conflict. The Council bears
continuing responsibility to stop the unacceptable plight
of these children. The Kingdom of the Netherlands, as
a member of the Council and beyond, is a committed
partner in this endeavour.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I
congratulate Sweden on its presidency and I thank the
Russian delegation for its leadership in June. I want to
thank the Prime Minister of Sweden for convening this
very important debate. I thank Ms. Fore and Ms. Gamba
for their leadership. Ms. Londoño’s story is inspiring.
I welcome her to the club of mothers. She will never
know again what it is like not to worry. She was the
right voice at the right time to help us with this issu,e
and I thank her.
It has been more than two decades since the
Security Council established the mandate for children
and armed conflict. In that time, one generation has
grown up and an entirely new generation has come into
this world. More than 60 per cent of people in conflictaffected countries are under the age of 25. That means
that in those places there is an entire generation of kids
who have lived in conflict their entire lives. Those are
the same kids who will some day be in charge of their
countries. Some of them will be the same people making
future decisions about peace and security, so we need
to care about how the next generation is growing up.
Last fall, I visited with families displaced by
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
we know the armed forces are continuing to coordinate
with groups that recruit child soldiers and sexually
exploit boys and girls. Knowing this, I sat down and
talked to Congolese women to hear about their lives. I
looked into their eyes, I held their hands and I met their
10/96

09/07/2018

children. Sadly, their stories were all the same: they
were overwhelmed, heartbroken and suffering.
I met one women, Angelique, who was the mother
of seven children. She was raped on two different
occasions during violent attacks, and because she had
trouble coping with the trauma, her husband left her to
take care of her children alone. As a mother myself, I
wanted to understand how she copes and what she tells
her children in the midst of so much pain. Her answer
has haunted me since. She tells her children to stay
with her in the camp and suffer together as a family.
She tells her sons not to leave the camp because they
would be abducted and forced into fighting. She tells
her daughters not to leave the camp because they would
be raped. Her children have no home, no school, no
choices and no hope for the future.
When I asked Angelique and other women in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan
what they wanted most, their answer surprised me. It
was not better living conditions, more food or material
things. It was for their children to be able to go to
school to get an education. They did not want their kids
to be bored, to become vulnerable to violence and to get
swept up into the endless cycle of conflict. They wanted
their kids to be in school and have the opportunity to
live a better life.
It is imperative that we listen to these mothers.
Educating children who have fled from violence is an
investment in the future stability of a country. If we
fail, these children will grow up to be uneducated,
unskilled and resentful. They will be prime targets for
recruitment by extremists and armed groups, and the
cycle will continue. If we do not do something about
the way these kids are being educated in refugee and
internally displaced person camps, we might be dealing
with them as adults on the battlefield. Education is
both a way to recover from conflict and prevent it in
the future.
The United States is a proud leader in providing
resources for education, workforce training and
psychosocial support to more than 50.2 million children
and youth in 51 countries, including 11.8 million
children in crisis and conflict environments. In
Mali, we are working with the Government to enrol
more than 5,100 children and youth in an accelerated
education programme. We are partnering with local
non-governmental organizations to provide books,
desks and learning supplies and increase parental
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

involvement in their children’s education. In Jordan, we
are helping the Government cope with the mass influx
of Syrian refugees. The United States has committed
$230 million to build 2,000 new classrooms and
renovate 250 schools.
The United States is not working alone. Other
countries have joined us in supporting new and
innovative mechanisms, like Education Cannot Wait.
Managed by UNICEF, that is the first global fund
dedicated to education in humanitarian emergencies
and protracted crises.
But putting children behind a desk in a classroom
only goes so far. Children cannot be expected to focus
and learn after they have experienced so much pain and
violence. Children who have escaped or were released
by armed groups in places like South Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo live with even
deeper wounds from the unspeakable acts they were
forced to do.
The Security Council must hold Governments
accountable for how they treat children both during
and after active conflicts. They cannot neglect the
unseen damage done to children’s hearts and minds.
To create sustainable peace, stabilization plans must
prioritize basic education and psychosocial support for
all victims — both boys and girls — including children
born from sexual violence.
Childhood is short. Time is not on the side of child
victims in conflict. The United States welcomes this
discussion. We support the adoption of resolution 2427
(2018), and we urge our colleagues to do more to save
new generations from being lost to the pain and trauma
of armed conflict. Living through violence and conflict
should not determine a child’s future. Every child
deserves the opportunity to flourish.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank the Swedish
presidency of the Council for organizing this open
debate on the children and armed conflict agenda item,
which is an absolute priority for us. I also thank the
Swedish presidency for having steered the important
resolution that we have just adopted (resolution
2427 (2018)). It is a rare privilege to have the Prime
Minister of Sweden here with us to preside over this
essential debate.
Finally, I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Virginia Gamba, Executive

S/PV. 8305

Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore and Yenny
Londoño for their illuminating and inspiring briefings.
More broadly, I wish to thank all actors, particularly
from civil society, who work every day on the ground
to protect children. They deserve our admiration
and support.
I note the worrying increase in the number of
violations of children’s rights, which must lead us to
remain more mobilized than ever and to make the best
use of the precious tools that the Council has adopted.
Within the framework of the method proposed by the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Jean-Yves Le
Drian, during the open debate on 31 October of last
year (see S/PV.8082), I will outline several new areas of
work for the coming months.
First of all, more than 20 years after the creation of
the agenda, the tools adopted by the Security Council
are more essential than ever given the increase in the
number of violations of children’s rights. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/465) shows a marked increase
in the number of violations in 2017, with more than 21,000
verified cases and some areas, such as Afghanistan or
Somalia, that remain of serious concern.
However, certain developments are encouraging,
such as the extraction of children from armed groups in
Colombia, the signing of new action plans in Mali, the
Central African Republic and Nigeria, and the release,
in total, of more than 10,000 child soldiers. Those
successes call for the continuation of over 20 years of
efforts of the Council and the actors on the ground.
First of all, the mandate entrusted to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to engage
in dialogue with the parties and obtain concrete
commitments from them, in particular through the
action plans, is of paramount importance in this context.
This field work, conducted in close coordination with
United Nations country teams, is certainly difficult,
but absolutely essential. Like the monitoring and alert
mechanism, it must remain at the heart of the agenda.
Secondly, as we all stressed at the Arria
Formula meeting last May, those action plans must
be comprehensive and seek to eliminate all serious
violations. Their implementation must also be assessed
in the light of all such violations.
Thirdly, it is essential for peacekeeping operations
to maintain adequate resources. Child protection
advisers play a crucial role, as demonstrated each year

18-2140211/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

09/07/2018

by the release of children following the tireless efforts of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and through
the central role of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in the recent signing of a new action plan in
the Central African Republic.

Thirdly, we all recognize that is key to sustainably
strengthen reintegration mechanisms when children
are released.

Fourthly, we would also like to commend Sweden’s
work as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which plays an key role.

Fifthly, we must ensure full compliance with
children’s rights and applicable international standards
in order to put an end to the illegal detention of children.

Finally, a normative framework — a constitutional
bloc to protect children — has been created and
continues to be developed. We therefore call on the
States that have not yet done so to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict; to
endorse the Paris Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces
or groups, the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
(Paris Principles), which are a reference for all actors,
especially in the field, the Safe Schools Declaration
and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and
the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, which complement the foundational Paris
Principles. This group of instruments is complete and
operational, and is destined to become universal.

Sixthly and finally, strengthening the fight against
impunity is the best prevention method. The role of
international justice, including that of the International
Criminal Court, are very important in that regard.

In that connection, we must redouble our efforts
to better protect children through actions ranging from
prevention to reintegration. Conflicts evolve, as do the
methods employed by belligerent parties. Resolution
2427 (2018), adopted today by the Council, on which
France has worked very closely with Sweden and with
all members of the Council, provides several important
operational responses in that regard. I note the following
six areas of work.
First, we must respond to the cross-border nature of
violations committed against children. It will therefore
be essential to combat violations against children in
the context of trafficking and to strengthen the role of
regional and subregional organizations in that regard.
Secondly, we must ensure more effective
prevention, including by raising awareness and
guaranteeing access to education in schools protected
against attacks. The detailed analysis of recruitment
methods used by non-State armed groups and work on
early warning systems will also be very useful.
12/96

Fourthly, we must more carefully consider
the specific needs of girls in order to prevent their
stigmatization, and adopt a gender-specific approach to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

We also have a duty to raise public awareness in the
Council. I propose that we regularly use the press and
press statements to do so.
The protection of children and their rights is not
only a universal moral obligation but also one of the
essential conditions for lasting peace. Children embody
hope for reconciliation and reconstruction, as has been
so rightly pointed out. The best interests of the child
must therefore prevail everywhere and children’s
voices must be heard. Their rights must be respected.
The Council knows my country’s constant and historic
commitment to the protection of children in armed
conflict. France is more determined than ever to act to
strengthen our collective action.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are grateful to Sweden
for convening this open debate and for its leadership of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We are very glad to see you, Mr. Prime Minister, as
you preside over this debate, which demonstrates the
significance you attach to this important topic. We are
grateful to all the briefers for sharing their thoughts,
which we have found very useful. We very much
appreciate the contribution of all three.
In our consideration of the various reports of
the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
around the world at the level of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, as well as our
discussions on various conflicts here in the Council,
so many instances of continued grave violations of
international humanitarian law committed by parties
to armed conflicts continue to be extremely alarming.
In that regard, we welcome the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2427 (2018) and we thank Sweden for its
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

efforts as the penholder in facilitating the negotiation
of the draft text. We hope that the resolution will make
a substantive contribution to the protection of children
in armed conflict. The large number of sponsors is a
testament to the level of concern of Member States about
the fate of children in conflicts and to the very effective
way Sweden has been discharging its obligation.
However, it is very clear that much more needs to
be done to ensure the protection of children affected by
armed conflict and prevent the grave violations against
them, which have reached very worrying levels. In that
context, we believe that there are a few considerations
that should be taken into account to help ensure the
protection of children in the context of armed conflict.
First, since the adoption of the groundbreaking
resolution 1612 (2005), on children and armed conflict,
there has been significant progress in the protection
and rehabilitation of children affected by armed
conflict in different parts of the world. The engagement
with parties to an armed conflict, the signing of action
plans with countries concerned and close follow-up of
the situation by the Security Council and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict continue to play a critical role
in further strengthening the protection of children
affected by armed conflicts. On the other hand,
reports of continued grave violations against children
in the context of armed conflict require all of us to
further strengthen those efforts. In other words, more
enhanced international cooperation is becoming vital
to protecting children facing this tragedy.
Second, it is important to recognize the proximity
and strategic advantage of regional organizations in
addressing the impact of armed conflict on children.
It is therefore important for the United Nations, in
particular the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and other actors, such as
UNICEF, to further strengthen their cooperation and
coordination with regional organizations, such as the
African Union, including in their engagement with
parties to an armed conflict and the implementation of
action plans.
Third, as much as possible, peace processes and
ceasefire agreements should ensure the protection of
children in armed conflict, in particular by ensuring
access to humanitarian assistance as well as formal
separation and reintegration of children recruited by
parties to an armed conflict. It is therefore necessary

S/PV. 8305

to encourage relevant parties to take into account the
needs of children affected by armed conflict in the
negotiation of ceasefire agreements and other peace
processes.
Fourth, peace operations continue to have a
significant role in the protection of civilians, including
children affected by armed conflicts. In that regard,
ensuring that peace operations have the capabilities and
force enablers necessary for the full implementation of
their mandates on the protection of civilians is of the
utmost importance. Furthermore, the deployment of
child protection advisers in peace operations is also
critical and should receive the utmost attention, as it
contributes to mainstreaming child protection and
leading monitoring, reporting and prevention efforts in
peace operations.
Fifth, Ethiopia recognizes the importance of strict
compliance with international humanitarian law by
all parties to an armed conflict in relation to their
means and methods of combat, including by protecting
civilians from the effects of hostilities. However, it is
a matter of concern to note the increased incidents of
grave violations against children in different parts of
the world and the protection challenges associated with
serious disregard for international humanitarian law by
parties to an armed conflict. That is why it is important
that the Council follow this matter and urge parties to
an armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
Sixth, it is necessary to ensure that children
formerly associated with armed groups or forces not
be deprived of their liberty and are treated primarily
as victims Furthermore, it is vital to strengthen our
investment in rehabilitation and reintegration projects
to comprehensively address the needs of children
formerly associated with armed forces or groups
as soon as possible, in full respect of their rights as
children and as victims.
Seventh, Ethiopia recognizes the role of the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism in tracking
the six grave violations against children in armed
conflict, including in the context of peace operations.
We also note some of the concerns that have been
raised in relation to the Mechanism, particularly in the
procedures related to reporting of alleged violations in
the context of peace operations. There is need to take
concrete steps to address those concerns, particularly

18-2140213/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

09/07/2018

by aligning the reporting standards with those under
peacekeeping operations.

the preventive approach provided by the concept of
sustaining peace.

Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating the
firm commitment of Ethiopia to ensure the protection
of children in an armed conflict. We will continue to
work with all the relevant actors in that regard

I should like to mention that Peru recently signed
on to the Safe Schools Declaration, an instrument
that, in view of the deplorable increase in attacks on
schools, seeks to improve the protection provided to
students, staff and educational establishments during
conflicts. We also highlight the need to implement
the Paris Principles and Commitments, which provide
guidelines to protect children against recruitment and
use by armed forces or armed groups and to secure
their freedom and social reintegration. We consider
the reintegration and rehabilitation of girls and boys
to be of special importance, with a view to restoring
their dignity and hope and empowering them as future
promoters of sustainable peace.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Swedish presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on the
issue of children and armed conflict, which is a priority
for our country. We especially commend you for your
participation, Mr. Prime Minister, which serves to
highlight your country’s commitment to this important
issue. We would also like express our appreciation
for the important briefings by Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Yenny
Londoño, representative of civil society. We also thank
Ms. Londoño for sharing her valuable insights.
Peru is a country committed to the agenda on
children in armed conflict. Children make up one
of the most vulnerable segments of any population,
and suffer in many ways from violence, devastation,
humanitarian crises and displacements forced by
contemporary conflicts. We condemn in the strongest
terms all forms of violence against minors in armed
conflicts, including sexual violence, and prioritize their
protection. That includes bringing those responsible
to justice and addressing the root causes that make
possible the commission of these atrocious crimes.
We deplore the magnitude and gravity of violations
of the rights of children in contemporary conflicts.
The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465)
provides an account of its increase in 2017 over the
previous year, with at least 6,000 cases attributed to
Government forces and more than 15,000 to non-State
armed groups.
The States Members and the Organization, as well
as the Council, have the responsibility to act effectively
to eradicate violence against children and allow them
to enjoy full lives, free of fear, of the loss of family
and friends and of traumas and injuries. To that end,
among other measures, we emphasize the importance
of working in close coordination with the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
and with UNICEF, to adhere to and fully implement
the relevant international instruments and to follow
14/96

We also want to point out the importance of
peacekeeping operations deployed by the Council
prioritizing the protection of children, including
training peacekeepers in that regard. Moreover, the
work of United Nations country teams and civil society
is key to that end.
There is undoubtedly much that remains to be
done on this issue, and we welcome, Mr. President,
the adoption of the important resolution 2427 (2018),
proposed and facilitated by the delegation of Sweden
and adopted today with Peru’s sponsorship, which we
were honoured to provide.
Before I conclude, I should also like to express our
appreciation and support for the work of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
and to highlight the priority that the SecretaryGeneral attaches to this issue, in line with the need
to build sustainable peace. Peru will continue to work
constructively to promote the children-and-armedconflict agenda, which we believe should occupy a
central place in the work of the Council, which should
continue to encourage, support and monitor specific
commitments and plans for the prevention of violence
against children.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to welcome you, Mr. President,
as you preside over today’s important meeting. At the
same time, we pay tribute to Sweden as it carries out
its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as for its efforts aimed
at reaching consensus on the resolution that we just
adopted (resolution 2427 (2018)). I would also like to
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of
UNICEF, and Ms. Yenny Londoño, for their briefings
this morning. I would like as well to express our
appreciation for the efforts of the United Nations system
to address this topic, which represents a great challenge
for the international community, namely, children and
armed conflict.
The crises and unrest in our world serve to highlight
an appalling increase in the suffering of children,
especially in armed conflict. We are concerned about
the almost 35 per cent increase in the number of
violations perpetrated against children as compared
to the reporting period in 2016. Armed conflicts have
negative consequences on children, and include their
recruitment and use, exploitation, mass abduction,
sexual violence, killing and maiming. The international
community should effectively respond to all those
issues, which threaten peace and security, while fully
complying with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The best way to protect
children and end violations against them is to forestall
armed conflicts and create sustainable peace.
Since the Graça Machel report on the impact of
armed conflict on children (see A/51/306), which was
published more than 20 years ago, the United Nations
has recognized that the best way to protect children is
to prevent conflicts. All United Nations reports and
resolutions, including today’s resolution 2427 (2018),
acknowledge that truth. We believe that protecting
children in armed conflicts should be an integral
part of any inclusive conflict-settlement strategy and
all procedures to be undertaken by United Nations
entities, especially within the framework of Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism, which supports and
complements the efforts of national Governments. That
should be done in close cooperation with the United
Nations and the Office of the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict in order to bolster
national plans and all other forms of cooperation for
the protection of children in armed conflict, with
the support of the relevant regional and sub-egional
organizations, each within its mandate.
We call upon all States Members to sign and
ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the Optional Protocol thereto in order to enhance the
protection of children in armed conflict. The Paris
Principles and the Paris Commitments were issued 11

S/PV. 8305

years ago to end the recruitment and use of children by
armed forces or groups. The State of Kuwait would like
to welcome anew the voluntary commitment to those
principles, which call for ending inhumane practices
against children, and to reiterate the importance of using
and optimizing all the tools and mechanisms adopted
by the Security Council so as to enhance the procedures
that aim to address violations against children.
With respect to children and armed conflict and
the importance of transparency, we are compelled to
highlight the suffering of the unarmed Palestinian
people and their children under the heavy yoke of
occupation for more than five decades. We would also
like to highlight the suffering, including maiming,
killing and rape and other forms of sexual violence,
of the children of the Rohingya minority in Myanmar.
It is incumbent upon us as a Council to shoulder our
responsibility and take all the necessary measures to
ensure compliance with international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, so as to
safeguard safety and freedom of movement without
any ethnic or religious discrimination, and enhance
mechanisms designed to make all perpetrators of such
violations accountable.
We reiterate the central role of national Governments
in achieving effective and sustainable protection for
children, in accordance with resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009). The work of the Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism on grave violations against
children is also important, in line with resolution 1612
(2005). All that should take place while bein able to
rely on impartial, reliable and credible sources and
independent United Nations observers. Member States
should also be informed about the facts of the situation
being monitored.
Expressing our anger repeatedly about these
atrocities is not enough. It is time to put an end to the
violence against children and make the perpetrators
of these crimes accountable. Now more than ever,
our joint efforts and international unity are needed to
provide children with effective protection and ensure
their legitimate rights.
It is very important to realize that ending conflicts
does not mean ending the suffering of children.
Sustainable peace requires the development and
implementation of mechanisms for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of children affected by conflicts into
their communities, by way of including the protection

18-2140215/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

of children in all peace processes. There is no peace
while children continue to suffer from psychological,
physical, social and health effects. In that regard,
we welcome the release and reintegration of 10,000
children into their communities in 2017, a development
that will eventually enhance sustainable peace. We
also welcome the establishment of an international
fund, upon the initiative of the United Nations and in
partnership with the World Bank, for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of children affected by conflicts.
We would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the fact that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and all related international conventions and resolutions
do not differentiate between children and adults. In that
context, the second preambular paragraph of the Charter
of the United Nations reiterates our determination
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small”.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to begin by
indicating that Poland aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for presiding over
today’s important meeting. We very much appreciate
Sweden’s work on resolution 2427 (2018), which the
Security Council just adopted. We also value Sweden’s
strong leadership as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, for their important
briefings. We also deeply appreciate the moving and
inspirational testimony of Ms. Yenny Londoño. It is
significant for all of us to hear her voice, which speaks
for civil society.
We should all be disturbed by this year’s report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2018/465). The report shows that in conflicts around
the world children are being killed and maimed, abducted
and attacked in schools and hospitals, recruited to fight,
sexually abused and denied humanitarian aid by State
and non-State actors alike. All parties to armed conflict
should share the obligation of protecting children from
violence, and yet all too often violations and abuses of
international law affecting children are widespread. As
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
16/96

09/07/2018

Sudan, Poland is particularly concerned about the
growing number of violations being committed against
children in South Sudan by all parties to the conflict.
We believe that constructive and close engagement
with the national Governments concerned is
essential to establishing durable peace, security and
development. In that context we welcome the signing
by Mali, Nigeria and the Central African Republic of
new action plans with the United Nations aimed at
ending and preventing violations against children in a
context of armed conflict. We note with satisfaction the
Sudan’s completion of its action plan and would like to
congratulate Colombia on its achievements in the area
of the protection of children reached through the peace
process over the past year.
I would like to emphasize the responsibility of all
the parties listed the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
report to enter into and fully implement concrete and
time-bound action plans with the United Nations to
end all violations immediately. We call on the parties
with existing action plans to take immediate steps to
ensure that they are more effectively implemented
and to report on their progress. We believe that the
international community should take all possible steps
to eradicate the underlying causes and the consequences
of children’s engagement in armed conflicts. We must
be more effective and resolute in considering how to
prevent the recruitment of children, encourage their
reintegration into their societies and deal with the longterm psychological and social implications for survivors.
Throughout that process, all children, girls and boys
alike, should be treated as victims, not as perpetrators.
The lack of reintegration options for demobilized
children increases their risk of re-recruitment.
We particularly want to stress the role of education
for children, including in times of crisis. During
emergencies, children in schools can be cared for,
accounted for and protected from abduction, recruitment
and sexual and economic exploitation. Education also
paves the way for their stronger integration into society.
If we are to ensure that the programmes have long-term
effects and prevent re-recruitment into armed groups
and armed forces, the international community must
continue to provide the necessary financial resources.
At their core, such efforts can ensure that children will
have a successful future for the global community as
for themselves. Lastly, Poland is a staunch advocate
of the effective protection and promotion of the rights
of the child through the adoption of internationally
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

recognized preventive measures. We proudly endorse
the Safe Schools Declaration, the Paris Principles and
guidelines and the Vancouver Principles, and we call on
other States to do the same.
We still have a lot to do in order to prevent and end
the violations and abuses that children face in conflict
situations. Poland will continue to stand behind the
important work being done by the United Nations to
protect children.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Prime
Minister, as you preside over the Security Council
today, and would like to thank our Swedish partners
for their initiative in organizing today’s meeting. We
wish you a successful and productive presidency of the
Security Council for July, and we are sure that your
very professional team will handle any problems. We
greatly appreciate the contributions of the SecretaryGeneral and today’s briefers, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Ms. Henrietta Fore and Ms. Yenny Londoño, to
our discussion.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/465)
confirms that children in a number of countries around
the world that are involved in armed confrontations
continue to encounter brutal violence. One of the main
reasons for their plight is that the parties to armed
conflicts frequently ignore the norms of international
humanitarian law and non-governmental armed
groups make open use of barbaric methods of warfare.
The Russian Federation firmly condemns all crimes
against children, including their recruitment and
use as combatants, their murder or abduction, sexual
violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and denials
of access for humanitarian organizations to help them.
In acknowledging its responsibility, the Security
Council cannot remain indifferent and should make
unfailing efforts to protect children in situations of
armed conflict.
The situation in a number of countries in the
Middle East and North Africa remains extremely
difficult. The weakening of State mechanisms in Syria
as a result of illegal external interference resulted in
a flood of terrorist groups there. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report notes, the militants are not shy of
using even very young children in their ranks, and
their systematic recruitment of minors, deprivation of
their access to education, and general violence have
become commonplace, something that the international

S/PV. 8305

community has no intention of becoming reconciled
to. Jihadists do not hesitate to involve children in their
inhuman designs for fabricating incidents, including
those involving allegedly chemical substances. They
do this to get international attention, denigrate the
legitimate authorities and bring punishment down on
them from the world community. For our part, we will
continue to reveal the true face of pseudo-humanitarian
non-governmental organizations such as the White
Helmets, which have brought shame on themselves by
collaborating with openly terrorist groups in Syria.
The situation in Yemen has noticeably deteriorated,
with hundreds of children killed and injured as a result
of strikes and shelling. The widespread destruction of
schools, hospitals and infrastructure creates intolerable
living conditions and deprives children of a future. The
future of Palestinian children is worrying, thanks in part
to Israel’s continuing policies of expanding settlements
and demolishing Palestinian property, including
schools. Many children are at risk of being unable to
attend school this summer because the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East is underfunded. We consider it unacceptable
to impose ideologies of hatred and nationalism on
children and raise them with false historical facts
and values. Children should not be discriminated
against on the basis of nationality, denied the right
to receive education in their native language and free
development. Unfortunately, we are seeing egregious
cases of such violations in various countries and will
continue to draw attention to them.
International humanitarian law includes a
significant body of norms designed to protect children
and civil infrastructure during armed conflicts. The
efforts of the international community should be
focused on ensuring the implementation of existing
obligations. Bringing those responsible for serious
crimes against children and violations of international
humanitarian law to justice is crucial, and primary
responsibility for taking the necessary measures in
this area rests with States. Many States involved in
armed conflicts are making significant efforts to
improve the situation of children. However, they need
the support of the international community within a
framework of respectful and constructive dialogue and
with unconditional respect for the principles of State
sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs.
Once again, we call for an end to the pernicious
policy of imposing unilateral restrictions on countries

18-2140217/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

in conflict. For example, the sanctions imposed on
Syria, as we read in the report of the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights,
Mr. Jazairy, following his visit to the Syrian Arab
Republic, are in essence a collective punishment of all
Syrians, including children.
The Russian Federation supports the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and her initiatives.
In particular, I would like to note that the Russian
football association, along with a number of other such
federations, has joined the Special Representative’s
Children, Not Soldiers: Let Them Play information
campaign, in the framework of the 2018 FIFA World
Cup championship currently being held in Russia.
Over the course of the championship, we and our
Swedish colleagues have agreed to display the official
World Cup football on the Council table as a symbol
of peace and harmony among nations and of the desire
to fight and compete only in sporting events. The
work of the Special Representative implies a special
responsibility, impartiality and objectivity, and it is
extremely important to have reliable and verifiable
information reflected in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral. With respect to such issues, any politicization
is unacceptable.
We note the contribution of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to efforts to
support States in preparing and implementing national
plans of action for protecting children in armed
conflict. The practice of appointing experts on the
protection of children in peacekeeping missions has
proved positive. We expect these officials to monitor
situations effectively and fulfil their mandate. In our
view, any duplication of functions or reporting by
other components of United Nations country missions
is wasteful.
We have taken note of the recommendations in
the Secretary-General’s report. Overall, the Council’s
efforts should be based on approaches that have been
developed and approved within the United Nations
framework. The Russian Federation supported today’s
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018), on children and
armed conflict. It contains a comprehensive set of
provisions whose implementation will strengthen
cooperation in this area. For our part, we are ready
to pursue comprehensive cooperation in order to
18/96

09/07/2018

effectively protect children from the consequences of
armed action.
Mrs. Cordova Soría (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank
Sweden for its leadership during the negotiations of
resolution 2427 (2018), adopted today, which we had
the pleasure of co-sponsoring and which undoubtedly
provides a framework for the integration of protection,
rights, welfare and empowerment of children
throughout the conflict cycle, reinforcing in turn the
mandate of the Special Representative and emphasizing
reintegration as an essential part of demobilization
and disarmament processes, as well as accountability
for all violations against children. We also appreciate
Sweden’s role as organizer of this open debate, whose
focus is on protecting children today in order to prevent
conflicts tomorrow.
We welcome the presence of the Prime Minister of
Sweden, Mr. Stefan Löfven, and the Prime Minister of
Aruba, of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Ms. Evelyn
Wever-Croes.
Likewise, we appreciate the briefings provided by
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba; the Executive Director
of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore; and the representative
of Colombian civil society, Ms. Yenny Londoño, who
shared her experience and recommendations with us.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465)
and the information provided by Ms. Gamba today
reflect the harsh reality faced by children immersed in
conflicts, who account for an increase of 27 per cent in
violations in 2017 compared to 2016. More than 10,000
children were killed or maimed in 2017. The number
of verified cases of the recruitment and use of children
rose by a factor of four in the Central African Republic
and two in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while
in the Syrian Arab Republic, Somalia, South Sudan and
Yemen the figures remained at an alarming level.
We also condemn the constant attacks on
schools and universities, particularly in the occupied
Palestinian territories, where the United Nations has
documented 164 incidents that interrupted access to
education and in many cases have led to the detention
of more than 304 boys and girls in Israeli prisons,
some of whom have been brought before military
tribunals, while many others have simply been subject
to administrative detention.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

The main factors in this increase are the
proliferation and expansion of armed groups, wars over
natural resources that provoke and sustain conflicts,
the internationalization of terrorism and the changing
nature of conflicts. Such factors cannot be effectively
combated. We agree with the focus of today’s debate on
the theme “Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow”. The best way to protect children is to
address the root causes of conflicts, including war, lack
of security, illicit human trafficking, arms trafficking,
terrorism, policies of regime change, competition for
natural resources and socioeconomic conditions related
to the unequal distribution of wealth.
Combating these factors should involve a
comprehensive strategy to prevent conflicts and
children’s participation in them. The implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
particularly relevant in this context, as is fighting
poverty and inequality and promoting education and
its accessibility to all children, particularly girls, in
order to confront and end the violations and abuses
of which they are victims, especially in the context of
armed conflicts. To this we must add the importance
of preventive diplomacy, mediation and good offices
in order to maintain peace, build it and enable it to be
sustainable in the long term.
Just as important is compliance with international
regulations on the part of the international community,
including the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols of 1977, in addition to the
provisions contained in the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflicts. Bolivia calls on States
that have not yet done so to adhere to those important
international instruments. In that regard, and in view
of our commitment to this agenda, we welcome the
Safe Schools Declaration initiative, through which
States commit themselves to protect students, teachers,
schools and universities during armed conflicts.
We also deem it important to reaffirm the important
role that the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral plays in contributing to the prevention of
conflicts in the context of her mandate by facilitating
better collaboration between the United Nations, the
Governments concerned and United Nations partners
on the ground, as well as its support for the in-country
efforts of the United Nations Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict to improve dialogue with
relevant agencies of the United Nations, Governments

S/PV. 8305

and parties to armed conflict, in order to obtain
concrete commitments and advocate for appropriate
response mechanisms. In that respect, the Special
Representative must continue to engage proactively
with United Nations agencies, Member States, regional
and subregional organizations and non-State armed
groups, and, together with the relevant actors, compile
best practices for their implementation, in accordance
with the resolution adopted today.
We welcome the fact that UNICEF facilitated
the appointment of a Senior Child Protection Adviser
by the African Union, which will undoubtedly help
channel the experiences of countries in the region into
signing and successfully implementing action plans.
In that regard, the Security Council’s commitment to
children in armed conflict has been realized through
such plans aimed at both stopping and preventing
serious violations.
The international community must ensure the
allocation of adequate budgetary and human resources
and personnel dedicated to the protection of children
so that the United Nations can respond effectively to
serious violations against children. To that end, the
nexus linking the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, financial institutions and donors must
be strengthened. Similarly, the follow-up process with
the World Bank and the Peacebuilding Fund could be
more systematic so as to ensure and implement the
recommendations of the Working Group. Discussions
could also be held on how to ensure adequate human
and financial resources after the signing of action plans
so as to ensure their effective implementation.
Likewise, action plans should not only support
the processes of demobilizing and disarming children
associated with armed groups but must also place
particular emphasis on reintegration. That includes
rehabilitation, psychosocial support, education, specific
gender- and age-based needs, economic opportunities,
sustained support to families and communities to
combat the stigmatization of former child soldiers, and
cooperating closely with host countries. In the longterm, they are the ones that must ensure the security
of their populations and implement the necessary
measures to ensure respect for children’s human rights
following conflict.
In conclusion, protecting children in armed conflict
is an endeavour that concerns the entire international
community, including the Governments of States

18-2140219/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

that are victims of conflict, the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, as well as civil
society. Accordingly, their actions must be guided by
prioritizing their protection, providing them with an
opportunity to enjoy a future in which they can fully
develop their abilities. Achieving that will be a step
towards the prevention of conflicts and towards ridding
humankind of the scourge of war.
Mr. Djedje (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Côte d’Ivoire commends you, Mr. Prime Minister,
for guiding the work of the Security Council and
welcomes the holding of this open debate devoted to
the issue of children and armed conflict. My delegation
expresses its gratitude to Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their instructive briefings on
the situation concerning children and armed conflicts
throughout the world. I also thank Ms. Yenny Londoño,
of the Colombian civil society group, for her briefing.
Although it has been a particular focus of attention
for decades, the protection of children in armed
conflict remains a major concern that calls for greater
involvement on the part of the international community
with a view towards a concerted and holistic response
to confronting the challenge. Despite the adoption of
major international instruments, such as the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, of
20 November 1989, and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, of 25 May
2000, the phenomenon has only increased in scale. The
annual report (S/2018/465) of the Secretary-General,
published on 16 May, sounds the alarm in pointing out
the significant increase in serious violations against
children in conflict-ridden areas in 2017. It lists more
than 21,000 cases — an increase of 31 per cent as
compared to 2016, which gives cause for great concern.
Moreover, the direct participation of children as
soldiers in conflicts, their use as human bombs and
human shields and recurrent attacks on schools, as
well as their use for military purposes, are a source
of concern for the international community. It is
imperative to redouble efforts aimed at implementing
concrete measures to prevent and combat such
practices, which have disastrous, and often irreversible,
consequences for the well-being and development of too
many children. In that regard, the Secretary-General’s
actions plans — while stressing the commitment of
parties to conflict, as well as the responsibility of
20/96

09/07/2018

Governments to protect children affected by armed
conflict, in accordance with resolutions 1539 (2004)
and 1612 (2005) — constitute appropriate mechanisms
that have demonstrated their effectiveness in achieving
concrete progress on the ground.
Côte d’Ivoire, which was listed in the annex to the
Secretary-General’s reports on the plight of children
in armed conflict from 2003 to 2006, following the
political-military crisis it experienced, was a pioneer
in the history of signing and effectively implementing
action plans for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. As early as 2005, the Forces armées
des Forces nouvelles, an armed group opposed to the
Government at the time of the conflict, signed with
the United Nations the first-ever action plan for the
protection of children in armed conflict, thereby marking
the starting point for the signing and implementing
of such a document. In 2006, four pro-Government
militias followed in the footsteps of the Forces armées
des Forces nouvelles by signing other action plans.
Thanks to genuine cooperation with the United Nations
and partnering non-governmental organizations, their
implementation enabled the release of hundreds of
children with a view to their reintegration into society.
A strategy to combat stigmatization was put in place,
which involved bringing together former child soldiers,
who accounted for approximately one third of the
total number of participants, and another two thirds
of non-soldier children from the community — all of
whom were lodged in the same centre and received equal
treatment so as to facilitate their social reintegration.
That enabled training the older ones with basic trade
skills and enroling the younger ones in school.
With regard to progress made since 2007, Côte
d’Ivoire has been removed from the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict. That delisting was the first of its kind in history.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the full implementation of other action plans,
in particular in the Sudan, as well as the progress
achieved in protecting children through commitments
within the framework of the peace process in Colombia.
We also welcome the signing of new action plans in
Mali, Nigeria and the Central African Republic,
the implementation of which will undoubtedly help
reduce the suffering of children affected by conflict
in those countries. It has also been shown that wellresourced reintegration programmes are effective tools
in peacebuilding. Côte d’Ivoire encourages the donor
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

community to support efforts to reintegrate former
child soldiers into society.
My delegation believes that the protection of
children in armed conflict must be an integral
part of any comprehensive strategy for conflict
resolution and peacekeeping, as part of a conflict
prevention strategy. In that regard, my country looks
forward with interest to the development of practical
guidelines on mainstreaming child protection issues
in peace processes, led by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
My delegation remains convinced that such
mainstreaming requires the adequate training of all
relevant actors, including the defence and security
forces. In that regard, the authorities of Côte d’Ivoire
have been including child rights and protection
education in the training programme of military training
schools and combat units since 10 March 2004, with the
establishment of decentralized focal points throughout
the country. All military regions in Côte d’Ivoire today
have a child rights protection cell. Furthermore, the
promotion of children’s rights and protection is now
integrated into the training curriculums for Côte d’Ivoire
police officers. I should like ot take this opportunity
to emphasize the important role of child protection
advisers, whose presence and capacities should be
strengthened within peacekeeping operations.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the commitment
of regional and subregional organizations in the
implementation of programmes for the protection
of children, and encourages them to strengthen their
commitment to supporting the efforts of Member
States, in accordance with the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and resolution 2427 (2018), which we
have just unanimously adopted.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the support
of Côte d’Ivoire to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and her teams on the ground and
urges them to continue their efforts to protect children,
particularly those associated with armed conflict.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, allow me to express my gratitude
to His Excellency Mr. Stefan Löfven, Prime Minister
of Sweden, for convening this open debate on the
important and timely issue of children and armed
conflict, and to express our satisfaction at the fact

S/PV. 8305

that he has come to New York to preside over it. We
commend the exemplary work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and commend Sweden’s
sponsorship of resolution 2427 (2018), which we just
adopted and was also co-sponsored by Equatorial
Guinea. All of that demonstrates Sweden’s strong
commitment to the protection of children. We also
thank Special Representative Virginia Gamba, as well
as our guest Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director
of UNICEF. Moreover, we thank Ms. Yenny Londoño,
civil society representative, for her emotional briefing.
Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned by the
increase in the number and seriousness of violations
committed against children, as documented in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465). According to
the report, there were at least 6,000 verified violations
committed by Government forces and more than
15,000 by non-State armed groups, including high
numbers of killing and maiming, recruitment, use of
sexual violence and abductions. Even more alarming
is the fact that, despite the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2017/21) adopted after the open debate on the
same topic on 31 October 2017 (S/PV.8082), in which 63
statements were made, there was a 31 per cent increase
in the number of violations against children that year,
as compared to 2016. That is totally unacceptable and
must be reduced immediately.
That is why the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
in line with the relevant instruments of the African
Union and drawing on lessons from specific cases
that occurred during conflicts in some countries in
our region, underlines the need to further develop a
criminal legal framework to protect children from
armed conflict in Africa and throughout the world.
In that regard, we stress the need for the international
community to ensure that violations of children’s rights
do not go unpunished and for all Member States to
commit themselves to do their utmost to ensure that
those responsible for such violations against children
are brought to justice and pay for their crimes.
On the sad issue of violations against children,
our obligation not only lies in our mission to maintain
international peace but is a basic moral obligation
as human beings. The care and reintegration of
children must be a central part of any reconciliation
and peace process, with the support of the Security
Council. Solving problems relevant to children must
be an integral part of any agreement, understanding or
dialogue between the parties involved in a conflict.

18-2140221/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

We must not ignore international law and its impact
on children. All actors involved in the protection of
children’s rights must redouble their efforts to continue
to protect children affected by conflict, in particular
against recruitment, abuse and violence. We believe that
it is important for Member States to join their efforts
and actions, including by implementing international
standards and norms on the protection of children, in
order to ensure special protection for children.
In that regard, Equatorial Guinea has established
national policies within the framework of its national
committee to support children in my country. Since
children and young people represent the future of a
country, they must be considered as peacemakers. That
is why it is important to involve them in peace processes
and socialize them as peacemakers from the beginning.
Meaningful participation in community life seems
to be an effective way for children and young people to
develop their potential, especially in times of conflict.
With adequate support and access to necessary
resources, they can become change agents and lay
the foundation for rebuilding lives and communities,
thereby contributing to the creation of a peaceful
society. Therefore, empowering family members is a
crucial component of the strategy to empower children
through educational programmes, since they depend on
their family members.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
will continue to support efforts to protect children in
armed conflict and calls upon all Member States to
support the implementation of action plans and other
commitments to strengthen the protection of children
in armed conflict. The important resolution that we
adopted this morning, sponsored by Sweden, constitutes
a most valuable instrument through whose effective
implementation, and together with other instruments
and plans of action that have been adopted and entered
into force, can make children safer and more protected
in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate the
delegation of Sweden for organizing this open debate
on children and armed conflict. I thank His Excellency
Stefan Löfven, Prime Minister of Sweden, for being
personally present today and presiding over this debate,
which underlines the importance of the theme and
22/96

09/07/2018

highlights the role of child protection in the prevention
of conflicts and building peaceful societies.
We express our warm appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia
Gamba and to UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta
Fore for their comprehensive briefings. We commend
the team of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, UNICEF and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for their coordinated and relentless
efforts to put an end to the grave violations against
children. We also thank Ms. Yenny Londoño, who is
here representing civil society, for her insights on
integrating child protection issues in the peace process
in Colombia. We pay tribute to the non-governmental
organization community, which makes a sterling
contribution as defenders of children’s rights.
I will begin by expressing deep concern over the
significant increase in the scale, complexity and severity
of grave violations affecting children in armed conflict,
as outlined in the Secretary-General’s annual report
(S/2018/465). In the past year alone, tens of thousands
of children were killed, maimed, sexually abused or
recruited by armed groups and Government forces.
At the same time, the overall reduction in the number
of incidents of child recruitment and the military use of
schools indicates that positive change is achievable. We
wholeheartedly endorse the adoption of resolution 2427
(2018), which covers a range of key issues of the childrenand-armed conflict agenda, which was drafted by the
delegation of Sweden as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The unanimous adoption
of that document and its large number of co-sponsors
proved that there is a strong consensus among Member
States on the importance of the issue. We must use
that unity to safeguard children — our most precious
resource — through collective and comprehensive
measures. In that regard, Kazakhstan would like to
propose the following recommendations.
First, we must promote full compliance with
international law and strengthen accountability for
grave violations against children. It is vital that all
Member States ratify and strictly implement the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and other relevant treaties, as Kazakhstan
did. We also encourage Governments to endorse
the international tools related to the protection of
children in armed conflict, such as the Paris Princ
iples, thVancouver Principles and the Safe Schools
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

Declaration, and include child protection provisions
in peace and negotiating processes, especially with
non-State armed groups. Enhancing the capacity of
United Nations missions to monitor and report grave
violations is equally important to ensure accountability.
Secondly, we need to prioritize preventive measures
and efforts aimed at confidence- and capacity-building.
We support the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba focused on preventive
actions, including through enhanced engagement with
parties to conflict, field visits and the signing of action
plans, as well as strengthened cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations.
Children who lack future prospects and education
and live in severe poverty are more vulnerable to
recruiters and perpetrators. Therefore, investments in
development, providing better living conditions and
meeting socioeconomic needs of children are also
critical to preventing recruitment and grave violations
against children. Equally important is support for
capacity-building at regional and local levels through
training programmes and providing interreligious and
inter-ethnic education to promote tolerance.
Thirdly, we must increase support for reintegration
and rehabilitation programmes for children formerly
associated with armed groups. Adequate, predictable
and sustainable funding must be provided to ensure
access for children to education, vocational training,
health care, basic services and trauma counselling on
an immediate basis. In addition, we must rethink our
approaches to reintegration and establish long-term
multi-year programmes that will help children more
effectively reintegrate into society and succeed in
their communities.
In conclusion, I once again reiterate Kazakhstan’s
commitment to all collective and comprehensive
measures to ensure the safety and welfare of children,
who become the most vulnerable group in times of
armed conflict.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China congratulates Sweden on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
welcome Prime Minister Löfven to New York and thank
him for presiding over this open debate. We would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Gamba and UNICEF Executive Director Fore for their
respective briefings. We also thank Ms. Londoño for
her statement.

S/PV. 8305

The Council just unanimously adopted resolution
2427 (2018), on children and armed conflict. We
applaud the enormous efforts Sweden undertook in
holding consultations and building consensus.
The issue of children in armed conflict has been
on the Council’s agenda for more than 20 years, which
means that children who were born when the Council
adopted its first resolution on this issue — resolution
1261 (1999) — are now adults. We deeply regret that the
continued outbreak of armed conflicts and the spread
of terrorism have rendered children among the most
vulnerable groups. Ruthless wars and heinous terrorist
attacks have devastated the lives of innocent children,
denying them love and care and bringing them untold
suffering instead. Those children need tangible and
effective protection from us, as well as utmost love and
care. It is incumbent upon the international community
to do so. In that regard, I would like to stress the
following points.
First, we must prioritize prevention by teaching
our children to cherish peace and reject war in order to
protect them from the harm of extremist and terrorist
ideologies. All sides should ensure that children are
taught from an early age to embrace the values of peace
and reject violence and conflict. The international
community should take effective measures against
online recruitment by terrorist organizations and the
incitement to violence and extremism through the
Internet. We should also mobilize families, schools and
communities in helping children resist terrorist and
extremist ideologies. We should strengthen international
counter-terrorism coorperation, adopt a zero-tolerance
and non-discriminatory approach and resolutely
combat all forms of crime against children committed
by terrorist organizations, such as recruitment, killing,
abuse and abduction.
Secondly, we must bring an end to hostilities and
violence and jointly maintain international peace and
security. The most effective way to protect children is
to prevent and resolve conflicts. The Security Council,
which is entrusted with the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, must
promote the use of political means as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations, including mediation,
conciliation, dialogue and negotiation, and support and
encourage all parties to peaceably settle their disputes
and prevent armed conflicts from happening in the first
place. The international community should promote the
proper resolution of regional hotspot issues and fully

18-2140223/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

protect the rights of children in that process. That is the
fundamental way to save children from the scourge of
armed conflict.
Thirdly, we must assume a long-term perspective
and provide capacity-building assistance to the countries
concerned. The primary responsibility for protecting
children in conflicts lies with the Governments of the
countries concerned. The efforts and cooperation of
the countries concerned are key in fully implementing
the Council’s resolutions and various plans and
programmes for the protection of children. We must
fully respect national ownership, enhance dialogue
and communication with the relevant countries and
support the development of child-protection capacities
in the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as security sector reform.
Fourthly, we must strengthen coordination and forge
international synergy for the protection of children.
UNICEF, UNESCO, the World Bank and other relevant
entities should work within their respective mandates
and leverage their comparative advantages for stronger
cooperation. An integrated approach is needed to
support the efforts of the Governments concerned on
poverty eradication, universal access to education and
sustainable development.
Moreover, we should help children affected by
armed conflict to reintegrate smoothly into their
respective societies and provide them with a favourable
security and social environment that facilitates
their healthy growth so that they can become active
contributors and promoters of peace in the future.
In this road that we all share, children are our
common hope. Let us work together for the security and
well-being of children around the world. Let us create a
harmonious world in which they can grow up in health.
Let us join hands to build a community of a shared
future for humankind so that peace can shine down on
small children as they grow and enjoy a better future.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me join others in
welcoming Sweden’s presidency of the Security Council
and in thanking Russia for its stewardship during the
previous month. We are also very pleased, Mr. Prime
Minister, that you have convened this open debate
today. It is very important for the Council to focus on
the protection of children as a key element of conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Like others, I also
would like to pay tribute to Ms. Londoño’s insight into
the effect of conflict. What she said about addressing
24/96

09/07/2018

the root causes is a theme that has been repeated by
many speakers today. I also thank the Executive
Director of UNICEF and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for their efforts, internationally
and on the ground, to protect children and prevent them
from being the victims of armed conflict.
In that regard, the United Kingdom joins others in
welcoming the publication of the Secretary-General’s
annual report (S/2018/465). Thanks to the courageous
and committed work of monitoring and reporting teams
all over the world, the report continues to produce a
reliable, evidence-based set of metrics, which the
Council, the United Nations and others need in order
to take effective action. But it also shows an alarming
trend — in 2017 the number of verified violations
against children in armed conflict increased by a
shocking 35 per cent. It is vital that the Council address
that trend, and to that end I welcome today’s debate.
We have heard a lot about the next generation.
We were able to hear some very good news from Côte
d’Ivoire. I was interested in those experiences, as
well as in what is happening in Nigeria. But, as the
Council saw for itself on its mission to Bangladesh
and Myanmar, there are too many children who bear
the physical scars of armed conflict. We saw children
amputees, a poignant and disturbing reminder of what
conflict does to children. We need to take better care of
the next generation so that they can, in turn, take care
of their societies. There is no single answer to how we
do that. We have heard many ideas put forward today. I
will not repeat them. The United Kingdom shares many
of the suggestions made today but, if I may, I would like
to concentrate on one particular action that can have an
overwhelmingly positive effect on improving stability
and reducing conflict.
I am referring to Sustainable Development Goal
4, which has to do with making sure that everybody
receives a quality education. That is something
that Ms. Londoño and a number of Permanent
Representatives have drawn attention to. As we all know,
women play a vital role in the prevention and resolution
of armed conflict and in peacebuilding, including
in peace talks and in re-establishing the fabric of a
recovering society. Yet we know that conflict restricts
access to education, particularly girls’ education. We
should see what we can do to ameliorate that situation.
Reintegration programmes should include education as
a core component, while disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes should be age- and gender18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

sensitive in order to meet the needs of all children.
We need to ensure that worldwide girls receive the
education that allows them to fully participate in
governance towards the achievement of durable peace,
security and reconciliation — and hence, ultimately,
towards conflict prevention
A staggeringly small amount of humanitarian aid
was invested in education in 2016 — a mere 1.4 per
cent. It goes without saying that that is not enough. We
should all do more to place education at the heart of our
approach to security and development. For its part, the
United Kingdom is committed to providing educational
support to millions of children around the world in
need of education in emergencies and protracted
crises. In Syria and the wider region, following on
from UNICEF’s No Lost Generation initiative, we
allocated $110 million to provide protection, trauma
care and education for children affected by the crisis
in that country and the wider region. We are the largest
bilateral donor to the Education Cannot Wait fund, and
we are committing $40 million this year to support
conflict-affected children in Uganda.
Finally, as other speakers noted, we need to
ensure that schools themselves are protected. While
international humanitarian law is the primary basis for
the protection of schools and educational facilities, the
Safe Schools Declaration, which the United Kingdom
recently endorsed, reflects our commitment to the
provision of, and access to, high-quality education in
humanitarian situations and protracted crises.
We align ourselves with the statement that will be
delivered by the representative of Argentina on behalf
of all those who have endorsed the Declaration. We
would like to take this opportunity to call on all of our
international partners to follow suit.
As set out in the first line of the Charter of the
United Nations — much quoted today — our goal is to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
We need to begin with our children, who are absolutely
vital to a better future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me also to congratulate Sweden on organizing
this open debate under the presidency of its Prime
Minister, Mr. Stefan Löfven.

S/PV. 8305

Resolution 2427 (2018), which the Security
Council adopted today, is an important contribution to
strengthening the children and armed conflict agenda,
which, as the Council knows, is particularly close to
Luxembourg’s heart. I can say that with great conviction
because, in 2014, I myself presided over a meeting of
the Council, during which resolution 2143 (2014) was
adopted (see S/PV.7129). In order to maintain some
momentum in the consideration of this issue by this
organ, a more frequent adoption of relevant instruments
is desirable.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. My thanks also go to the Executive Director of
UNICEF for her briefing. I also listened very carefully
to the moving testimony of Ms. Yenny Londoño.
The Secretary-General’s annual report on the plight
of children in armed conflict (S/2018/465) begins with
the sad fact that in 2017 violations of all types sharply
increased as compared to the previous year. Those
violations are the unacceptable daily fate of more than
21,000 children living in conflicts. We must strongly
condemn all violations committed against children
and commit ourselves to working resolutely for respect
of the rights of the child, in particular those living in
armed conflict.
The report is the result of extensive consultations
within the United Nations system, at Headquarters and
in the field, and with the Member States concerned.
We have confidence in the safeguards, including the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, to verify the
accuracy of all information contained in the annual
report and its annexes.
From the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
Syria, from Afghanistan to Myanmar, from South Sudan
to Mali, children are being killed and maimed. They
are abducted, recruited by force and sexually abused
by Government forces as well as non-State actors. In a
context of repeated abuses, the protection of children
must be systematic. Child protection programmes in
times of armed conflict must have have the support of
sufficient capacity and means to ensure that children
can be released and reintegrated into their families
and communities in a sustainable way. We emphasize
the crucial importance of integrating child protection
advisers with their specific mandate in United Nations
operations on the ground. We note with satisfaction
that 10,000 children were formally released in 2017 and

18-2140225/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

an unknown number were able to lay down their arms
through other means. We realize that this is only the
beginning of a process in which these children must be
supported on the psychosocial and educational fronts
in order to sustainably break the cycle of violence and
ultimately consolidate peace. The actors on the ground
must be given the means they need to enable them to
take on those tasks and achieve their objective, which
I believe was one of Ms. Londoño’s main appeals
this morning.
I should congratulate the Security Council on
its adoption of resolution 2419 (2018), in recognition
of the importance of strengthening the inclusion of
young people in the negotiation and implementation
of peace agreements. The marginalization of young
people is detrimental to achieving lasting peace and
combating violent extremism. In that context, the right
to education is fundamental to building lasting peace.
Schools continue to be the target of deliberate attacks
and school infrastructure is routinely looted or diverted
from its primary purpose for military uses, acts that
deprive children of their right to an education and can
breed intolerance, a resort to violence and weakened
community resilience. We urge all Member States
that have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration, and we call on all States to take concrete
measures to discourage the parties to conflicts from
using schools for military purposes.
Lastly, while progress has been made in recent
years, much remains to be done. The increase in the
numbers of serious acts of violence against children
and of their perpetrators suggests that too many parties
are shielded from international justice. There should be
no impunity for those responsible for crimes against
children. The important role played by the International
Criminal Court in complementing national proceedings
in that regard remains central and essential.
We reiterate our unequivocal support for
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, who has been working tirelessly
for the protection of children in armed conflict, and
we continue to provide concrete support to her Office
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We therefore responded positively to her request
for financing the secondment of a liaison officer in
Brussels with the aim of strengthening relations with
European and Atlantic institutions in the context of
implementing their guidelines on children and armed
conflict. That includes developing a strategic road
26/96

09/07/2018

map and implementing standard monitoring and
reporting procedures for the six serious violations
against children identified by the Council. We have
also supported a research project of the United Nations
University in partnership with UNICEF, which has
just ended with the publication of a study for United
Nations staff in the field entitled Cradled by Conflict,
on preventing. protecting and disengaging children
from extreme violence.
We build the future with our children, which is why
we must protect them if we want a future founded on
lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Children and Youth Affairs of Ireland.
Ms. Zappone (Ireland): Thank you for convening
today’s debate on this extremely important subject,
Mr. President. I would also like to thank today’s briefers
and welcome the Secretary-General’s report for 2017 on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465), which makes
many valuable recommendations.
Children are on the front lines of armed conflicts
across the world. While their vulnerability in times
of crisis has been recognized since the early days of
international humanitarian law, our common efforts to
protect all children from aggression and violence fall
short of where we need to be. Ireland therefore welcomes
a greater focus on linking the agenda on children in
armed conflict with strategies for conflict prevention
and sustainable peace. As a Minister responsible for
children and young people, I want to define security not
merely as a condition of peace but as a recognition that
in order to flourish we need to live in a just and equal
society where our States protect us from interpersonal
violence and persecution.
In his acceptance speech for the Nobel Peace Prize,
Ireland’s Sean MacBride reminded us that there can be
no peace without justice. I believe that inequality, in all
its forms, is a driver of conflict. Gender-based violence
is one of the most damaging and perilous types of
injustices towards children in armed conflicts. Young
girls are particularly vulnerable to sexual exploitation
and human trafficking, so empowering them and
prioritizing their protection from gender-based abuse
in conflict is absolutely vital. Under Ireland’s chairship
of the Commission on the Status of Women earlier this
year, the conclusions of the priority theme “Challenges
and opportunities in achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of rural women and girls” were agreed
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

on. We also promote the protection of girls in conflict
through our national action plan on women, peace and
security. That is reflected in our humanitarian action
but is also a priority for our defence forces.
When violence erupts, children are frequently
denied education, leaving them open to indoctrination
or exploitation, and without positive economic
opportunities for the rest of their lives. Ireland’s
development assistance programme, Irish Aid, supports
a number of non-governmental organization partners
at the community level in establishing safe learning
spaces for boys and girls. In November 2017, Ireland
was one of 65 Member States to endorse the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, which raise
awareness of the recruitment and use of child soldiers
by armed groups and commit us to addressing issues of
trauma and lost childhood.
Far beyond being merely victims of conflict,
children and young people can also play a crucial role
in promoting long-term peace across the globe. That is
why Ireland is a strong supporter of the youth, peace
and security agenda, including providing funding
to the recent progress study on youth, peace and
security. In 2015 we introduced a United Nations youth
delegate programme, in a clear commitment to greater
engagement with young people on development, human
rights and global citizenship. They represent the future,
the values of Ireland and the values that established the
United Nations and the Security Council. It is for them
that we must together be a global vehicle for developing
and promoting sustainable security, a security that
allows all our people to flourish.
In conclusion, I invite the Council to imagine a
child who is allowed to flourish, and then one who is
not. As Minister, I am particularly proud that half of the
1,883 persons accepted into Ireland under resettlement
and relocation programmes are children fleeing war
and conflict. In addition, Ireland is providing care
for 79 children who arrived alone at our ports and
airports. All of those children — from such countries
experiencing conflict as Syria, Afghanistan and
Eritrea — are making Ireland their home. They speak
for themselves in a collection of stories and art created
by Syrian and Palestinian children now living in Mayo,
in the West of Ireland. In the book entitled A Strong
Heart, they tell of the beauty of their new hometowns,
the local rivers, mountains and even our world-famous
salmon. They express their passion for Irish sport, their

S/PV. 8305

sense of fun and their hopes and dreams. Khaled, who
is 12-years-old and lives in Claremorris, writes,
“My dream for the future is to be a footballer first
and play for Ireland. When I am 33, I will be a
teacher and go back to Syria to teach English.”
Khaled and his classmates — Irish, Syrian and
Palestinian — are flourishing. They are our future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine greatly
appreciates Sweden’s initiative to hold this open
debate, Mr. President, as well as your personally
presiding over it. We thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta
Fore, UNICEF Executive Director, for their briefings.
Ukraine welcomes the initiative of Sweden on adopting
updated resolution 2427 (2018), on children and armed
conflict. By joining as a co-sponsor, Ukraine once again
underscores its commitments on protecting children in
situations of armed conflict.
I am about to deliver a statement in my national
capacity, but I also would like to highlight that Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union.
It is regrettable that, since the first Security
Council open debate on children and armed conflict
(see S/PV.3896), which was held in 1998, children
have continued to be disproportionately affected in
situations of armed conflict. As documented in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/465), the scale of
the violations committed against children is extremely
alarming. Behind the data lies enormous human sorrow,
which impacts children’s lives and causes long-term
psychological trauma, thereby making violence and
insecurity permanent features of their everyday lives.
Let me therefore echo other speakers who took the
floor before me by saying that the right thing to do in
the face of these grim facts is to intensify our common
efforts to ensure enhanced protection for children in
armed conflict. In that context, enhanced cooperation
by the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations at all stages of the conflict cycle could
make a substantive contribution.
It is equally important that adequate levels of
funding and support be provided to Governments to

18-2140227/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

assist them in carrying out reintegration programmess
aimed at children scarred by armed conflicts. Access to
education, psychological support and rehabilitation are
important building blocks in devising and implementing
effective strategies for preventing the escalation of
current conflicts and the emergence of new ones.
It is worth mentioning that monitoring is an
important preventive mechanism that can identify
risks of a sharp deterioration of a situation and
make respective recommendations for early action.
Unfortunately, despite existing preventive mechanisms,
we witness a lack of their implementation in situations
of emerging conflicts.
I would like to remind the Council that, despite
the existing resolution on the role of prevention in the
promotion and protection of human rights that was
initiated by Ukraine, long before the armed aggression
launched by the Russian Federation, the Human Rights
Council was unable to use the preventive instruments
on human rights violations at its disposal.
Twenty years ago at the open debate on children and
armed conflict, a permanent member of the Security
Council noted that
“Leaders of military factions are using children
ever more frequently in armed conflicts as cannon
fodder.” (S/PV.3896, p. 11)
Back then no one sitting at this table could imagine
that the same Council member would launch a fullscale armed intervention against a neighbouring State,
illegally occupy parts of its territory and resort to the
same tactics it vehemently condemned, namely, shelling
densely populated civilian areas and endangering the
lives of civilians, including children.
As a recent example, on 28 May a 15-year-old girl
died after an artillery attack by Russian forces on the
city of Toretsk, in Donbas. Moreover, there are also
reports that children as young as 15-years-old have been
recruited into armed youth groups and are taking part
in active combat as full-fledged members of combined
Russian and Russia-led militant forces, including as
youth reconnaissance and sabotage groups operating in
the Government-controlled territory of Ukraine.
Another brutal examples is the detention of six
teenagers, citizens of Ukraine, in September 2016
in the city Yasynuvata by the Russian occupation
administration on charges of subversive activities.
Those children remain under illegal arrest in detention
28/96

09/07/2018

facilities. The question of their release has been
discussed in Minsk at the Trilateral Contact Group.
Unfortunately, no progress has been achieved yet.
Approximately 200,000 boys and girls live within
the 15-kilometre zone along both sides of the line of
contact. They all long for peace finally to come to their
land, when they can go to school without worrying that
their classes could be interrupted by sudden artillery
shelling and be able to take a walk in the fields or
forests without fear of booby traps or mines.
This conflict has already claimed way too many
lives, including those of 80 innocent children on board
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which was shot down
four years ago, in July 2014, by a Buk missile system of
the Russian fifty-third Anti-Aircraft Military Brigade,
which had been brought into the territory of Ukraine
from the Brigade’s permanent base near the city
of Kursk.
Let me remind the Council that, in 2015, the
Security Council draft resolution (S/2015/562) aimed
at creating an international tribunal to prosecute
persons responsible for the attack on Flight MH-17
was vetoed (see S/PV.7498) by a country claiming that
“international legality is the main attribute of a stable
world and security”. That country can easily contribute
to the resolution of conflicts by putting an end to its
practices of constantly and deliberately undermining the
international legal system, abandoning its aggressive
policies, withdrawing its troops from the occupied
territories of neighbouring States and ceasing to flood
the region with heavy weapons.
On our part, Ukraine has always been consistent
in its policy of ensuring the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. With the endorsement and
ratification of basic documents such as the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol, as
well as the Paris Commitments and Paris Principles,
Ukraine has fully committed itself to the protection
of the rights of children. We also continue to attach
great importance to the Safe School Declaration, a
framework to ensure better protection for schools
and students. The Government of Ukraine intends to
endorse the Declaration after completing the necessary
internal procedures.
We note the absence in the report of the SecretaryGeneral to a reference to the situation concerning
Ukranian children affected by the conflict in the Donbas
region of Ukraine. Such a situation reflects the efforts
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

of the Government of Ukraine to protect and save the
lives of the children impacted by the armed aggression.
Ukraine pays special attention to the reintegration
of almost 240,000 children out of around 1.7 million
internally displaced persons.
As a member of the Council during the two previous
years, Ukraine strove to highlight the preventive role
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. We welcome the
adoption today of resolution 2427 (2018), which will
allocate greater powers to the Special Representative
to implement her role in conflict prevention. We are
encouraged by the approach just set out by Ms. Virginia
Gamba when she said that we must “move to an era of
prevention”. That is fully in line with the general vision
of the Secretary-General on the reform of the peace and
security pillar based on the concept of the prevention
of conflict. It is evident that preventive diplomacy
represents a major tool that the United Nations should
deploy more.
Ukraine, as an initiator of the aforementioned
resolution of the Human Rights Council on the role of
prevention in the promotion and protection of human
rights, firmly believes that without a systematic approach
to prevention throughout the entire Organization, we
will not be able to succeed in preventing new conflicts
or the resumption of old ones. In matters of preventing
conflicts and gross violations of human rights, the speed
and determination of the United Nations are crucial. In
1994, in Rwanda, and later in Srebrenica, the United
Nations failed to react promptly to prevent genocide. In
2014, neither the leadership of the United Nations at the
time nor the members of the Security Council managed
to stop Russia’s military aggression and occupation of
Crimea and Donbas.
Finally, I would like to close my statement with
a quote of a notable Swedish scientist, Alfred Nobel:
“Good wishes alone will not ensure peace”. It seems
like this is the right time to stop enjoying ourselves
or, as they say in English, this is the right time to stop
having a ball.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The fact that you have
been sitting here for three hours, Mr. Prime Minister,
demonstrates how seriously you take the issue and
how high your delegation places the issue of children
and armed conflict on your agenda. I would also like
to congratulate you on the consensual adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018), which, if my information is

S/PV. 8305

correct, now has 98 sponsors. I believe that you will hit
the record number of 100 by the end of the day.
I would also like to commend the three briefers
today. Virginia Gamba has been working tirelessly
on this issue for many years and we support her. Her
mandate needs support. I also highly appreciate her
close cooperation with UNICEF. I praise Henrietta
Fore and UNICEF for the work they have been doing on
youth, in addition to the cooperation that I mentioned.
I also thank the third briefer. She offered a very
impressive demonstration of what she has gone through
in Colombia. Like my French colleagues earlier today,
I would like to highlight the need for civil society
initiators, of which there are many in Colombia.
Germany has been trying to help to promote the process
in Colombia. One of our project partners is Benposta,
which is a charity that houses former child soldiers and
adults affected by violence. Through contributions to
the United Nations Post-Conflict Multi-Partner Trust
Fund for Colombia, Germany is supporting two projects
that seek to reintegrate young former combatants of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia and to
prevent new recruitment.
While Germany aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union, I
should like to make four brief points.
First, we commend the Secretary-General and his
annual report (S/2018/465), which is a key document
and tool for implementing the children and armed
conflict agenda. While there have been some positive
developments — we heard from the representative
of Côte d’Ivoire about what happened in his country,
while the Sudan and other countries have adopted
action plans — overall, when we look at the message
conveyed by the report, it is rather devastating.
The Prime Minister of Aruba, representing the
Netherlands, said earlier that what we are witnessing
is eroding respect for humanitarian law. Like others,
she was shocked by the figures that you, Mr. President,
mentioned at the beginning of your statement. Thus,
there is much work to do, and it must remain on the
agenda of the Security Council, which also leads
to something that was noted earlier by our French
colleague, and that is the importance of raising public
awareness by having the discussion here. As the
representative of Ethiopia, among others, said, we have
to include child protection in armed conflict in country
resolutions and mandate child protection advisers in

18-2140229/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

missions. In all mandates of peacekeeping operations,
we must keep children and armed conflict on the agenda.
I would also like to highlight one point that has been
made by several speakers. We have to underline and
work on accountability. We have to prevent impunity
for those who commit grave violations of human rights
in that context.
Secondly, and something Ms. Gamba also
highlighted, there are many non-State actors and
parties involved in conflicts across borders. We
therefore totally support the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General’s efforts to work across borders
with regional organizations, because we believe that
in doing so she can receive joint responses to respond
to cross-border challenges, for instance through joint
prevention strategies, joint standards for training and
joint responses to reintegration needs.
Thirdly, we support Sweden’s focus on prevention.
That is key. The reintegration of former child soldiers
is part of a strategy to resolve conflicts and preserve
peace, which means that reintegration programmes are
key. They need to include gender aspects in order to
be effective for boys and girls alike. We also share the
view that funding for reintegration must be predictable,
sustained and flexible. Germany has supported longterm projects focusing on vulnerable groups in society,
including former child soldiers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Fourthly, effective prevention goes beyond
reintegration programmes and needs to focus on
education. Earlier, my British colleague highlighted the
need for and underlined the right to education and what
we are trying to achieve with Sustainable Development
Goal 4. Education is also key to prevention. In 2011 and
2012, when Germany last sat on the Security Council,
we made children and armed conflict a top priority of
our time here. We commit to keeping it on the agenda
when we are a member of the Council next year and the
year after. We are committed to further strengthening
the link between child protection and prevention. We
see prevention as a cross-cutting issue in the Council’s
work. We will continue the discussion that our Swedish
friends have started and use the momentum from this
year’s debate and the upcoming high-level meeting on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace to keep the topic
on the agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
30/96

09/07/2018

Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
sincerely thank Sweden and you, Mr. Prime Minister,
for convening this open debate on the protection
of children in armed conflict and its impact on the
prevention and maintenance of peace. We particularly
appreciate the forward-looking focus of this debate.
My delegation also appreciates the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/465) and the briefings we
have heard this morning by the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and Ms. Yenny Londoño of
Colombia, a country that is so dear to all of us.
Chile associates itself with the statements made by
the representatives of Canada, on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and of
Argentina, on behalf of the group of States endorsing
the Safe Schools Declaration.
Faced with the multidimensional nature of conflicts
and the increase in and persistence of violations of
children’s rights, attacks on schools and hospitals, and
the actions of extremist groups that victimize the most
vulnerable groups, the international system as a whole
must act preventively and decisively. We agree that it is
time to stop the onset of future conflict.
We therefore echo the call of the international
community to go further in its resolve and action to
protect children who have been victims of conflict
in order to guarantee them a better future that will
allow them to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals established in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and lasting peace. As concrete measures,
we urge States to ratify the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and to
support the Paris Principles, the Vancouver Principles
and the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration. We attach
importance to maintaining child protection advisers
in peacekeeping operations and to considering new
appointments where such advising is required. We also
underscore birth registration as a means of proof to
prevent the recruitment of children and to ensure their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
We consider it relevant to include the issue
of children in peace negotiations, ceasefires and
mediation and support processes for sustaining peace,
and to ensure that peacekeeping contingents receive
adequate training in the promotion and protection of
human rights. We reiterate the importance of combating
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

S/PV. 8305

impunity and prosecuting and punishing those
responsible for heinous crimes against children. In the
absence of such capacity or willingness, it is the task
of the International Criminal Court to address crimes
under the Rome Statute. In addition, we must ensure
predictable, sustained and flexible financing for the
reintegration of children affected by armed conflict so
that child protection actors can create viable alternatives
to military life and prevent their re-recruitment.

the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of UNICEF, with whom we have been working very
closely for a long time.

In conclusion, Chile believes that the international
community cannot and should not accept the violation of
children’s rights anywhere or under any circumstances.
Ensuring a peaceful global society requires that
priority be given to the protection of its children and
the development of conflict prevention and resolution
strategies in order to achieve sustainable and lasting
peace that will guarantee future peace for all.

Colombia has been no exception. The situation
of children has been particularly difficult in recent
decades. Of the more than 8 million victims of the
armed conflict, almost 39 per cent have been children
and adolescents, which is an awful and very high
figure. Between 2013 and 2018, 410,934 children were
recorded as victims of the conflict and are on their way
to reparation.

The President: Before moving on, I want to really
express the appreciation of Sweden for the strong
commitment and engagement of everyone during
the debate this morning. It is sometimes tempting to
express that commitment through very long statements,
as we know. I just have to remind speakers to limit their
statements to no more than three minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.

We are therefore grateful for the annual report
presented by the Special Representative (S/2018/465),
which acknowledges the progress achieved thanks to
the peace process and removes the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo as
a recruiting group from its annexes, following its
transformation into a political party. We consider that
good news because it allows our institutions to continue
to work to strengthen strategies that seek to create
environments and spaces for prevention and protection,
in particular in rural parts of Colombia, which Yenny
spoke about this morning.

To that end, let me take the opportunity to remind
speakers that the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the collars of the microphones to remind speakers
that it is time to sum up and bring their remarks to a
close. Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

As stated in the concept note (S/2018/625, annex),
the protection and care of children who have been
affected by armed conflict are fundamental to achieving
sustainable peace and successful reintegration is the
cornerstone of any peace process.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Colombia.

I would also like to share with the Council our
experience with the coordinated work we have been
doing with the Office of the Special Representative in
recent years, which has involved a coordinated effort
among Governments and could be used in other areas
of the world. In May, in Bogotá, we were able to hear
about comparable experiences in Sri Lanka, Nepal,
Sierra Leone and Colombia, which helped us identify
challenges and possibles solutions.

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
Government for convening this very important open
debate and for your ongoing commitment to the
Colombian conflict, which, as Council members
were able to see first hand today with the emotional
participation of my compatriot, Ms. Yenny Londoño,
is a flesh-and-blood reality in many conflict affected
countries. I welcome the Special Representative of

Council members and the Swedish delegation,
which follows this issue closely, can continue to count
on Colombia’s commitment during the implementation
of the post-conflict phase, in particular with regard to
indigenous children and those of African descent, as
well as children living in marginalized areas. As Yenny
said, we have to keep working to provide, if not her, at
least her daughter, and all children affected by various
conflicts, with a better future.

I wish to inform representatives that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour
as we have a large number of speakers to listen to
this afternoon.

18-2140231/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I have the honour
to speak on behalf Latvia, Lithuania and my own
country, Estonia.
We fully align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
We would like to thank Sweden for convening this
open debate and all the briefers for their presentations.
Armed conflicts continue to have a horrific
impact on children and, as stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on children and armed conflict
(S/2018/465), last year the situation was one of the
worst in recent memory. Children are being killed or
maimed, recruited as child soldiers and used as human
shields. Their schools are being attacked, they are
sexually abused, detained, abducted, separated from
their families and denied humanitarian access.
On the other hand, there are a few optimistic
developments. Intensive United Nations engagement
with armed groups in the Central African Republic and
Nigeria resulted in the signing of action plans to release
children and prevent their future recruitment. Sudan
made progress in the implementation of the action plan.
Mali endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. Those
positive steps, however, are not sufficient.
States and the international community bear a
responsibility to prevent violations and to protect
children and others who are most vulnerable to the
detrimental impact of conflict. It is clear that the way
we treat children affected by armed conflict has a strong
impact on their future well-being, their development as
individuals and, ultimately, on communities as a whole.
We as the international community need to do more
to bridge the gap between protection of children and
conflict prevention. These prevention efforts should be
guided by the necessity to ensure full compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In that regard, we first and foremost call on all States
who have not yet done so to accede to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
In line with the Secretary-General’s agenda on
prevention, we also acknowledge the need to receive
early warning signs from the ground. Here, civil
society can play a vital role. For prevention to be
truly efficient, however, States and ultimately the
32/96

09/07/2018

international community need to take sufficient and
timely action. Children’s involvement in peacemaking,
peacebuilding and transitional justice processes should
also not be overlooked.
Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia are also among
the Member States that have endorsed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers in furtherance
of their commitment to taking further steps to
protect children.
In order to create sustainable and resilient societies,
it is important to offer all children affected by conflict
long-term support for reintegration into society. Also,
in line with the motto of the Sustainable Development
Goals of leaving no one behind, we need to make sure
that children recruited as soldiers or otherwise involved
in armed forces or groups receive the necessary
support, including psychological support to facilitate
their reintegration into a normal life. An important and
indispensable element here is the provision of education
to all children, including all girls, without exception. We
need to build community and family-support capacities
and skill-development opportunities, without which
those children will not be able to rebuild their lives.
We must remember to treat children as victims first,
not as perpetrators, and to avoid at any cost the double
victimization of children by detaining them for their
former association with armed forces or groups.
Finally, allow me to stress that conflict resolution
and sustainable peacebuilding involves the vital
element of accountability. That includes fighting
against impunity for violations and abuses that have
been perpetrated towards children. That obligation
lies primarily with States, whose capacity to enact
appropriate national legislation to criminalize grave
violations against children should be assisted. As a last
resort, upon the inability or unwillingness to prosecute
crimes, we continue to support the important role of the
International Criminal Court.
It is important for us as the international community
as a whole and as individual States to do our utmost
to not let down the children that are being affected by
conflict. By protecting them, we are protecting our
common future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Moragas Sánchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to start by thanking the Prime Minister of
Sweden for his presence in today’s important debate. I
also welcome the Special Representative, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and Ms. Yenny Londoño, whose
presence here demonstrates the importance of working
with non-State actors and investing in reintegration.
The Swedish delegation is doing an excellent job
chairing the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We congratulate Sweden on this invaluable
contribution and for the consensus adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018), which my country is proud to
have co-sponsored.
My country aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, as well as that
delivered by the representative of Argentina on behalf
of the group of countries endorsing the Safe Schools
Declaration. We would like to add a few remarks in our
national capacity.
The issue of children and armed conflict is much
more than an agenda item of the Council. It represents
a collective responsibility of Members of the United
Nations and as human beings. Confronted with the
recruitment of minors, the bombing of schools and
hospitals, abductions, violations, the killing and
maiming of children, and the denial of humanitarian
access, we must be inflexible and demand strict
compliance with international law. I would like to focus
on four issues.
First of all, I stress the importance of preserving
existing institutional capacities in peace operations
in order to monitor, report and respond to grave
violations against children. Indeed, if we wish to secure
an accurate and credible list of those responsible for
that type of violation and abuse, we need to maintain
and strengthen child protection advisers. We cannot
expect results from this mandate if the right tools are
not in place. We must also pay special attention to the
cross-border component of many violations and their
connection to the trafficking of children.
Secondly, we welcome the preventive approach of
the resolution adopted earlier. Safeguarding children’s
rights and ensuring their protection from the moment
there is a risk of conflict can contribute to the solution.
Post-conflict protection must also not be neglected.
Therefore, we agree that implementing an action
plan must entail establishing frameworks to prevent
future violations and abuses, including mechanisms

S/PV. 8305

to empower children and young people. There are
also positive examples, such as those of Colombia or
Nepal, that show that a timely commitment on the part
of the parties in this area can substantially contribute
to the creation of confidence-building measures within
the framework of a new peace process. Therefore, we
believe that this agenda must be at the core of prevention
efforts and sustainable conflict resolution.
Thirdly, we express our support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, UNICEF
and specialized civil society organizations for their
commitment to reintegration. There is little point in
achieving the demobilization of children if they do
not find an alternative to end the spiral of violence.
Perhaps as donors we should introduce that notion in
our contributions.
Finally, we all know that the denial or hindering
of humanitarian access particularly affects children.
They are also especially vulnerable to the destruction
of civilian infrastructure that provides basic services,
such as medical and educational facilities. My country
prioritizes those two issues because they have very
negative short- and long-term consequences and they
are an example of the multiple challenges faced in the
sphere of protection, humanitarian emergency services
and the development of peaceful societies.
In April, we organized a retreat focused on the
protection of health care in armed conflicts. We are
now working on a General Assembly initiative that will
contribute towards the implementation of resolution
2286 (2016). Moreover, we are signatories of the
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict, the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and the Safe
Schools Declaration.
In this regard, I would like to finish by saying
that I must remind the Council that Spain will host the
third Safe Schools Conference at the end of May 2019,
less than a year from now, following the conferences
previously organized by Norway and Argentina. We
will work to expand the number of countries that
support the Safe Schools Declaration and to deepen
best practices, including those focusing on women’s
and girls’ access to education.

18-2140233/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

Let me now conclude with a final point. The
Security Council and all Member States must make
use of all the tools at their disposal to ensure that
serious violations of children’s rights are investigated,
that those responsible are identified, and that there is
accountability. I repeat: investigation, identification
and accountability. In our view, this is the best tool for
prevention, and it is the least that the victims deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to
begin by thanking Sweden for organizing today’s open
debate and the Secretary-General for his annual report
(S/2018/465). Slovenia aligns itself with the statements
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union,
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and
the representative of Argentina on the Safe Schools
Declaration. Moreover, I would like to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.
Today’s debate marks 20 years since the first
Security Council open debate on the subject of children
and armed conflict, in June 1998 (see S/PV.3896), and
some progress can be observed since the issue was put
on the United Nations agenda. Despite the progress
achieved, the findings documented in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report are concerning: an increase in
grave violations committed against children, use of
landmines and cluster munitions, the deployment of
children as human shields and suicide bombers, the
cross-border nature of the violations, continuous attacks
on schools and hospitals, and denial of humanitarian
access — all of this is deeply concerning and must be
urgently addressed.
Slovenia welcomes the continued engagement
with different regional actors and believes that
specific provisions for the protection of children
should continue to be included in all relevant United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as political
and peacebuilding missions, including by means of
the deployment of child-protection advisers. Slovenia
remains committed to lessening the burden of
children affected by armed conflicts. In 2018, we have
supported, inter alia, projects for Syrian refugees in
Jordan aiming to empower Syrian children and their
mothers with social rehabilitation for children through
schooling and psychosocial workshops focused on
developing life skills. Mine-risk education programmes
34/96

09/07/2018

for Syrian refugee children in the northern Jordanian
provinces were implemented by the Slovenian-based
International Trust Fund Enhancing Human Security
to raise awareness about landmines and explosive
remnants of war and promoting safety precautions with
a view to minimizing the number of victims when the
displaced return home.
We have heard about the importance of integrating
the protection, rights and well-being of children in
peace processes. In this context, empowering children
to become actors for peace is of utmost importance.
We note the release of over 10,000 children in 2017.
It is essential not only that children be returned to
their communities, but also that their overall wellbeing be comprehensively addressed, giving them a
future without fear of re-recruitment or threat of grave
violations against them.
For the last 15 years, Slovenia has supported the
project entitled Our Rights, which is a human rights and
children’s rights education project promoting a culture
of peace, non-discrimination and tolerance anchored in
respect for human rights. Since its beginning, more than
190,000 children in 26 countries in Europe, Asia, the
Middle East, Latin America and Africa were included.
In 2017, Slovenia launched a school- and peer-mediation
project in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where teachers and
students are trained to practice mediation techniques
in schools, which are becoming vocal promoters of
dialogue, tolerance, reconciliation, human rights and
the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
Monitoring and accurate and timely reporting
are crucial for ensuring that perpetrators are
held accountable. The Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism is therefore a key mechanism of the United
Nations children-protection mandate. We believe that
the Security Council should impose further targeted
measures on persistent perpetrators of grave violations.
Slovenia is convinced that the work of the International
Criminal Court and other international criminal
tribunals adds to breaking the culture of impunity.
As it is cross-cutting, the issue of children and armed
conflict needs a comprehensive approach, including
through such initiatives as the Paris Principles, the Oslo
Safe School Declaration and the Vancouver Principles.
Slovenia would like to call on Member States that have
not yet done so yet, to join these initiatives, as they
foster the implementation of the framework set up by
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

In conclusion, it is our duty and responsibility to do
our utmost to prevent children from suffering, regardless
of whether a situation is on the Security Council’s
agenda or not. The adoption today of the new resolution
2427 (2018) is an important step in this direction, which
is why Slovenia joined in co-sponsoring the draft.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I too would like to begin by
thank the Swedish presidency for convening today’s
debate and the Prime Minister of Sweden for presiding
over it earlier. We also thank the briefers for their
insightful coverage of this important issue.
The dreams and hopes of hundreds of thousands
of children continue to be shattered by conflict. Then
there are also those who may never even get a chance
to dream. Children become victims of unimaginable
horror everyday. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/465) confirms these horrors. Children are
killed and maimed, abducted to fight, sexually abused
and denied humanitarian aid.
All parties to armed conflict have the responsibility
to protect children from violence. And yet, all too often,
violations and abuses of international law affecting
children remain rampant. This disturbing trend shows
no sign of abating. Last year, we witnessed a significant
increase in the incidence of abuse of children, making
2017 another nightmare year for children trapped in
conflict and violence.
Despite some progress, the scale and the intensity
of today’s conflict is stretching our capacity to
protect these children. In conflict zones and occupied
territories, we are witnessing a deeply troubling
breakdown in humanity and diminishing respect for
human life and dignity. Children are often at the heart of
conflict and are in consequence directly targeted. Their
homes and schools are destroyed and food and water
supplies deliberately cut off. Under foreign occupation
they are subjected to arbitrary arrests, detention and
torture — and mass blinding, too, as the use of pellet
guns by occupation forces in occupied Jammu and
Kashmir testifies. According to the recent report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the situation of human rights in Kashmir, there
were “multiple cases of children under 18 years” being
arbitrarily detained and tortured under the cover of a
black law, the so-called Public Security Act.

S/PV. 8305

The plight of children in Palestine, Indian-occupied
Jammu and Kashmir, Myanmar and Yemen should
galvanize the international community to find new and
effective ways to protect those most vulnerable. The
goal of protecting children can best be achieved by
preventing the outbreak of armed conflict in the first
place. The most effective way to protect children is
by preventing and resolving conflicts, ending foreign
occupation and, of course, by sustaining peace where
peace is possible. That must be our top priority and the
Council’s.
My Government remains fully alive to its
commitments with regard to protecting children.
Pakistan was one of the earliest signatories to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols, and we have established a national
commission for child welfare and development that
coordinates, monitors and facilitates its implementation.
Last year, we also established a national commission on
the rights of children.
Lastly, I would like to say that 20 years ago, Graça
Machel asked the international community to come
together and address the plight of children in conflict
(see A/51/306), and proposed the appointment of a
special representative for children in armed conflict.
Pakistan fully supports the appointment and the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, but we also
believe that its mandate should not become a tool for
achieving political objectives. The legal parameters of
the mandate, as provided for in the relevant Security
Council resolutions, must be respected. We hope that
principle will be kept in mind in future reports.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Swedish presidency for convening today’s
open debate and for its capable leadership of the
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. I also want to congratulate the Council
collectively on its adoption today of resolution 2427
(2018), of which we were a sponsor.
Italy aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and by
the representatives of Canada and Argentina, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict and the group of countries endorsing

18-2140235/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

the Safe Schools Declaration, respectively. I would also
like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
According to the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2018/465), in the past year there has been an
alarming increase in the number of children affected
by armed conflict and the severity of the violations
committed against them. New armed groups have
emerged, while the cross-border nature of conflicts
makes it harder to monitor and report all the abuses.
We would therefore like to commend the work being
done by the United Nations in this area. Despite the
devastating number of violations in 2017, more than
10,000 children were formally released from armed
groups and forces, thanks mainly to the advocacy
efforts of the United Nations system, accomplished first
through the country visits of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Council’s Working
Group, and secondly through the Secretary-General’s
political urgings in his annual reports. In that regard,
we welcome the approach applied to the list and hope
it will encourage more parties to armed conflicts to
put in place measures to improve the protection of
children, including by signing and implementing action
plans. The third way has been through UNICEF’s
crucial role in monitoring and reporting on the ground,
together with the work of humanitarian workers and
non-governmental organizations.
In order to break the cycle of violations affecting
children, we must take a systematic and coherent
approach based on prevention, accountability and
reintegration. With regard first to prevention, we should
continue to encourage as many States as possible to
ratify the relevant international instruments, including
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, and to promote their implementation and
enforcement. We encourage the endorsement of
initiatives such as the Paris and Vancouver Principles
and the Safe Schools Declaration, with a view to making
significant improvements in children’s lives. It is also
important to ensure that peacekeeping and political
missions have the necessary means to monitor, report
and respond to grave violations. To that end, we must
ensure that the positions of child protection advisers
are duly staffed and budgeted. Finally, United Nations
personnel should receive specialized predeployment
training on children in armed conflict, a practice that
should be scaled up and become standard. In Italy, all
the courses offered to peacekeepers each year by our
36/96

09/07/2018

Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units include
modules on respect for human rights, international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians.
Secondly, with regard to accountability, it is
difficult to rebuild broken communities and begin
the process of social healing without ensuring that
violations and abuses are prosecuted and victims
receive reparations. At the national level, States
should adopt, develop and implement the legal and
administrative measures needed to ensure that all
violations against children are criminalized and their
perpetrators brought to justice, in compliance with the
provisions of the relevant international instruments.
At the international level, we encourage the Security
Council to include in its sanctions regimes specific
listing criteria for grave violations of children in armed
conflict. Lastly, the International Criminal Court
has an essential role to play in holding perpetrators
accountable for their crimes.
Thirdly, turning to reintegration, the international
community’s attention must not cease once children
have been released from armed groups. Exposure to
the cruelties of war and the battlefield has a serious
and often irreparable impact on the physical and
psychological well-being of children involved in armed
conflicts. They must be successfully reintegrated into
society and helped to overcome the stigma and blame
wrongfully attached to them. That is unfortunately the
last and most frequently forgotten link in the chain. At
the Arria Formula meeting we organized last year, Joy
Bishara, a student kidnapped by Boko Haram, testified
from her personal experience that if children are not
reintegrated, they will see no alternative other than
re-recruitment to armed groups. As the successful
example of Colombia has shown, all peace agreements
must include specific provisions on this issue if they are
to be sustainable. We need to connect all the dots in this
chain as we strive together to build long-term peace,
stability and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina): I have the honour to
take the floor on behalf of the following States, which
have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration: Albania,
Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic,
Cyprus, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya,
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Paraguay,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, the State of Palestine, Sweden, the
United Kingdom, Uruguay, Yemen and my own
country, Argentina. We welcome the holding of today’s
open debate on “Protecting children today to prevent
conflicts tomorrow”, organized by Sweden, given the
urgency of ending the vicious cycle of conflicts and
protecting children from their effects.
The Safe Schools Declaration is an intergovernmental
political commitment aimed at protecting and
continuing education during armed conflict. It includes
a pledge to implement the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. Education is not just a human right
but an essential protection mechanism for children
living in conflict, helping them to reach their potential
and contribute to building stronger, more resilient and
more peaceful communities. Continued access to safe
education can help protect children and young people
from the worst effects of armed conflict and can also
help to prevent the emergence of new conflicts, while
protecting the education sector as far as possible from
the effects of war can also help countries recover in the
post-conflict phase.
Since the first International Conference on Safe
Schools was held in Oslo in 2015, 76 States have
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. We welcome
Djibouti, Mali, the United Kingdom, Germany and
Peru, which all recently endorsed the Declaration to
join the Safe Schools community. At the Buenos Aires
Conference in March 2017, representatives from States,
international organizations and civil society had the
opportunity to share experiences, raise awareness, and
exchange expertise in an effort to find practical solutions
to the real problems faced by students and teachers in
conflict situations. Numerous States shared examples
of implementation that demonstrated the Declaration’s
tangible impact, highlighted in the Conference’s
outcome report. We welcome the announcement made
by Spain that it will host the third Conference on Safe
Schools in 2019, and look forward to seeing all Member
States represented there.
We take note of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) and
wish to convey our profound concern about the ongoing
grave violations against children in conflict, including
threats, attacks and the military use of educational

S/PV. 8305

infrastructure, which leave children vulnerable. We
therefore echo the report’s recommendation for all States
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration — a call that
has also been made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, as well as the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We take this opportunity to express
our special appreciation for the Secretary General’s
support for the Safe Schools Declaration.
At the same time, we note the analysis of the
report by Human Rights Watch, which demonstrates
that there has been a global decrease in the military
use of schools. The report shows that, among the States
that have endorsed the Declaration, the military use of
schools has decreased significantly, by almost 50 per
cent on average since 2015. We are encouraged that the
Declaration makes such a difference on the ground and
that endorsing States are implementing it. However,
among States that have not endorsed the Declaration,
military uses of schools have actually increased.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all Member
States, and particularly on all members of the Council,
to recognize the Declaration as a tool to protect children
and to join the Safe Schools Declaration community by
endorsing and implementing the Declaration.
I shall now deliver a few brief remarks in my
national capacity as representative of Argentina.
(spoke in Spanish)
Argentina would like to thank the Government of
Sweden in particular for organizing this open debate
and its work at the helm of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We also are grateful
for the briefings by Special Representative Virginia
Gamba, Executive Director Fore and Ms. Londoño. In
that regard, I would like to express our appreciation and
firm support for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and express our gratitude
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465).
We share the deep concern about the significant
increase in the number of violations recorded in 2017
by State actors and non-State actors alike as part of
the intensification and changing dynamics of armed
conf licts. In that regard, Argentina reaffirms its
unwavering commitment to all initiatives to prevent,
avoid and halt serious violations of children’s rights
in armed conf licts. We are pleased to note that, since

18-2140237/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

the previous open debate of the Security Council on
the issue (see S/PV.8082), in October 2017, we have
endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers, and co-sponsored today’s resolution
2427 (2018).
In conclusion, Argentina reiterates once again the
urgent need for the international community to agree
and implement measures to increase pressure on State
and non-State actors that commit violations against
children so as to demobilize, disassociate, rehabilitate
and reintegrate children associated with such groups, in
cooperation with their respective communities within
the framework of absolute respect for international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
refugee law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): Let me begin by thanking
Sweden for convening this much-needed open debate
and congratulating, you, Sir, on your very capable
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.
I am pleased to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict — a network of 42 Member States representing
all five regional groups of the United Nations.
We welcome the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/465), and we thank him for his ongoing
efforts to shine a light on the terrible situations affecting
children in armed conflict around the world. Effective
monitoring and reporting are key to the prevention of
and the response to grave violations of child rights. The
Group of Friends wishes to reiterate its strong support
for the Special Representative and the continued
independence and impartiality of the United Nationsled monitoring and reporting mechanism, established
in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005).
We commend Ms. Londoño’s courage in sharing
her story with us today. We also thank United
Nations bodies, such as UNICEF, which work to
protect and promote the rights of children in armed
conflict worldwide.
The report of the Secretary-General illustrates
in stark detail how armed conflict often strips
away — in practice, if not in principle — the
protections that children are afforded by families and
society. It shows us how children are victimized and
38/96

09/07/2018

how their victimization helps perpetuate conflict and
poverty. We are encouraged by those armed forces and
groups that have signed action plans in the past year
to help make violations against children a problem of
the past. Notwithstanding those important steps, it is
our collective responsibility to do better. On behalf
of the Group of Friends, I would like to highlight four
areas that merit attention by the United Nations and all
Member States.
First and foremost, in order to strengthen the links
between child protection and conflict prevention, we
must strengthen our resolve to better protect children
in armed conflict. All parties to armed conflict must
fully comply with their obligations under the relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law, human
rights law and refugee law. Additionally, there are several
practical protection tools that Member States have the
option of using, notably the Safe Schools Declaration;
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict;
the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, known as the
Paris Principles; the Paris Commitments to protect
children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or armed groups; and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. We call upon Member
States to further strengthen the protection of children
in armed conflict, including through ratification of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, as well as consideration of the endorsement of
those commitments.
Secondly, Ms. Londoño’s briefing shows us the
importance of integrating the protection, rights and
well-being of children in peace processes. Accordingly,
we welcome the launch of a process to compile practical
guidance on child protection issues for peace processes.
We urge the drafters to specifically consider the needs
of the girl child, whose particular challenges are too
often forgotten or overlooked.
Thirdly, we recognize that children affected by
armed conflict are not defined by their victimhood
alone. When they are successfully reintegrated
into their families and communities, they can be
an important source of resilience. To that end, we
pledge to elevate and echo the voices of child victims,
especially the voice of the girl child. We also support
strengthened accountability for all perpetrators of child
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

rights violations and commend organizations, such as
Justice Rapid Response, that offer surge capacities for
that purpose.
Fourthly, the Special Representative pointed out
in a recent statement that we must work together to
leave no child affected by conflict behind so as to fully
realize the potential of the Sustainable Development
Goals. To make progress towards achieving that goal,
we must address the cross-border nature of violations
by supporting the development of regional, subregional
and national prevention plans and strategies. We must
also ensure greater awareness and understanding of the
unique challenges associated with children in armed
conflict though training and advocacy.
(spoke in French)
Let me make several additional remarks in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.
As a firm advocate for respect for international
humanitarian law and international protection
frameworks, Canada has been actively engaged in issues
involving children and armed conflict for more than 20
years, including when Canada previously served as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council from
1999 to 2000. Together with Security Council members
and other States Members, we worked tirelessly to ensure
the children and armed conflict item was placed at the
core of the Council’s agenda. Canada’s long-standing
chairmanship of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict also has its origin in our commitment
to bringing parties concerned together to achieve
shared goals. We continue to take concrete steps today
to strengthen international protection frameworks.
Canada recently launched the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. To date, the voluntary and
non-binding Principles have now been endorsed by 65
States. In order to pursue collective action against the
unlawful recruitment and use of child soldiers, Canada
is developing guidelines for States having endorsed
them to implement the Vancouver Principles.

S/PV. 8305

places as South Sudan, Syria, Yemen, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and elsewhere. Canada is particularly appalled
by accounts that Rohingya children in Myanmar and
Bangladesh have been victims of killings, rape and
sexual assault, and have been used as human shields and
mine-sweepers. This has to stop and those responsible
must be held accountable.
In conclusion, I strongly call upon all Member States,
including the members of the Security Council, to join
the growing number of countries acting to safeguard
the rights of children and to protect them from violence
in situations of armed conflict. It is only by working
together that we will overcome these challenges.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): We congratulate you and your delegation,
Sir, on organizing this open debate on a very important
issue in the field of international peace and security.
The presence of the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Sweden highlights that importance.
The concept note (S/2018/625, annex) also includes
guidelines for our debate and we appreciate the briefing
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
as well as that of the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Henrietta Fore.

(spoke in English)

Our first observation is about the importance of
carrying out this debate just as we embark upon a reform
of the United Nations focused mainly on prevention and
sustainable peace. Those two concepts, promoted by the
Secretary-General, have been supported by all Member
States this year through the adoption of two resolutions
this year, one in the General Assembly (resolution
72/276) and the other in the Security Council (resolution
2413 (2018)). Indeed, the protection of children is today,
more than ever, essential to fostering a culture of peace,
tolerance and coexistence in order to prevent conflicts
in the future or, as Ms. Fore asked, what will become of
children if we do not protect them?

Canada encourages those States that have not yet
endorsed the Vancouver Principles or the complementary
Paris Principles to consider doing so without delay.
Despite those important steps, as noted in the report
of the Secretary-General, children continue to be used
for combat and denied humanitarian access in such

We agree on the need to care for and assist children
not only because of their vulnerability, but also because
by protecting minors from all forms of violence or
abuse, we are ensuring the very survival of society
in conditions of stability and harmony, which in turn
ensures the progress of nations in peace and security.

18-2140239/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

That is why we are very concerned that, in spite of
having legal instruments destined to protect children,
we still witness armed conflicts that perpetuate serious
abuses against girls and boys, as the Secretary-General
mentions in his recent report (S/2018/465). We are
utterly shocked by the indiscriminate use of chemical
weapons and internationally banned ordnance against
children, schools and hospitals, in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
demonstrating heinous brutality against defenceless
and innocent civilian populations.
We reiterate our strongest condemnation of all
these abject acts and we call on not only States, the
United Nations and international specialized agencies,
but on every citizen of goodwill so that, together, we
can take responsibility for generating and ensuring that
children can enjoy their childhood without prejudice or
exclusion, without violence or wars. This is a direct and
inescapable responsibility of the Council. It means that
the Member States must totally reject any practice that,
even when it does not violate international humanitarian
law, violates universal human dignity, especially when
the victims are children separated from their parents
due to inhumane policies that traumatize them and,
by all accounts, is shameful. We call for the complete
cessation of these heinous practices that evoke historical
chapters of crimes against humanity.
As the Council is aware, Guatemala was affected by
a fratricidal conflict that lasted more than four decades,
the tragic consequences of which disproportionately
affected women and children. Since the signing of the
peace accords more than 20 years ago, we have succeeded
in building a more democratic and inclusive society
with greater respect for human rights. We recall with
gratitude how in 2002, with the support of UNICEF, the
National Commission for the Search for Disappeared
Children, enabled the documented reunification of
more than 1,000 children with their families.
In conclusion, we think that we come to this
debate with the intelligence of instilling hope for
building a better future, by appealing to the entire
human race to achieve the effective protection of
children. It is the Council’s primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security and, as such,
the prevention of conflicts and child protection are
urgent tasks.
That is why we decided to sponsor resolution 2427
(2018), adopted and promoted by your delegation,
40/96

09/07/2018

Mr. President, as it prioritizes the protection of
children, promotes prevention and urges all humanity
to support States and intergovernmental organizations
with a renewed commitment to cooperating in ensuring
the respect of children’s rights and thus creating a
protective environment that protects them from the
scourge of violence and abuse in order to safeguard
future generations from new conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Allow me to begin by extending
my deepest appreciation to the Government of Sweden
for its leadership in convening this open debate and
to the Permanent Representative for remaining in the
Chamber during lunch to listen to the statements of
countries that are not members of the Security Council.
It is not always done. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their insightful presentations.
It is deeply regrettable that the number of violations
against children in armed conflicts has increased
greatly over the previous year. The Government of
Japan strongly condemns the perpetrators of such
violations against children and calls for accountability
to end impunity.
The international community must protect children
affected by armed conflicts and prevent future violence.
It is crucial to ensure humanitarian access and longterm support for these children — not only to heal their
wounds but also to give them hope for a peaceful future.
It is in that belief that the Government of Japan became
the first donor to the humanitarian window of the Fund
to End Violence against Children, launched by the
Secretary-General in 2016. By supporting the Fund’s
12 projects in Nigeria and Uganda, we hope to serve the
human security interests of children by protecting and
empowering them. Let me share a story of a child who
receives assistance through one of the Fund’s projects
in Uganda.
As described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, many children have been recruited and used
in the armed conflict and numerous cases of rape and
other forms of sexual violence against boys and girls
took place in South Sudan. Unaccompanied children
have fled their homelands, among them a 17-year-old
girl and her 15-year-old sister, who fled South Sudan to
a refugee camp in Uganda. Having lost her father and
having been abandoned by her mother, she is now seven
months’ pregnant and soon to be a single mother. Stress
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

from displacement and her situation has also deprived
her of schooling, and she now suffers from hepatitis B.
She sells her own food to take care of medical expenses.
A skill-development activity in the project aims to
provide her with a stable income for her baby, her sister
and herself. Regular home visits by the project staff
allow her to share her struggles and concerns.
This is just one of so many children suffering
the consequences of violence in conflict settings.
By creating safe environments, supporting parents
and ensuring adequate incomes through vocational
education, the Fund is also preventing future violence.
The Government of Japan calls on others to
join the Global Partnership to End Violence against
Children and invest in solutions to address violence
against children in armed conflicts through the Fund.
We should have faith in the strength of children and
empower them as our partners in the peace process.
Together, we must end the cycle of violence and build a
peaceful and sustainable future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Swedish delegation for having convened
today’s meeting, and Ms. Gamba, Henrietta Fore and
Yenny Londoño for their briefings today.
My country welcomes the adoption of resolution
2427 (2018), which we co-sponsored.
The numbers speak for themselves: in just a year,
the number of cases of violations against children has
gone up by more than 50 per cent. We are talking about
21,000 cases of violations of the rights of children,
10,000 of them involving children killed by aerial or
artillery strikes, usually against schools, hospitals or
civilian infrastructure. This is a proven fact and, if
that were not enough, humanitarian assistance, as the
Special Representative so clearly stated in her briefing,
is also being denied in Myanmar, South Sudan, Syria
and Yemen, where the delivery of humanitarian
assistance for children is being hampered.
We wish to highlight here the role of the
Special Representative, who can count on our full
support — support that we urge the international
community once again to continue to provide. We
see great value in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/465), particularly the list annexed thereto. But
in order for it to be effective, it must remain independent

S/PV. 8305

and impartial, without any interference by Member
States or unnecessary accommodation with respect to
any Member State, which would hinder the capacity to
respond to and prevent violations against children.
We often speak of accountability, which is the
ultimate objective in order to that those who commit
such atrocities are brought to justice. I should like
simply to recall that while those who fire missiles
bear responsibility, so do those who provide them with
weapons or the logistical support necessary for them to
carry out such terrible acts.
Allow me to conclude with a quote from
Nelson Mandela:
“There can be no keener revelation of a society’s
soul than the way in which it treats its children”.
This can be either high praise or strong condemnation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): I wish to thank
Sweden for having convened this important debate and
the briefers for their presentations.
Brazil associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Argentina on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Safe Schools Declaration.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) is especially
alarming, since it points to a large increase in the
number of verified violations. Brazil resolutely
condemns these violations and reiterates that all parties
must protect children and other civilians, in line with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Both children of war and child soldiers are vulnerable
groups and as such need to receive special protection.
Brazil also reiterates its concern at reports of the
detention of children on national security grounds
during armed conflicts. Apart from raising legal and
moral issues, these measures are counterproductive, as
they envisage children allegedly associated with armed
groups as security threats rather than as victims.
The violations were reported mainly in situations
on the agenda of the Security Council, which has an
important role to play in this regard, especially by
taking into account child-protection concerns in the
consideration of peace processes and peacekeeping
mandates. Achieving sustainable peace requires

18-2140241/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

strong support for political negotiations and preventive
diplomacy. In our view, prevention is always crucial.
Based on our experience in supporting initiatives
on the ground, allow me to very briefly elaborate on the
importance of programmes aimed at the rehabilitation
and reintegration of former child soldiers and some of
the related challenges.
Brazil has been promoting the practice of
capoeira, an Afro-Brazilian martial art, as a tool for
the reintegration of former child soldiers in Haiti and
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Because
many of those children had been separated from
their families and original communities from a very
early age, reintegration requires supporting them in
rebuilding their sense of identity and finding a place in
a peaceful social environment. It is also crucial to treat
all children primarily as victims of armed conflict and
prevent stigmatization by hosting communities.

09/07/2018

I would also like to thank the Swedish presidency for
having organized today’s debate and for its unstinting
efforts as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Resolution 2427 (2018), which the
Council has just adopted, provides a comprehensive
framework for child protection and children’s rights,
well-being and empowerment throughout the conflict
cycle to prevent conflict and sustain peace. I must at
this stage acknowledge the indispensable role of childprotection experts working in countries affected by
conflict, including child-protection advisers in United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions. They do
vital work in challenging environments and deserve the
full support of all States Members of the United Nations.

There are many grass-roots initiatives similar to
this one that are of paramount importance to avoid
re-recruitment and to rescue children from the grip of
conflict. Such initiatives could be replicated.

The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) sets out in
detail how children in situations of armed conflict
continue to be subjected to appalling violations of their
human rights. The report highlights the devastating
impact of a number of protracted and new crises and
plays a crucial role by providing us with verified and
impartial information on violations, collected through
the monitoring and reporting mechanism.

In concluding, let me say that today’s debate is
very timely and relevant. We recommend that it not
remain limited to the Security Council, since structural
prevention is a cross-cutting endeavour that requires
contributions from all pillars of the United Nations.
The Peacebuilding Commission, given its coordination
mandate and unique composition, is especially well
positioned to host discussions and contribute to
this debate.

But the annual report also documents the progress
that has been achieved, which would not have been
possible without the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba and her team, UNICEF
and other United Nations actors, including United
Nations peacekeeping child-protection teams, and
civil society. We welcome the active role that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba has
played since her appointment last year.

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate
Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.

By protecting children and ensuring that their
human rights are respected, we build more stable
and peaceful societies. By properly supporting
children after they have left armed forces or groups,
we make them less vulnerable to re-recruitment, help
to prevent the recurrence of conflict and support
their reintegration into communities. This requires
long-term, sustainably funded, comprehensive and
gender-sensitive reintegration programmes. We must
recognize that children are recruited by groups that
operate across borders, and design reintegration
programmes accordingly.

First, I would like to warmly thank today’s briefers,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Gamba, UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore
and Ms. Yenny Londoño.

We cannot wait until there is peace before taking
steps to protect children, but instead integrate child
protection into peace processes. We therefore welcome
the launch of a process to compile practical guidance

42/96

18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

on the integration of child protection issues in
peace processes.
Earlier this year we marked the eighteenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict, a crucial
instrument for the protection of children. I take this
opportunity to encourage all States that have not yet
done so to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol. All
EU member States have endorsed the Paris Principles
and the Paris Commitments, and I call on all States that
have not yet done so to also endorse them.
The children and armed conflict agenda is a
priority for the European Union. EU-funded projects
provide vital assistance to children in a range of
conflict situations. We support efforts to prevent the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, secure their
release and ensure their comprehensive and successful
reintegration through long-term interventions. In the
EU’s new Communication on Education in Emergencies
and Protracted Crises, children associated with armed
forces and groups are specifically identified as a group
to be given priority for support in access to education.
The EU’s commitment to education in emergencies is
at 8 per cent of its humanitarian aid budget in 2018 and
will increase to 10 per cent as of 2019 — far above the
global average.
The EU is also deeply concerned by the high rate
of sexual violence against girls and boys in conflict.
In 2017, the EU allocated almost €22 million in
humanitarian aid for the prevention of and response to
sexual and gender-based violence worldwide.
Girls are significantly affected by recruitment
and use by armed forces and groups, with some
estimates indicating that as many as 40 per cent of
children associated with armed forces or armed groups
are female. The EU seeks to ensure that the specific
obstacles to the education of girls in emergencies
are fully taken into account in its activities and
programming. Girls should no longer constitute the
invisible side of reintegration programmes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Sweden for convening today’s
open debate. We welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018) , which Mexico co-sponsored,
and we welcome the recommendations contained in

S/PV. 8305

the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) to
help consolidate concrete actions for the protection
of children and adolescents in armed conflict. We
appreciate Virginia Gamba’s constant commitment to
her work.
Mexico, in its capacity as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, promoted the
negotiation and adoption of resolution 1882 (2009) on
this issue in 2009. Mexico is currently a lead country
for the Global Partnership to End Violence against
Children and a member of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict, among other groups and
initiatives that have served to continue to draw political
attention so as to alleviate the suffering of those who
are the future and the present of our societies. For the
same reasons, we also chair the Group of Friends of
Sustaining Peace.
At the national level, Mexico meets the needs of
approximately 39.2 million children and adolescents
through various regional and international initiatives
and projects related to protection from violence,
particularly in the areas of corporal punishment, sexual
exploitation and abuse, bullying and disappearance,
as well as other initiatives aimed at preventing
and eradicating forms of violence that violate their
human rights.
In addition to the work that all Members must
do in our national public policies, the protection of
the best interests of children and adolescents must be
the priority of the United Nations and of each of its
Members, agencies and sectors of its system. If we
shirk this collective responsibility, we will continue to
perpetuate the damage being done to children who live
in insecure conditions and are twisted by conflict, the
rule of law will deteriorate and the training of human
capital for the future will be put at risk. The causes
for the involvement of children in armed conflict
are comparable to those that spark and exacerbate
conflict. We need to see child protection as an essential
component of prevention and development and as a
central component of the sustainable peace for which
we work together at the United Nations.
We welcome the calls of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General for child protection measures
to be integrated into peace negotiations and into plans
for the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation of child soldiers, who have been part
of armed groups, in order to ensure their protection,

18-2140243/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

well-being, inclusion and empowerment. We call on
the members of the Council to address this issue in
a manner that cuts across all items on their agenda
and to continue to strengthen the mandates of peace
operations, with child protection advisers in both
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
and to ensure that sanctions committees consider child
protection as a central component of their mandates.
For international society and for the United
Nations system, protecting the rights of children in
all circumstances must be seen as an obligation. It is
imperative that we turn environments of adversity into
environments of opportunity for the children of the
world. The path we all must take is clear and is universal:
it is through prevention and through the sustainable
and inclusive development to which we must aspire,
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals set forth
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): I would like to start by
thanking Sweden for convening today’s debate and
for its active engagement as the Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We commend
the committed work of the Special Representative
and her team, as well as UNICEF, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs and the civil society organizations specializing
in the topic.
We have studied the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/465) and agree with him that preventing
violations against children affected by conflict should
be a primary concern of the international community.
Our support for the Security Council’s childrenand-armed-conflict mandate is steadfast, and we
stand behind its integrity and impartiality to list all
perpetrators of grave violations against children.
Austria fully aligns itself with the statements of
the European Union, the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict and the States that have endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration. In my national capacity, I
would like to highlight three points.
First is promoting action plans. Action plans with
parties to a conflict provide the main engagement
framework for the United Nations to address immediate
protection concerns and as a lever to prevent future
violations. We have to further promote the work with
44/96

09/07/2018

both State and non-State actors to follow up on their
implementation as well as to conclude new action
plans. Austria recognizes the challenges of engagement
to respond to and prevent violations by non-State armed
groups and continues its support for the United Nationsled dialogue.
The Austrian Development Cooperation (ADC)
is actively engaged in projects aimed at reducing the
threat of violence against children. At present, ADC is
carrying out a project for the Sudan, where participating
parties in the Darfur conflict are being trained in the
rights of the child. That project also supports the Child
Protection Unit of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur in facilitating dialogue
between the parties to the conflict.
The second point concerns protection and
reintegration. Peace processes can be a vehicle
for advancing child protection and for promoting
reintegration and reconciliation, thereby helping to
prevent the outbreak of future conflicts. Provisions on
the protection of children, including their release and
reintegration, should therefore form part of the early
stages of ceasefire and peace negotiations.
We express our serious concern that children
allegedly associated with non-State armed groups
are too often perceived as a security threat and as
perpetrators, rather than as victims of grave violations.
While it is a priority to put in place alternatives to
detention and prosecution, the monitoring and reporting
on the detention of children for being associated with
armed forces or groups needs to continue. We would
also like to emphasize the importance of deploying
designated child protection advisers to United Nations
missions and of ensuring that the protection mandate
remains strong and unaffected.
Thirdly, with respect to commitment and action,
we encourage all States to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. Attacks on schools put children at risk
of injury or death. But the mere probability of attacks
can lead to higher drop-out rates, as parents then
tend to keep their children at home. Girls are often
disproportionately impacted and are less likely to return
to school even when the situation has become safer.
Austria has endorsed the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and
Use of Child Soldiers as a measure to give priority to and
further operationalize child protection within United
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

Nations peacekeeping, and we are currently exploring
possibilities to contribute to their operationalization.
Austria has supported the development and the rollout of the new integrated protection of civilians training
materials by hosting train-the-trainer courses as part
of our long-standing cooperation with the Integrated
Training Service. We will continue to support the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support in developing training
materials on child protection for military peacekeepers
through their cooperation with the Integrated Training
Service and by hosting train-the-trainer courses for
troop-contributing countries.
We are struggling with new and recurring challenges
regarding the protection of boys and girls who are
vulnerable to violence and abuse. The international
community has to maintain its strong engagement to
bringing about positive change to the lives of children
affected by armed conflict. The full version of this
statement will be uploaded to our website.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Stener (Norway): I am speaking today on
behalf of Finland, Iceland, Denmark, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.
Let me first thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/465), which shows a significant increase
in verified violations against children. That trend can
and must be reversed. First and foremost, parties to
conflict must respect international humanitarian law
and human rights.
I would also like to thank the Swedish presidency
of the Security Council for organizing today’s debate
and for its work on resolution 2427 (2018), which the
Council just adopted with overwhelming support. The
resolution provides a comprehensive framework for
mainstreaming child protection, children’s rights and
empowerment throughout the conflict cycle to prevent
conflict and sustain peace. The Nordic countries are
proud to co-sponsor this important resolution.
Protecting children and upholding their rights
in situations of armed conflict is closely linked
to the broader prevention agenda. It is crucial to
resolve conflicts and sustain peace. Not only do
violations against children during armed conflict
have immediate negative impacts on individuals and
their communities, but they also undermine longer-

S/PV. 8305

term prospects for reconciliation, reintegration and
reconstruction. Children must be treated and protected
as children — legally and socially — regardless of
the context.
The Nordic countries are particularly concerned
about the continued silence and stigma related to
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse, which leads to
underreporting and a lack of support for victims. We
are encouraged by the Secretary-General’s firm stance
in that respect, including zero tolerance for violations
committed by military personnel and civilians in the
service of the United Nations.
It is important to strengthen the links connecting
child protection, the rights of the child and conflict
prevention. One of the issues that should be given
priority in that regard is education, especially girls’
education. In addition, more needs to be done to
provide and protect education during emergencies and
protracted crises. The Secretary-General’s report calls
for the effective implementation of the Safe Schools
Declaration. With Djibouti’s recent endorsement, 76
States have now endorsed the Declaration. Its main
purpose is to prevent the military use of schools and
reduce the number of attacks on education in armed
conflicts. We encourage all States to endorse and
implement the Safe Schools Declaration.
Let me reiterate our strong support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Ms. Gamba is playing an essential
role at the global, regional and national levels by
advocating for children’s protection and rights and
providing practical guidance on how the agenda can
be brought forward. Colombia is a good example for
how child protection and children’s rights, including
reintegration, can be integrated into peace processes.
We welcome the launch of a process to compile
practical guidance for mediators and peace negotiators,
as a way to operationalize today’s resolution.
Children involved in armed conflict require not only
comprehensive support and care, but also justice.
Securing accountability for conflict-related crimes
involving children is of the utmost importance. In that
context, we would like to recognize the important work
of Justice Rapid Response.
Parties to conflict and the international community
can and must do more, both to protect the increasing
number of children and young people affected by
armed conflict and to ensure that they are included

18-2140245/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

in peacebuilding and development processes. That is
for the benefit of their communities and beyond. The
Nordic countries urge all United Nations Member
States to ensure that children in armed conflict receive
the attention and protection to which they are entitled.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: My delegation wishes to thank
the Swedish presidency for convening this special open
debate on children and armed conflict, a theme to which
the Holy See attaches critical importance.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465)
details the shocking scale and severity of violations and
abuses against children in armed conflicts around the
world. Although we might not be able to solve all the
conflicts on the agenda of the Security Council now,
we can do better in protecting the children who are
suffering from their devastating consequences. The
children and armed conflict agenda is an important
framework to that end. It provides us with the tools to
prevent all violations and abuses against children and to
ensure that the perpetrators be held accountable. There
is a unique consensus within the Security Council, and
within the entire international community, on the issue,
and we should spare no effort to implement it fully.
Among the areas where there is ample room for
improvement, my delegation would like to mention three.
First is the great responsibility to act in the face of
attacks on children. Sustainable Development Goal 16
commits us to end abuse, exploitation, trafficking and
all forms of violence against and torture of children The
first step towards achieving that target is to strengthen
preventive measures against human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law that are
occurring against children — and, in our case today, in
armed conflict.
Secondly, there is the need to prioritize the
effective reintegration of children formerly associated
with armed forces or armed groups. Children caught
in armed conflict must always be treated primarily as
victims, even if, under the control of armed groups,
they may have factually committed crimes. Successful
rehabilitation and reintegration are in the best interests
not only of the child, but also of society as a whole.
Children should always be part of the solution, not part
of the problem. The care and rehabilitation of children
saved from armed groups require adequate, long-term
46/96

09/07/2018

resources to provide them with the greatest chance for
their successful reintegration into their families and
society. We must assure that those children not remain
hostage to the horrors that they survived.
Third is the need to guarantee the right to education
for children victimized by armed conflict. A solid
education is the best way to assure that the victims of
today’s conflicts will work to prevent those of tomorrow
and be peacebuilders. Sustainable Development
Goal 4 underlines the important role of children’s
education in reducing poverty and inequality. In that
regard, through their various structures operating in
most conflict zones, the Holy See and the Catholic
Church are actively engaged, through educational and
rehabilitation institutions, in taking care of the many
victims of violence, both girls and boys.
Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow. For the children who have fallen victim to
armed conflicts and have survived, let us do everything
possible to give them back their future by helping them
to realize their deepest aspirations and enabling them
to fulfil their dreams, whether as doctors, lawyers,
teachers, social workers, parents or some other
profession or role that contributes to the common good
of every society for the prevention of conflicts and the
building of peaceful and sustainable communities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2018/465) and Special
Representative Virginia Gamba for her tireless efforts
in taking the children and armed conflict agenda
forward. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2427
(2018), which we co-sponsored.
Unfortunately,
children
continue
to
be
disproportionately affected by armed conflicts around
the world. We are deeply troubled by the increase in
the number of violations committed against children in
2017. As we speak, millions of children seek to survive
under unprecedented challenges arising from conflicts
and related displacement. We see the suffering and
hopelessness very vividly in the eyes of Syrian,
Palestinian, Rohingya and other children. However,
despair cannot and should not prevail. If hope is to
triumph, we must continue to work hard to provide
hope for a better future for the children who suffer
under armed conflict.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

The crisis in Syria has taken the biggest toll on
children. The findings of the Secretary-General’s
report prove that the conditions of Syrian children are
alarming. They are facing violence imposed upon them
not only by the regime but also by terrorist groups.
The responsibility of the international community in
terms of its failure to protect and prevent cannot be
overlooked either. In that context, we observe the side
effects of empowering terrorist entities. It is therefore
worth mentioning one of the important findings of the
Secretary-General’s report.
During the reporting period, verified cases of the
recruitment and the use of children by the terrorist
organizations of the Kurdish People’s Protection
Units (YPG/YPJ) increased fivefold from 46 to 224,
compared to 2016. In fact, the Kurdish Workers Party
(PKK), the Democratic Union Party (PYD)and the
YPG/YPJ terrorist organizations have a long-standing
practice of forcefully recruiting young girls and boys,
in violation of international law and norms. Forty per
cent of PKK recruits are children younger than 18,
while 10 per cent are under the age of 15. Recently,
the PKK terrorist organization, under the pretext of
fighting Da’esh in Iraq, has forcibly recruited minor
Yazidis, transferred them to battlegrounds far from their
homeland and mercilessly punished those unyielding to
that horrendous attempt.
The PYD and the YPG/YPJ resort to the same
tactic in Syria. As a recent case in point, I would like
to bring to the Council’s attention a press release issued
by the World Council of Arameans on 29 May, which
drew the attention of the international community
to the abduction of as many as 50 young Arameans
by the PYD and and the YPG/YPJfor the purpose of
forced recruitment.
To protect children from falling into the hands of
terrorist organizations, the international community
should exercise full solidarity and cooperation in fighting
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. It should
also be underlined that references to non-State armed
groups within the context of the children and armed
conflict agenda, including resolution 2427 (2018), which
we co-sponsored today, should not be construed in any
way to indicate that terrorist organizations are subjects
of international humanitarian law. We shall resolutely
continue fighting against terrorist organizations, in
accordance with applicable international law and our
national counter-terrorism legislation.

S/PV. 8305

Meeting the fundamental humanitarian needs of
children in conflicts and emergencies, including for
the provision of health services, must be one of our
priorities. In the meantime, investing in the education
of all children, including girls, requires particular
attention. Last but not least, it is clear that the best way
to keep children from harm’s way is to work to prevent
the outbreak of armed conflicts in the first place. In
that understanding, Turkey will continue to support the
Secretary-General’s focus on prevention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me first
congratulate you, Madam President, and the Swedish
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July.
In the year of the centenary of our former President
Nelson Mandela, it is instructive to draw on his wisdom
when he remarked,
“Our children are our greatest treasure. They
are our future. Those who abuse them tear at the
fabric of our society and weaken our nation.”
Today’s debate is extremely relevant and timely,
particularly given the rise in the incidence of violations
of the rights of children not only in armed conflict
but also in terms of emerging asymmetrical threats to
global peace and security, such as terrorism. The debate
should also be seen within the context of preventative
measures and addressing the root causes of conflict.
The involvement of children, the most vulnerable
group of victims, in armed conflict is tantamount to
sowing the seeds of war, which will bear insidious and
destructive consequences in later years.
We commend the work of the Secretariat and the
briefings by Ms. Gamba, Ms. Fore and Ms. Londoño
in bringing to the attention of the Council the grave
violations that continue to be perpetuated by State
and non-State actors alike. Indeed, it is a most vital
responsibility of the Council to respond to those
violations and hold those responsible to account.
The fact that those violations have increased is
a matter of serious concern, which indicates that our
efforts so far have not been completely effective.
Nevertheless, the work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is admirable and we
applaud the delegation of Sweden, as the Chair of the
Working Group, for its continued efforts in moving

18-2140247/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

forward the children and armed conflict agenda.
However, we believe that more resources and attention
could be assigned to the agenda.
Addressing the root causes of conflict, the
effectiveness of long-term peacebuilding and the
preventative diplomacy approach hinge strongly on the
protection of children from the adverse influences and
grave violations committed against them during armed
conflicts. It is vital that we not lose sight of the fact
that today’s children could become future rebel leaders,
who would have learned that in order to fend for
themselves in an environment of little-to-no legitimate
economic opportunities and political marginalization,
they would have to take up arms. Instead, we should
create a conducive environment where today’s children
can play a positive role in society.
In that regard, South Africa would like to
emphasize the recommendation made in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) that the funding
gap for the reintegration of children recruited by armed
groups back into normal society be urgently addressed.
We fully support the establishment of the multi-year
funding mechanism, which will allow for the early
release of children into long-term viable alternatives to
military life.
South Africa underscores the importance of
addressing the present problem of grave violations
against children during war times as a critical
prerequisite of future sustainable peace. In that regard,
South Africa fully supports the strengthening of
mechanisms for the protection of children in armed
conflict. That could take the form of specific provisions
in United Nations peacekeeping missions, as well
as the engagement of the United Nations with armed
groups on the matter. We also welcome adoption this
morning of resolution 2427 (2018), which condemns the
attacks and the threats of attacks, in contravention of
international law, against schools and health centres.
We need to ensure the safety of children in schools and
health facilities during conflict. Therefore, we call for
the urgent and imperative need to hold accountable all
perpetrators of human rights violations and abuses and
international humanitarian law violations, irrespective
of their status or political affiliation.
To further that aim, South Africa welcomes the
Secretary-General’s call for cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations in coordinating efforts
to address violations against children in armed
48/96

09/07/2018

conflict. We would also like to highlight the need for
dedicated child protection capacities within regional
mechanisms and to encourage further engagement with
the United Nations to prioritize the development of
tools to forestall grave violations, including through the
adoption of prevention plans aimed at institutionalizing
preventive measures.
In conclusion, we believe that the Security Council
should take firm and concrete action to ensure that our
children, and youth in general, are shielded from the
horrors of conflict and other violations that threaten to
undermine our future prospects for the maintenance
of international peace, security and development. That
stance should be applied consistently, devoid of double
standards, to ensure that children are protected no matter
where and in what context they may find themselves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Ms. Pham (Viet Nam): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN):
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
We are honoured to acknowledge the presence of the
Prime Minister of Sweden and take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to Sweden for moving this
agenda forward. We extend our thanks to all of the
briefers for their statements.
While welcoming the positive developments
in the protection of children in armed conflicts,
ASEAN remains deeply concerned over the alarming
increase in grave violations against children. Attacks
on schools, students and education personnel are
alarming as children are put at risk and deprived of
their opportunities to learn and grow for a better future.
These ongoing shocking realities call for greater
consensus and stronger actions by the international
community. In that regard, ASEAN would like to
highlight the following points.
First, more coordinated and responsive strategies
at the national, regional and global levels are urgently
needed, ranging from bringing an end to and preventing
the use and recruitment of children, as well as ensuring
their reintegration and rehabilitation and accountability
for perpetrators.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

Secondly, ASEAN looks forward to the development
of practical guidelines for the integration and inclusion
of child protection issues in peace processes. Such
guidelines need to fully address the needs of children
during and after armed conflicts.
Thirdly, ASEAN emphasizes the importance of
constructive engagement among relevant partners, in
line with the principle of the primary responsibility
and authority of States, including closer coordination
between the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and
concerned States to ensure comprehensive, accurate
and objective reporting.
Fourthly, ASEAN encourages those countries that
have yet to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child to do so, as proof of their unwavering commitment
to child protection issues.
For ASEAN, the protection of children is always
high on our agenda. In 2016, the ASEAN Commission
on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women
and Children adopted a work plan with 16 thematic
areas, including the elimination of violence against
children and the right of children to participate in all
affairs that affect them. ASEAN also has been working
closely with external partners in that endeavour.
It has been two decades since the first open debate
of the Council on this agenda item (see S/PV.3896).
Next year will also mark the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1261 (1999) — the first resolution on
children and armed conflict. Those outcomes reflect
our dedication to this important matter, and we realize
that much remains to be done.
ASEAN reiterates its strong commitment and
stands ready to work with other external partners to
ensure a better future for children all over the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Today’s meeting,
convened on the initiative of Sweden, should not focus on
or end up with a mere renewal of the general commitment
to protecting children and armed conflicts. There is no
doubt that, at least in principle, this endeavour is shared
by all of us. Therefore, our meeting and resolution 2427
(2018), which we adopted this morning, should focus
on the most practical and appropriate measures to make
sure that this commitment is fulfilled and that the place
of children is in school and not in armed conflicts.

S/PV. 8305

Let me say at this juncture that, regardless of the
situation, any child who is in an armed conflict is by
definition a victim.
Let me address the Council, the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative as Chair of the Security
Council Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict:
Be bold in proposing and advancing measures, bearing
in mind all the mechanisms, procedures and authority
that you hold and make clear the interaction that exists
between all areas of intervention that were defined
perfectly the concept note before us(S/2018/625, annex).
We recognize the extreme importance of and
strongly support the mandate of the Office of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We always wait for her report to be
published, which marks a crucial moment at the United
Nations. We would like something to be added to that
report. We also believe that the United Nations list of
terrorist groups in the annexes of the report should be
differentiated from other non-State actors or parties to
peace processes or peace agreements.
It is rather shocking that, 13 years after the adoption
of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, there is still a
constant increase in violations against children, as is
underlined by the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/465). The case of the Central African
Republic is one terrible example, as the use of children
in armed conflict has quadrupled in that country. That
is appalling. In all cases, 21,000 violations of children’s
rights, as documented by the report of the SecretaryGeneral, represent 21,000 challenges to all of us and to
the Security Council. This cannot continue.
We would like to see the consolidation of the results
of the global Children, Not Soldiers campaign through
renewed efforts by Governments and agencies, but we
must recognize that those efforts have not reversed
the negative trend. Barbaric attacks are still being
committed by terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram,
Da’esh and the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa, in particular the kidnapping and selling of girls
to terrorist fighters. That is another challenge to us all
that calls for greater coordinated efforts, and we should
continue to give specific attention to the protection of
girls, as they are at greater risk of sexual violence and
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Long-standing peace will never be achieved unless
we give children the means, skills and education to

18-2140249/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

rebuild a society and institutions torn apart by armed
conflict. Peacekeeping missions have an important
role to play in the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict. It is therefore essential that
peacekeeping missions receive the necessary training
and resources to effectively perform that critical task.
In the context of peacekeeping processes, we
strongly believe that specific provisions on the
protection of children and armed conflict should be
included in all peace negotiations and agreements and
in peacebuilding. Indeed, for example, the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed in Algiers
in 2015, contains specific provisions related to the
protection of children from armed conflict and the
engagement of communities to support the return
and maintenance of children, especially girls, in
school. Such provisions should inspire all ongoing
peace processes.
Let me conclude by saying that the increased
number and scope of conflict hasten the importance
of cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations, especially the
African Union, in all areas and precisely on prevention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Hau Do Suan (Myanmar): Myanmar has made
significant progress in its efforts to end and prevent
violations and abuses against children since the signing
of the joint action plan in June 2012. Since then, more
than 877 former underage soldiers have been released
and reintegrated into communities. The country task
force on monitoring and reporting has verified that
cases of new recruitment have dramatically decreased.
The Tatmadaw further released 67 children in 2017 and
no new recruitments have been reported in 2018.
The Government has also taken various steps to
prevent child recruitment and abuse by armed forces.
A nationwide public awareness campaign to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children by the
Tatmadaw has been in place since 2013. Moreover, army
officers and members of the military have received
training on the joint action Plan and the prevention of
underage recruitment.
The Government of Myanmar has taken important
steps to sign or ratify international legal instruments to
protect children. In particular, the 1993 National Child
Law has been revised in conformity with prevailing
50/96

09/07/2018

international norms and is soon to be adopted by
Parliament. The new Law has devoted a whole chapter
solely to children and armed conflict. Furthermore,
Myanmar has signed the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups in February 2017. Myanmar is now in the process
of ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
With regard to accountability, a total of 67
military officers and 191 other ranks have so far
been prosecuted for violating recruitment procedures.
No human rights violations will be tolerated. For the
alleged violations mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
annual report (S/2018/465), I would like to reiterate that
legal action will be taken where there is clear evidence.
The Government recently announced its decision to
form an independent commission of inquiry with an
international member. The commission will investigate
all human rights violations following the August 2017
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army terrorist attacks of
30 security outposts.
Myanmar has been working closely with the
country task force on monitoring and reporting. In
May, the Government invited Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba to Myanmar. I would like
to express our sincere appreciation to Ms. Gamba for
her spirit of constructive engagement and cooperation.
We are now working closely with her Office for the
early completion of the implementation of the joint
action plan. In that regard, I wish to inform the Council
that with a view to raising greater awareness and to
accelerating the implementation of the joint action plan,
the Government of Myanmar has invited the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
conduct a training workshop for security personnel in
Myanmar on the six grave violations.
Myanmar believes that sustainable peace is the
only way to alleviate the plight of children in armed
conflicts. Peace is essential to sustainable development
and lasting democracy and human rights. Bearing that in
mind, the Government held the 21st-Century Panglong
Union Peace Conference in pursuit of a lasting peace
and a democratic federal union. The Government is
also prioritizing the inclusion of child protection issues
in the discussion of the forthcoming session of the
Peace Conference.
Myanmar remains committed to the protection and
promotion of the rights of children. We will work hand
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

S/PV. 8305

in hand with the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and other international partners
to end violations against children and build a better
future for them.

exploits schools, hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods
as bases for its terror activities and does not hesitate
to employ the despicable practice of using innocent
people, including children, as human shields.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

This summer, while children around the world are
enjoying their vacation at home, at summer camps or
on the beach, the children of Gaza are instead attending
military camps. Hamas recruits thousands of children
to those camps. Instead of teaching them how to swim
or play soccer, the children of Gaza are taught how to
assemble automatic weapons and operate missiles. Just
in the past month, Hamas has even resorted to turning
children’s toys into weapons, sending bombs made out
of kites into Israel. The incendiary kites ignited over
400 fires in Israel, destroying more than 7,000 acres
of Israeli agricultural land. To make matters worse,
over the past month Hamas has launched hundreds of
rockets and mortar shells into Israeli civilian population
centres, even hitting a kindergarten in one of its attacks.
That behaviour cannot be misconstrued — Hamas is
targeting children.

Ms. Shilo (Israel): Over 20 years ago, the Graça
Machel report (see A/51/306) was published, paving the
way for the Security Council to establish the children
and armed conflict agenda. Despite more than 20
years of countless resolutions and debate, hundreds of
millions of children still endure war and strife, physical
injuries and mental trauma.
It is difficult to find words to describe the scale
of the atrocities we have seen in the past few years.
Acts of sustained barbarism and cruelty have shaken
our collective conscience. We must, however, not let
despair overcome our duty to protect these innocent
souls. We must provide the victims with the tools to
rehabilitate and reintegrate into society. These children
deserve our honest efforts.
The Middle East region is plagued by this horrific
reality. According to UNICEF, 2017 was the worst year
yet for Syria’s children as violence ripped apart places
that should be safe — schools, hospitals, playgrounds
and even the homes of children. It is reported that in
the first two months of 2018 alone, more than 1,000
children were killed or injured. Syria is the world’s
biggest producer of both internally displaced people
and refugees. Current estimates show that 2.8 million
children have been displaced from their homes.
In Yemen, according to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/465), over 500 children have been killed
in air strikes and ground assaults. More than 700 have
been maimed. These acts of cruelty reflect a complete
and utter disrespect for life.
For decades, Palestinian children have been
exploited by their leadership. They attend schools
named after terrorists. They cross streets honouring
terrorists. They watch their leaders on television
hand out candy to celebrate terrorists who have killed
innocent Israelis. We acknowledge the fact that, for the
first time, the Secretary-General’s report recognizes
Palestinian leaders’ incitement to violence. But it
does not end with incitement. In Gaza, Hamas — the
internationally recognized terrorist organization — has
long been guilty of using children for terrorism. It

While we recognize the progress made, the report,
unfortunately, continues to describe only a fraction of
the reality on the ground and misleads the international
community. One reason for that misleading portrayal
of reality is the fact that the formal field working
group includes organizations like Defense for Children
International-Palestine, which is closely linked to the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP).
We have raised that concern repeatedly. We must recall
that PFLP is an internationally recognized terrorist
organization infamous for turning airplane hijacking
into a preferred tool of terror. No non-governmental
organization with ties to terrorist organizations can
be a source of information for an objective, credible
United Nations working group.
Israel envisions a future that does not require a
meeting on children and armed conflict. We believe
in solutions, and with the honest efforts of all Member
States and international bodies, we are sure those
solutions are within our reach. We must protect our
children today so that we can prevent future conflict.
We can do this in two ways. First, we must invest in our
youth and empower them to become actors for peace
and conflict prevention. Secondly, for those who have
been affected by conflict and the trauma of war, it is our
moral duty to provide them with education and health
care, including psychosocial support and rehabilitation.

18-2140251/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

Through such efforts, we can break the cycle of
conflict and ensure a peaceful life for these children,
their communities and their countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Indonesia would
like to welcome and thank Mr. Stefan Löfven, Prime
Minister of Sweden, for presiding over today’s open
debate. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2018/465), as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
in Armed Conflict, the Executive Director for UNICEF
and Ms. Londoño for their briefings
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and I would like
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.
Promoting and protecting children’s rights to
ensure their well-being is a moral obligation that all
countries must fulfil. While every achievement is good
news, the persistence and scope of the violence against
children in armed conflict, particularly in relation to
recruitment, killing and maiming, cannot be ignored.
Every violation, including those committed by armed
groups, such as acts of terror, mass kidnapping and all
sexual abuse and exploitation, must be condemned in
the strongest language possible.
Indonesia believes that given the changing and
complex nature of current conflicts, the international
community must intensify its efforts. As a country
that considers this issue as a core one, Indonesia has
become a pathfinder country in the global effort to
protect children from violence and exploitation. It
has also become a party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We continue
to support the promotion and protection of the rights of
children agenda to achieve a sustainable future for all.
Concerning the way forward, allow me to share
some pertinent points.
First, it is the central responsibility of Member
States to protect children. No country should spare any
effort in promoting the rights of children and ensuring
their growth and development. On the other hand,
building the capacity of Member States in the area of
child protection is also a key component that requires
international cooperation.
52/96

09/07/2018

Secondly, children will remain vulnerable to
exploitation unless the root causes of conflict are
addressed. Investing in development and meeting social
and economic needs are important factors in bringing
stability and progress to societies. More importantly,
there is an urgent need to maximize efforts to prevent
the recruitment, radicalization and widespread
dissemination of terrorist ideology among children and
young people.
Thirdly, the full protection of and respect for
the best interests of children should be paramount in
counter-terrorism efforts and in peace and ceasefire
agreements, including their treatment as primary
victims and not as perpetrators when associated with
non-State armed groups. During their reintegration, the
aim should be to create the basis for a transformative
and durable change in society, leading to long-term
sustainable peace and stability. This implies the
provision of a protective environment, access to quality
education and provisions for specific physical and
mental health needs.
Fourthly, we encourage all Member States
to universally ratify and implement the relevant
international
treaties
and
to
enact
related
national legislation.
Lastly, Indonesia is committed to ending violence
against civilians in armed conflict, particularly women
and children. We would like to encourage the sharing of
best practices among the United Nations peacekeeping
forces to strengthen the role of peacekeeping missions
in the protection of children. Indonesia would also
welcome the inclusion of personnel specifically
dedicated to child protection in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Madam
President, let me at the outset join previous speakers
in commending your initiative to convene today’s
meeting. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on children and armed conflict
(S/2018/465), which helps to make clear the full gravity
of this important issue, and to welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018), which enjoys broad
support with sponsors from 95 countries, including the
Republic of Korea.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

Over the past 20-some years, we have collectively
endeavoured to advance the protection of children
from armed conflict and have achieved some
progress towards this end. However, there remains a
significant gap between our aspirations and the harsh
realities on the ground. Children are increasingly and
disproportionately affected by the myriad ongoing and
protracted armed conflicts around the world.
It is appalling that in 2017 alone more than 21,000
verified violations were committed against children
globally, a substantial increase indeed from 16,500
in the previous year. It is also deeply troubling that
children under the age of 18 make up more than half of
the world’s 25.4 million refugees.
Against this distressing backdrop, I would like
to highlight three points of particular importance in
addressing this daunting challenge.
First, we must continue to focus on prevention.
As the Secretary-General has repeatedly emphasized,
prevention is the paradigm-shifting approach that
closes the gap between commitment and reality. It is
also the direction underscored by the three reviews on
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture, and
women and peace and security.
While serving as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission last year, I worked closely with the
Secretary-General to help push his prevention agenda
forward. The Republic of Korea remains firmly
committed to supporting him in translating this
commitment into reality, especially bearing in mind the
urgent need to protect children from the danger of armed
conflicts. Such efforts should start with preventing
children from being exposed to violent extremism. It is
for this reason that, working together with the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
leading information and communications technology
companies such as Google, Microsoft, Facebook and
Twitter, we launched last year the Knowledge-Sharing
Platform, which is aimed at strengthening the
capabilities of small technology companies to fight
against terrorists’ attempts to abuse digital spaces,
thereby enhancing young people’s awareness of the
terrorist use of the Internet.
Secondly, we must ensure accountability for
all violations against children. Strengthening
accountability and abolishing impunity is the key to
ending gross violations and preventing any recurrence
thereof. Those who have committed grave violations

S/PV. 8305

against children must be held accountable through both
national and international justice systems, including
the International Criminal Court.
In addition to justice mechanisms, we also need to
make full use of other tools, including, among others,
the monitoring and reporting mechanisms established
by the Security Council, the listing of violators in the
Secretary-General’s report, and targeted sanctions to
seek accountability.
Thirdly, children should be seen as enablers for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. As the SecretaryGeneral highlighted in his report, we must ensure
that child protection is an integral part of strategies
for enabling sustainable peace and that the close
involvement of children is promoted throughout the
whole process.
In this regard, it is critically important to strengthen
partnerships with all stakeholders, including regional
and subregional organizations, international financial
institutions and civil society, in the light of existing
funding gaps and cross-border violations. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General also has an
important role to play, especially in harnessing and
leveraging resources from various actors.
In working towards that end, special attention
should be paid to reintegrating former child soldiers
and children of foreign terrorist fighters into society
without stigmatization. It is against this backdrop that
the Republic of Korea currently provides assistance
to Colombia in its post-conflict recovery through the
Korea-Colombia Friendship Rehabilitation Center,
established to help former combatants, including young
soldiers, to be reintegrated into Colombian society
with enhanced attention to their psychological security,
physical rehabilitation and professional skills.
The Republic of Korea will continue to work closely
with the international community to save and protect
children from the scourge of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Eiermann (Liechtenstein): Children are among
the most vulnerable individuals in need of protection
from the effects of armed conflict. The recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) highlights the large
increase in the number of violations compared with
previous reporting cycles. Thus we continue to often
fail to provide protection when it is most needed. We

18-2140253/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

reiterate our strong support for the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
and for her continuous efforts to shed more light on
such violations. Protecting the independence and
integrity of her mandate is crucial to its effectiveness
and credibility.
There are numerous initiatives that enable us to
enhance protection. The Safe Schools Declaration,
supported by 76 States, including Liechtenstein, is
an important commitment to continuing education
during armed conflict, including by protecting
schools and universities from military use. The full
implementation of Security Council resolution 2286
(2016) will also go a long way towards improving the
situation of children in armed conflict by ensuring
the protection of those providing medical services as
well as health-care facilities. Both initiatives are aimed
at counteracting the worrisome trend of increasing
disregard for international humanitarian law. The
Council should follow up on these initiatives and help
enforce compliance by State and non-State actors with
the Geneva Conventions.
We welcome the fact that the list of parties that
have committed grave violations affecting children in
situations of armed conflict has been updated recently.
Evidence-based and impartial listing is a key tool to
put pressure on State and non-State actors alike to
take concrete measures to better ensure the protection
of children. Myanmar’s State and border forces were
added to the list for the first time following the
widespread and systematic violence committed against
the Rohingya in Rakhine state, the destruction of their
villages and their forced deportation into Bangladesh.
We share the Secretary-General’s deep concerns
about the violations committed against children, such
as killing, maiming, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, as outlined in his recent report.
We were also appalled to hear from the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict about her recent trip to Myanmar and
Bangladesh (see S/PV.8133) and her account of
atrocious sexual and gender-based violence committed
in a systematic manner against children, even babies.
We will continue to support Bangladesh’s efforts to host
the large refugee population, but we are also concerned
about the reports of forced disappearances of women
and minors in the camps and incidents of human
trafficking. Unfortunately, the Council has remained
54/96

09/07/2018

silent on those challenges, even after its own visit to
the region. Accountability for the crimes committed
cannot be treated as an afterthought when it is clearly
a precondition for the stated objective of enabling the
Rohingya refugees to return. We have repeatedly echoed
those who have expressed the view that the Council
should engage in a serious discussion with a view to
referring the situation to the International Criminal
Court, a decision that would be in line with the code
of conduct on mass atrocities of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, supported by
117 States.
Sexual violence against children is one of the
violations most chronically underreported during
situations of armed conflict. United Nations monitoring
and reporting mechanisms often fail to capture many
such incidents, particularly those committed against
men and boys, as has been shown in the research done
by the All Survivors Project in places such as Syria
and the Central African Republic. We encourage all
the relevant United Nations entities to conduct more
effective monitoring, documenting, investigating and
reporting of violations against children, including
rape and other forms of sexual violence. Peacekeeping
and special political missions, as well as fact-finding
commissions and commissions of inquiry, should be
mandated accordingly and given sufficient capacities
and resources to implement those mandates. At the
same time, the United Nations should make better use
of initiatives such as the Justice Rapid Response roster
in order to enable experts to be deployed as quickly
as possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Swedish presidency for organizing today’s open
debate. Bangladesh welcomes the Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018). The briefers shared
grim realities about the fact that children’s rights,
including their right to protection, are being trampled
and ignored in many parts of the world. They also
highlighted some positive achievements in the area
of protection, particularly in protecting children from
recruitment as combatants. Such gains make a sobering
yet compelling case for sustaining our efforts with
renewed determination.
The Security Council recently witnessed issues
related to the protection of children in their most pressing
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

manifestations in the Rohingya camps in Cox’s Bazar,
Bangladesh. Children constitute 58 per cent of the more
than 700,000 Rohingya who have entered our territory
from Myanmar’s Rakhine state since August 2017. So
far, 36,373 of them have been found to be orphans,
with 7,771 having lost both parents. Without parental
care, they remain particularly vulnerable to trafficking,
sexual exploitation and other forms of criminal activity.
On average, 60 babies are being born in the camps
every day. Some of them are born to mothers who were
subjected to sexual violence in what now appears to
have been its premeditated use as a weapon of war. We
made a point of addressing the status of such children in
the bilateral arrangement we concluded with Myanmar
on facilitating the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of forcibly displaced Rohingya to Rakhine state.
It may be an illusion to assume that violence
against the Rohingya and their children has subsided.
Ms. Yanghee Lee, the United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, talked to
some recently arrived Rohingya in Cox’s Bazar. This is
part of what she told the press:
“I was horrified to be told by one woman that
her 12-year-old son had been chopped to pieces
when he visited the family’s fish hatchery, after
the family had been told by security forces that
they could not go there unless they accepted the
National Verification Card. Such brutality, and to a
child, is deplorable.”
What concerns us most is that such accounts hardly
attest to a stable situation on the ground and could only
be a further deterrent to the Rohingya in their prospects
for a voluntary return. There have been reports that
non-State actors in Rakhine state were also involved
in violence inflicted on children. It will be critical to
ensure that the crimes committed against these child
victims are accounted for and their perpetrators brought
to justice, in order to help the children reconcile with
such harrowing memories. Meanwhile, along with our
humanitarian partners, we are in a race against time to
give these hundreds of thousands of Rohingya children
the protection and assistance they need, including mass
immunization, nutritional supplements, non-formal
education, skill development, psychosocial support
and recreational facilities. Their vulnerability to
natural disasters, child marriage, forced labour, violent
extremism and other forms of exploitation remains a
major area of concern. Without a durable solution to
their situation, their vulnerabilities will most likely

S/PV. 8305

exact a price on the future peace and security of the
region and beyond.
There is no way that the Council and the
international community should allow Myanmar to
avoid its responsibility for creating a favourable,
sustainable and credible situation for ensuring
protection for these children and their rights, starting
with their right to return home. We urge the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to
make concrete recommendations for the Council’s
consideration in that regard in her updated report
focusing on the situation in Myanmar.
The image of our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina,
consoling a distraught Rohingya child with a ghastly
wound across his face has become iconic, but we expect
the Myanmar leadership to help make such images
things of the past.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mr. Inguanez (Malta): First and foremost, I would
like to join others in thanking the Swedish presidency
of the Council for organizing today’s open debate and
placing a spotlight on this issue. The protection of
children must remain one of our top priorities if we
want to have lasting peace and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. I also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Yenny Londoño
for sharing their insights today. We particularly
welcome the Special Representative’s persistent efforts
and invaluable work in this field.
Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
This year’s report by the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) confirms that
children continue to be disproportionately affected by
such conflict. It is disheartening and shameful that in
this day and age, children in various parts of the world
continue to suffer the consequences of armed conflict.
We cannot realistically expect a peaceful tomorrow
if schools are being bombed today. It is completely
unacceptable that in certain parts of the world, children
have to deal with abductions, rape, sexual violence and
killings as if they were a normal part of daily life.
Action at the international level is crucial if we are
to ensure that children get the future they truly deserve,

18-2140255/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

09/07/2018

regardless of the country or region they happen to be
born in. In doing so, due attention must also be given
to all who have already suffered grave violations.
Those victims must not be forgotten, and we have a
responsibility to offer them all the help they need to cope
with their traumatic experience and become agents of
change. Ms. Londoño’s experience is testament to that.

of a comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict and
sustain peace. We are optimistic that there is increasing
awareness about the fact that the protection of children
must be better connected to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace efforts. Ultimately, our goal must
be to prevent armed conflicts from happening in the
first place.

Malta remains particularly concerned about the
alarming scale and severity of the effects of violence
on children in war zones and their increasing exposure
to it. Violence breeds violence. It is deplorable that
hospitals and schools are bombed to destruction and
that the life-saving work of humanitarian aid workers
is impeded. International humanitarian law must be
respected by all the parties to a conflict at all times.
Furthermore, places where the State is fragile or absent
can easily become breeding grounds for terrorist
groups who abuse and exploit children. Here too we
must strive to ensure that children do not grow up
in an environment where the only opportunities are
offered by a military life and a war economy. Synergies
are needed so that Member States and regional and
subregional organizations can work in partnership and
complement United Nations efforts. We must continue
investing in peace in order to ensure that children can
grow up in an environment that allows them to reach
their full potential.

Despite progress in protecting children in armed
conflict, the general situation remains grave and
unacceptable. According to the 2018 annual report of
the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
(S/2018/465), there was a 27 per cent increase in the
number of grave violations of children’s rights verified
by the United Nations last year as compared to 2016.
We are deeply concerned in particular about reported
cases of the denial of humanitarian access as a weapon
of war and about the increase in the number of attacks
on schools and hospitals.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): My delegation fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union.
Slovakia condemns in strongest terms the
recruitment and use of children by parties to armed
conflict. Military exploitation of children is not only
completely wrong and unjustifiablem, it is also illegal.
Children simply have no role in warfare. We call for
the universal ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict and encourage those
States that have not yet signed or ratified the Protocol
to do so without delay.
I would like to express our appreciation for Sweden’s
leadership in negotiating an important resolution on
children and armed conflict, adopted today, which my
country has readily co-sponsored. Resolution 2427
(2018) builds upon commitments from last year and
stresses that the protection of children should be part
56/96

We appreciate the tireless efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba, who has a key
role to play in strengthening the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. The effective
implementation of her mandate requires our support
and cooperation. Furthermore, I should like to reiterate
the crucial importance of child protection advisers in
mainstreaming child protection and in monitoring,
reporting and prevention efforts in peace operations.
Child protection must remain at the heart of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding and receive
adequate support. Where necessary, the number
of child protection advisers should be increased in
field operations.
As mentioned, last year more than 10,000 children
were released as a result of the implementation of action
plans signed with armed forces. The recent open Arria
Formula meeting in May highlighted the importance
of action plans in the Council’s framework for ending
and preventing grave violations against children. The
meeting also highlighted key challenges and priorities
for action plans in the coming years that should be
taken into consideration, both at Headquarters and in
the field.
Lastly, I wish to stress that failing to incorporate
the security sector in the solution to the recruitment and
use of children can lead to renewed conflict and the use
of child soldiery. Resolution 2151 (2014) encourages
nations emerging from conflict to take appropriate
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

measures to protect children and ensure that security
sector actors are equipped to do so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Let me join others in
expressing my appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his most recent report (S/2018/465), to Sweden
for holding today’s open debate, to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her dedication and efforts and
to the briefers for their insightful perspectives.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Children are key to our future. They are the
catalysts for peace, development, prosperity and
progress and must be protected so that their potential to
engage and contribute to an inclusive and just society
can be ensured. Our efforts to address grave violations
against children in and after conflict must therefore
be a vital component of the prevention agenda. In
addressing the issue as part of that agenda, we must
take a comprehensive and rights-based approach and
continue to raise awareness and promote capacitybuilding and technical cooperation.
With regard to recruitment, it is essential that
civil society, the media, academia and Governments
work together to address the evolving tactics used to
recruit children, including through online and social
media platforms. In addition to law enforcement, strong
advocacy and education at the family and community
levels can provide the best defence for children falling
prey to recruitment.
The peacekeeping community must also ensure that
building capacity on child protection becomes a key
component of training peacekeepers. We are pleased to
inform the Security Council that the Royal Thai Armed
Forces and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
recently held a workshop on child protection for Thai
peacekeepers preparing for deployment to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. We can do more and
explore how regional and subregional organizations can
be involved.
Thailand welcomes the release of more than
10,000 children from armed groups in 2017 and sees
the reintegration of recently released children as a

S/PV. 8305

vital process. Reintegration should be incorporated in
relevant national plans and efforts to provide inclusive
basic social services, as it is a long-term sustainable
solution to prevention and protection.
The annual report of the Secretary-General
plays an important role in guiding Member States in
strengthening child protection. For that reason, we
welcome the enhanced engagement between Member
States and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
in preparing the report. We also welcome possible
further regional engagement on the issue.
The international community must continue its
work in all possible ways to put an end to the suffering
of children in conflict. Thailand endeavours to do
its part and looks forward to working with others to
amplify our efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. García Gutiérrez (Costa Rica) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s important debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict
and with the statement made by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of countries that signed the Safe
Schools Declaration.
We would like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, for their briefings. We also thank Ms. Yenny
Londoño for her statement. We reiterate our support
and appreciation to Ms. Gamba for her arduous efforts.
Costa Rica has carefully read and studied the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) and shares the
view that all parties to armed conflict have a special
obligation to protect children and that that obligation
flows directly from international law. However,
regrettably, millions of children suffer as a result of
armed conflict and asymmetrical attacks perpetrated
by non-State armed groups, which have a severe impact
on children in densely populated areas in particular,
especially since such attacks are carried out in schools
or hospitals. Given their primary responsibility for the
protection of children, States must strengthen their

18-2140257/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

national capacities to protect them and keep them away
from armed conflict, violent extremism and recruitment
by non-State armed groups.
It is imperative to conduct coordinated international
efforts for prevention and early warning, as it is the
most effective way to fulfil their obligations and
ensure that the protection of children is an integral
and comprehensive part of any prevention strategy. We
recognize the urgency of ensuring that the provisions
of the Convention of the Rights of the Child and of
international humanitarian law are not dead letter.
Using children as soldiers is unacceptable. It is also
acceptable for the parties to conflict to cut off the supply
of drinking water, electricity, gas, food, medicine or
humanitarian aid for civilians, which makes them
increasingly vulnerable. States must adopt measures to
protect and ensure that schools are safe and welcoming.
In 2015, Costa Rica was one of the 38 countries that
signed the Safe Schools Declaration, which was adopted
in Oslo, and we encourage those who have not signed
it to do so.
The Organization, and in particular the Council,
must implement a uniform and consolidated monitoring
strategy. It should provide information about, and
respond more effectively to, the serious violations of
children’s rights, including by granting the relevant
mandates to peacekeeping operations and to the
political missions that ensure their capacity.
We reiterate our condemnation of the sexual
exploitation and abuse of children, especially in the
context of peacekeeping missions, and call for the
necessary steps to be taken to bring those responsible
to justice. Costa Rica calls for ensuring access to childprotection services in all detention centres and ending
impunity for those who commit these grave violations.

09/07/2018

for its efforts at the helm of the Security Council this
month. We wish your delegation, Madam President,
every success. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings.
Despite the world’s major progress in developing
legal norms and frameworks for the protection of
children in armed conflict, and despite improvements
in the way the international community addresses the
protection of children during and after armed conflict,
we are nevertheless seeing an unprecedented increase
in violations, attacks and violence directed against
children as well as an expansion in their numbers
as victims in the world. This situation has been
compounded by an increase in attacks on hospitals and
schools in numerous conflict areas.
While the nature of armed conflict is changing, the
major challenges before the international community
are the following. How do we ensure that non-State
armed groups respect international humanitarian law
and human rights? How do we ensure accountability
for those committing these grave violations and crimes
against children in armed conflicts? How do we make
sure that they do not enjoy impunity for those violations?
In this context, it is necessary to draw attention to the
need to ensure that peacekeeping operations have all
the capabilities to protect children and save them from
being exploited.
We wish to highlight the ongoing violations being
committed against Palestinian children in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip, as the Israeli occupying forces
do not hesitate to violate the human rights of children.
Every day, these children face numerous threats such as
arrest, imprisonment, torture and death, not to mention
the aggressions of the Israeli occupying forces and
settlers without impunity.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.

We underscore the importance of giving attention
to the situation of children living in others conflict
zones like Syria, Yemen, Libya and Myanmar, in order
to provide them with protection. We must also give
due attention to providing them with the rehabilitation,
reinsertion and reintegration programmes. We must
not forget to give appropriate attention to the rights of
the girl victims of trafficking, rape, sexual violence
and worse kinds of exploitation, as we have seen in the
atrocities committed by Da’esh against Yazidi women
in Iraq.

Mr. Al-Otoom (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Swedish presidency

Education remains the best way to protect the
future of displaced children. That is why Jordan has

Finally, my country strongly calls for children
who have been recruited by non-State armed forces
to be considered victims, that they be placed in
detention centres only as a last resort and that their
protection and rights be guaranteed, including the
right to psychological and educational support after
demobilization, so as to ensure their reintegration into
society and the sustainability of peace.

58/96

18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

made and continues to make tireless efforts to provide
Syrian refugee children with the best possible education
services, given the means at our disposal. We have
also established a child-protection centre for refugees
and another centre related to promoting educational
environment and child protection. Ongoing financial
support for the host countries by the international
community is of course required in order to continue
providing education and health services until a political
solution is reached and the refugees return home.
Jordan insists that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees remain free
from politicization and manipulation, and calls on
the international community to continue supporting
that vital entity, because any shortage in its funding
will lead to the closure of schools and the suffering
of tens of thousands of children who will not be able
to continue their education and their life as required.
Jordan also supports at all levels the historic resolution
2250 (2015), on youth, security and peace.
In conclusion, the eyes of millions of children
around the world are turned to you, Madam President,
and to the rest of the Security Council members and
the United Nations Member States for a better future.
We must promise that we will not deny them education,
growth opportunities and living in peace. Children are
our most important investment in a better future and in
achieving peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank the Permanent Mission of
Sweden for convening today’s important meeting on
the theme “Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow”. I also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their outstanding briefings.
We also thank Ms. Londoño for her briefing, in which
she shared her own personal experience.
At the beginning of my statement, I would like
to share our immense pride and joy at seeing the
successful collaboration between the Sudan and the
United Nations result in a joint action plan to put an
end to the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. This plan has allowed the Sudan to be removed
from the Secretary-General’s list of countries where
children’s rights are violated and where children are

S/PV. 8305

being used in armed conflict. This success would not
have been possible without the remarkable cooperation
and tireless work of the Government of the Sudan,
Ms. Gamba’s Office, in particular her direct supervision
of the implementation of the plan, and UNICEF.
During the period of implementing this plan, in
November 2017 my country received a delegation
from the Security Council, headed by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden, Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, and comprising
other members of the Security Council as well as
representatives of the Office the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict to witness that experience. The delegation
was also able to observe the progress made in the
implementation of the plan on protection of children in
armed conflict.
Alongside the Sudan’s efforts in the area of child
protection, which we cannot outline in detail here owing
to time constraints, I would like to note that late this
year the Government of the Sudan and the Office of the
Special Representative, together with African regional
organizations, intend to launch a regional campaign
based on the initiative Ms. Gamba outlined during her
latest visit to the Sudan. The Government of the Sudan
has also established mechanisms at the local level for
reporting cases of child-soldier recruitment and grave
violations against them. We respond to these reports
through competent mechanisms such as the National
Council for Children, the police, the courts and even
specialized tribunals for Darfur. The Government of
the Sudan has also expressed its willingness to make
progress in future cooperation with the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. A
meeting was held in Khartoum with countries members
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
discuss issues related to child protection.
We will work in the near future to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations and its agencies,
as well as with international partners, so that Sudan
can be the first country to convert a successful action
plan with the United Nations into a long-term national
action plan to prevent all serious violations against
children. We hope that other parties will be inspired by
our initiative and follow in the Sudan’s footsteps.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): Let me begin by
congratulating Sweden on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of

18-2140259/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

July and for organizing this open debate. Malaysia also
thanks this morning’s briefers.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Malaysia thanks the Secretary-General for his
annual report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2018/462), dated 14 May, and supports
the mandate carried out by the Security Council,
which includes the integrity and impartiality of
the mechanism for listing all perpetrators of grave
violations of children’s rights. The report highlights
the consequential impact of when children are denied
humanitarian access, including the use of starvation as
a method of warfare.
Malaysia encourages the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to develop practical guidelines on
data collection regarding the denial of humanitarian
access. We hope that such an effort would help to
standardize and support the work of United Nations
country task forces on monitoring and reporting.
Malaysia shares the view of many delegations that
spoke this morning on the dangers, risks and violations
that children fall prey to in armed conflict, including
abduction, when children, as we all know, should be
in school. Therefore, in our view, today’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018) is important,
as it underscores our unified stance on protecting
children and condemning abduction. In addition,
strengthening monitoring and reporting abductions, as
well as identifying the perpetrators, will contribute to
ensuring accountability.

09/07/2018

as the military use of schools by State and non-State
armed groups alike, thereby subsequently depriving
access to education and health care to thousands of
children. Therefore, my delegation encourages all
Member States to consider endorsing the Safe Schools
Declaration, which aims, among other goals, to raise
awareness of good practices that would deter from the
military use of educational facilities in armed conflict
and maintain schools as mainstays of learning, not
bloodshed. My delegation also urges Member States
to implement the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral on measures to protect health care contained
in resolution 2286 (2016), which Malaysia supported
and co-sponsored. The resolution aims to enhance the
practical implementation of protections afforded under
international law to prevent acts of violence against
the wounded and sick and medical and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, as
well as hospitals and other medical facilities, and to
better ensure accountability for such acts.
The issue of accountability must be pursued, as
it is a vital component of a comprehensive approach
to child protection. My delegation urges that firm
action be taken under national or international justice
mechanisms, where appropriate, against parties that
commit violations and abuses against children. We
reiterate the importance of the Security Council
framework on children and armed conflict and the
various tools that have been developed to ensure the
accountability and compliance of parties to conflict,
including through the listing mechanism of the annual
report. We believe that facts should be the determining
factor that guide our actions under the framework.

At the same time, we must also ensure that security
forces and peacekeeping missions are competent and
proactively respond to situations in which children
are exposed to the risk of abduction and other grave
violations. We must also recognize that reintegration is
a long-term effort that requires the shared responsibility
of all stakeholders, including regional organizations. In
that regard, we call on Member States, United Nations
entities and other parties concerned to integrate
child protection provisions in community-based
reintegration programmes that foster a spirit of unity
and reconciliation among communities ravaged by war.

In conclusion, we fervently hope that the adoption
of resolution 2427 (2018) will serve to further strengthen
our collective resolve to continue developing effective
strategies and responses for the protection of children
in armed conflict, even in the face of unprecedented
challenges. Furthermore, we urgently call for the
immediate, safe and unconditional release of abducted
childrenm and their family reunification, reintegration
and rehabilitation. Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to working together with other Member States to
ensure that children around the world affected by
armed conflict receive the greatest consideration and
attention, which they truly deserve.

We are equally shocked by the increasing
number of attacks on schools and hospitals, as well

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

60/96

18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Privitelli (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank Sweden for making this important topic a priority
issue during its presidency. Switzerland welcomes the
annual report (S/2018/465) of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict, which lists more than
21,000 grave violations — an extremely alarming
increase of 35 per cent compared to 2016. In the face of
such an increase, the international community must act
in several areas.
First, protecting children and defending their rights
before, during and after conflicts and a comprehensive
approach towards sustaining peace are mutually
reinforcing. Protecting those who are most vulnerable
preserves our countries’ resources for the future, thereby
entailing long-term consequences involving governance
and peacebuilding. Switzerland therefore supports the
multi-stakeholder partnership End Violence Against
Children. The goal of that initiative is to strengthen
political will and accelerate relevant efforts so that
every child can grow up shielded from violence. The
initiative is supported by 271 member organizations.
At the same time, the Sustainable Development Goals
provide a long-term vision for protecting children and
prevent conflicts.
Secondly, the reintegration and rehabilitation of
children formerly associated with armed forces and
groups are key factors in preventing the recurrence of
conflicts. Armed conflicts inflict physical and extreme
emotional suffering upon children. If we want to break
the cycle of violence, we must address their long-term
integration needs by providing them with education,
psychosocial support and the means to ensure their
livelihood. The link between the reintegration of
children and sustainable peace will be one of the
priority themes to be discussed during Geneva Peace
Week in November.
Thirdly, the impartial Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism established pursuant to resolution 1612
(2005) and the accurate and credible listing of
perpetrators are powerful tools, which can establish
responsibility and contribute to preventing grave
violations. It is essential that that listing remain
impartial and evidence-based. In that regard, we ask
the Secretary-General to inform us of measures taken
and progress made by listed parties.
In conclusion, Switzerland reiterates its full support
for the mandate and work of the Special Representative

S/PV. 8305

of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and her Office.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Armed conflict takes
a devastating toll on children. The physical and
psychological wounds of war, including the resulting
displacement and disrupted education, illustrate why we
must act. Australia commends the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms Virginia Gamba. The recent
work of her Office to strengthen local child protection
systems and advocate for the effective reintegration
of children deserves high praise. We also applaud the
Special Representative’s concerted efforts to engage with
non-State armed groups and to commit those groups to
action plans. That is critical because — as the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/465) demonstrates — those
groups are responsible for the majority of violations
against children. Within peacekeeping missions
and United Nations country teams, child protection
specialists are key to identifying grave violations and
taking preventive action. Together, those efforts reduce
the risk of intergenerational harm.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights some
positive developments, such as the release of children
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Nevertheless, the overall trend of increasing grave
violations against children should alarm us all.
Unlawful attacks on schools and hospitals, including
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq and
Syria, have had particularly grievous impacts on
children. Impeding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, instances of which are highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s report, is having an inordinate and
unacceptable impact on children.
We welcome efforts to ensure a longer-term
approach is taken to the reintegration of children affected
by armed conflict. When designing reintegration
programmes, the needs of girls must be taken into
account, including to prevent the re-recruitment of
former child soldiers. There is strong evidence that
gender-sensitive programming delivers better outcomes
for girls, women and their communities.
Opportunities must also be taken to support
the participation of youth in peacebuilding and
peace processes. By increasing their participation,
we contribute to the protection of their rights as

18-2140261/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

well as setting a strong foundation for an inclusive,
sustainable peace. It is critical — for this and for future
generations — that we redouble our efforts to protect
children and prevent grave violations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Andorra.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to thank the Swedish presidency and its Prime
Minister, His Excellency Mr. Löfven, for convening
this open debate to express our positions. We have also
had the honour of co-sponsoring resolution 2427 (2018),
unanimously adopted by the Security Council today.
I also appreciate the enlightening briefings
delivered by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, and the Executive Director of the UNICEF,
Ms. Нenrietta Fore, as well as thank Ms. Yenny
Londoño, civil society representative, for her analysis
and courageous and forward-looking proposals.
I would like to underscore aspects that are
particularly significant, in our opinion. As Yenny
Londoño said, listening to the words of child victims
and young people and incorporating their experiences
is one of the keys to the resolution. They must be given
a voice, as set forth by the Convention on the Rights
of the Child — a very powerful instrument today,
the monitoring of which creates a very solid basis
for prevention.
The resolution also incorporates the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. The transformation of
the world must end the root causes that can lead to
conflicts, inequalities, poverty and marginalization,
which in some ways can become the framework for
violating children’s rights. We also value the focus
on the reintegration of children, the identification of
the challenges of their stigmatization, the need for
attention to their physical and mental health and their
social integration. No one should be left behind. Each
and every child matters — they have their lives, rights,
relationships, identities and communities.
In Sustainable Development Goal 4, as has been
reiterated in the reports of the Secretary-General and
in the resolutions and presidential statements of the
Security Council and now, as has been recalled in this
meeting, education plays an essential role in conflict
prevention. It can facilitate the reintegration of children
by adapting to each situation to provide them with the
62/96

09/07/2018

necessary training for their social insertion. It can also
equip them with the appropriate skills and values, as
well as pay close attention to the specific needs of
girls and young women. The values of coexistence
and knowledge can create resilient societies with the
resources to prevent armed conflict.
Through the collaboration and coordination of
United Nations agencies with local entities on the
ground and the elaboration of action plans, it has been
possible to achieve progress with States and non-State
armed groups, such as the most recent cases in Mali,
Nigeria, the Central African Republic, the participation
in Colombia and what we just heard about in the Sudan.
However, 2017 saw an upsurge in very serious
attacks on children that should not be tolerated. The
verification of violations of children’s rights must
therefore continue. My delegation is committed to
supporting children enjoying their present and trusting
in the future. For that reason, in addition to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Andorra has acceded to the Paris Principles and the
Vancouver principles. We urge those who have not yet
done so to join those declarations.
We are part of the Group of Friends of Children
in Armed Conflict, and we welcome and endorse the
statement delivered by the representative of Canada.
We have also signed the Declaration on Safe Schools
and align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Argentina. The universality
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, to which Andorra is a party, would provide
greater capacity to combat impunity, since it considers
intentional attacks on educational establishments as
war crimes. Since 2006, Andorra has also provided an
annual contribution of funds to the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
Allow me to conclude by commending the
commitment made by offices, agencies, States and
organizations. We reiterate our support for the results to
be tangible and thereby- contribute to the consolidation
of lasting peace, with children as genuine agents and
protagonists of the transformation of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

I would also like to thank today’s briefers for their
statements, in particular Special Representative Virginia
Gamba. Portugal reiterates its support for her important
mandate, and we commend her unrelenting efforts.
The information contained in the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) is alarming.
While there have been improvements in some places,
with the adoption of action plans, in others violations
of children’s rights significantly increased, including
sexual violence, maiming and killings as a result of
military operations, both by State and non-State actors.
Despite the strong normative framework and
a mechanism to monitor, report and respond to
grave violations against children, huge challenges
remain, in particular to the changing nature of
hostilities, protracted conflicts, violent extremism
and the proliferation of non-State armed groups,
including terrorist groups. Prevention, reintegration,
rehabilitation and cooperation, both at the domestic
and international levels, are essential. Efforts should
include the demobilization and return of displaced and
refugee children.
As the international community, we must
ensure that adequate resources are devoted to child
rehabilitation programmes and educational training
in post-conflict situations. However, it is fundamental
that children deprived of their liberty for their alleged
association with extremist groups be recognized, in the
first instance, as victims of forcible recruitment who
have been exposed to extreme brutality.
Portugal supports the inclusion of child protection
provisions in the mandates of peace operations and
mandatory predeployment training on child protection
for all United Nations troop and police contingents. We
also support the effective screening of peacekeepers.
Attacks on, and the use of, schools and hospitals
for military purposes cannot continue to take place
with impunity. In that context, my country reiterates
its active engagement in providing access to education
in emergency situations, including higher education,
and calls on Governments to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. Education is both a mechanism to prevent
recruitment and the means to address the root causes
of conflict.
The Convention of the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocol on children and armed conflict,
along with the Paris Principles, continue to provide an

S/PV. 8305

adequate frame of reference for action. Portugal invites
all Member States that have not yet done so to consider
endorsing the Paris Principles.
In conclusion, protecting children from the
ravages of war is a moral imperative and a priority
of international peace and security. The international
community is equipped to improve the situation of
children in armed conflicts and address the root causes
of conflict, including through sustainable development,
the promotion and protection of human rights and
peacebuilding. It is our collective duty to do our utmost
to end the suffering of children victims of armed
conflicts and violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of San Marino.
Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): San Marino aligns itself
with the statement previously made by the representative
of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict.
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this debate, as well as the briefers and participants
for their contributions.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his commitment and his annual report (S/2018/465),
and I would like to reiterate San Marino’s support
for the Security Council’s children and armed
conflict mandate.
The Secretary-General’s report has documented
a very alarming trend: in 2017 there was a massive
increase in violations against children. Moreover,
the repeated attacks on schools and hospitals and the
denial of humanitarian access as a tactic of war clearly
show that civilians, and in particular children, are
vulnerable and very likely to be subject to abuses and
grave violations.
Unfortunately, children pay a very heavy price in
armed conflicts. In the past year, children, boys and
girls, were killed, maimed, abducted, raped and used
as human shields, and many of them were recruited
as soldiers. Furthermore, their schools have were
targeted and destroyed, thereby denying children their
basic rights, while health facilities were attacked and
damaged, depriving them of the assistance they need.
While calling all parties to fully comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
we also reiterate that it is crucial that the international

18-2140263/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

community renew its engagement on the children and
armed conflict agenda.
San Marino has ratified the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and has
endorsed the Paris Commitments. San Marino calls
for the endorsement and ratification of the relevant
international instruments that strengthen the protection
of children in armed conflict. Respect for those
instruments is key in order to protect civilians caught
up in conflict. Today I am glad to announce that my
country will join the Safe Schools Declaration, an
important instrument for the protection of education
facilities from military use during conflict.
As previous speakers have done, I would like to
reiterate that protecting children affected by armed
conflict can contribute to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. In that regard, placing children at
the heart of peace processes is crucial. If we want to
prevent their re-recruitment, effective reintegration is
essential. We must put in place long-term alternatives to
military life and support them through educational and
vocational programmes, so that we can finally break
the cycle of violence, consolidate peace and prevent
conflicts from recurring.
San Marino commends the work of Ms. Virginia
Gamba and her Office and welcomes the action plans
signed in 2017.
We all need to do more to safeguard the protection of
children and promote their rights. Those children should
finally be given a chance to build their own futures and
to become actors of peace for our communities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Permanent Mission of
Sweden for convening this open debate. We believe
it is essential that all States be able to express in the
Security Council their concern about the situation of
children in armed conflict.
Ecuador welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/465) and this morning’s briefings, as
well as the concept note (S/2018/625, annex) that you,
Mr. President, provided us with to guide this meeting.
The situation of children is becoming increasingly
worrisome owing to the number and seriousness of
64/96

09/07/2018

violations in countries in conflict. We see this in the
reports submitted, which show that children are victims
of State and non-State actors and that there is no
collective and comprehensive response to protect them.
Ecuador expresses its concern at the continuing
recruitment and use of children throughout the
world. Despite the formal release of more than 10,000
children associated with armed forces or groups in
2017 and the arrangements that have been taken for
their reintegration, 56 armed groups and state State
forces continued to recruit and use children in conflicts
around the world.
We believe that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Sustainable Development
Goals 5 and 16, related to gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls, as well as the
promotion of just, peaceful and inclusive societies, can
be achieved only when all States fully protect children.
In its Constitution, Ecuador recognizes children
as a group deserving of special attention, and indicates
that it is the State’s responsibility to protect and care for
them against all forms of violence, ill-treatment, sexual
exploitation or exploitation of any other kind, as well
as to eradicate all forms of violence to which they may
be subjected. That is why we supported resolution 2427
(2018) this morning.
As we celebrate 18 years since the signing
of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, we call for universal
ratification of the Protocol and encourage States
that have not yet done so to ratify it without delay.
Similarly, we call for the cessation and prevention of
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict,
and stress the importance of adequate funding for
gender-sensitive reintegration programmes, taking
into account the particular needs of girls who have
not been well served through traditional disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
The Secretary-General’s report also underscores
how schools are used for military purposes and points to
the destruction of educational infrastructure. Ecuador
expresses its full support for the need to protect students,
teachers and educational infrastructure in situations
of armed conflict, and stresses the importance of
continuing education during armed conflict, as well
as the implementation of the Guidelines for Protecting
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict.
Our Constitution also stipulates that military
service for citizens over 18 years of age is voluntary,
and prohibits all forms of forced recruitment. Our
Constitution also establishes that children and
adolescents shall receive priority attention in the event
of disasters, armed conflicts and any type of emergency.
We therefore reiterate that the statistics provided to us
must call for a comprehensive response from all States
by not allowing impunity and providing appropriate
political support and funding.
We believe that it is important to build and sustain
peace, as peace is directly linked to the achievement of
the 2030 Agenda. We reaffirm Ecuador’s commitment
to leaving no one behind on the path to sustainable
development, and we want to use this forum to pool
efforts aimed at a productive and successful dialogue
that highlights the situation of children and armed
conflict and its importance for the global agenda.
Finally, we call for stronger support for the
management of the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict so that it may receive sufficient political
support and funding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking the President of the Security
Council, the Swedish Prime Minister, for organizing
this open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2018/465) and appreciate the valuable
inputs from the briefers.
A large increase in violations against children in
2017, as reported by the Secretary-General, is alarming.
It serves to underline the need for redoubling our
efforts to prevent the emergence of new conflicts. If we
cannot protect children today, we will fail in preventing
conflicts tomorrow. In turn, that means we will face
a vicious circle of increases in both the number of
conflicts and the loss of children’s lives.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/465) once
again shows that, unfortunately, the scale of violations
is alarming in many places, especially in the Palestinian
occupied territories and Yemen. Throughout 2017, a
large number of Palestinian children continued to be
killed, injured, arrested and detained by Israeli forces.

S/PV. 8305

The exponential increase in the level of such violations
during peaceful protests this year puts the Israeli
regime at the top of the list of global child-killers. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms the brutality
of the Israeli forces against Palestinian children.
Such acts are clear manifestations of war crimes and
crime against humanity, and they are carried out with
total impunity. They must come to an end and their
perpetrators must be brought to justice. Failing to do so
will only embolden Israel to kill more children.
That situation is the result of the Council’s failure
to meet its relevant responsibilities due to the use of the
veto power by the United States, which thus extended
unconditional impunity to the Israeli regime. Despite
all the atrocities it has perpetrated against Palestinian
children, the Israel Defence Forces has unfortunately
never been blacklisted in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral. We hope that the 2018 report will put Israel at
the top of the list of violators of the rights of children in
armed conflicts. That will bring accuracy, credibility
and impartiality to that list.
The situation of children in Yemen, where,
according to UNICEF, more than 2,200 children have
been killed and nearly all children are in desperate
need of humanitarian assistance, is at best comparable
only to the situation of Palestinian children. Saudi and
Emirati forces, which seek only a military solution
in Yemen, are responsible for the continuation of that
conflict. Creating a separate category for the so-called
improving violators in the Secretary-General’s reports
last year (S/2017/821) and this year, due to well-known
political considerations, did not help to halt their
brutality perpetrated against Yemeni children or change
the realities on the ground. As the Secretary-General’s
report indicates, the killing of Yemeni children
continued unabated, most recently in an airstrike on a
wedding in July, during which at least seven children
lost their lives.
The policy of deliberately killing children as a
war tactic is utilized by Israel, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates, as well as by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The aim of such a policy
is to put maximum pressure on adversaries. The most
notable cases are the mass killing of children by Israel
in Lebanon in 2006, by ISIS in Syria in 2013 and by
Saudi and Emirati forces in Yemen in 2018.
We call for accountability for any war crimes
against children anywhere, be it in Palestine, Yemen,

18-2140265/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

Myanmar or elsewhere. Adopting a selective approach
in such cases is tantamount to betraying the most
vulnerable people — children — whom this process is
designed to protect.
The President (Belgium) (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Belgium fully associates itself with the
statements made by the observer of the European Union,
by the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and by the
representative of Aregentina on behalf of the countries
that have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration.
At the outset, I would like to thank the speakers for
their stimulating statements, and Sweden for organizing
this debate and for giving Belgium the opportunity
to participate. We also reiterate our support for
resolution 2427 (2018), adopted this morning, which we
co-sponsored. In that regard, I would like to commend
Sweden’s leadership on this issue, which has led, after
lengthy discussions, to a robust text that brings new
elements to the mandate.
We believe that prevention is the only lasting
solution to the problem of children’s participation
in armed conflict. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/465) stresses that preventing violations against
children affected by conflict should be one of the main
concerns of the international community. We must
therefore do more to address the problem by ensuring
the inclusion of child protection as an integral part
of any comprehensive strategy to prevent and resolve
conflict with a view to achieving sustainable peace and
by encouraging the active participation of children in
the development of such strategies.
It is also very important to enable children affected
by armed conflict to undertake the journey from victim
to child in a peaceful society. We welcome the release
of more than 10,000 children and their reintegration
into their communities in 2017. However, that is just
a first step. We share the Secretary-General’s view
that it is vital to ensure strong and ongoing support
for psychosocial and educational reintegration in order
to break the cycle of violence and consolidate peace.
Unfortunately, the psychosocial well-being of children
is often forgotten, even if those invisible wounds are
deep and take a very long time to heal. This work is
essential as a prevention tool and breaks the vicious
cycle of violence. I must underscore that long-term
66/96

09/07/2018

reintegration, including psychosocial support that
exceeds the current six-month programmes is crucial.
In that regard, I also wish to draw attention to the
specific needs of girls. We must redouble our efforts to
address the impact of conflict on girls.
The issue of children in armed conflict is
multidimensional and requires a coordinated and
comprehensive response involving all the relevant
actors. Belgium therefore welcomes the approach
of the Special Representative, who has initiated a
process to strengthen cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations.
Belgium intends to engage specifically on this issue
during its term on the Security Council in the coming
two years. The challenges are enormous, as borne out
by the 35 per cent increase in serious violations in 2017
and the worrying trend of denial of humanitarian access
for civilians as a new tactic of war.
In conclusion, Belgium appreciates the close
cooperation with the Special Representative and looks
forward to the opening of an office of the Special
Representative in Brussels very soon.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Mr. Arrocha Ruíz (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of Prime Minister Stefan
Löfven this morning and we applaud the initiative
of the Swedish presidency for convening this timely
debate to put in perspective the vulnerability of a high
number of children affected by the scourge of armed
conflicts and violence.
Panama aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Argentina on behalf of
the group of countries that have endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration.
The briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Gamba, as well as the contents of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/465), confirm that the
outlook is truly alarming. The marked increase in
serious violations, confirmed by the United Nations,
that have been perpetrated against children — not only
last year — is unacceptable and reprehensible by any
account. That is why we applaud the joint efforts of
UNICEF and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, as they are crucial given the
current situation.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

The magnitude of the impact on children deprived
of their freedom and recruited into armed groups and
forces in order to actively participate in conflicts is
substantial, as we heard at first-hand this morning from
Ms. Yenny Londoño, and we thank her for her courage
in speaking to the Council.
Even worse are the appalling cases of killings,
sexual exploitation and violence, collective violations,
forced marriages with combatants, kidnappings,
and sexual slavery and trafficking, which cannot be
tolerated by any State, and the adoption and ratification
of international instruments on the rights of children is
therefore a key element in this respect.
Accountability for crimes and serious violations
of human rights and humanitarian law in a rigorous
judicial framework must be ensured. To this distressing
panorama, in which the clear participation of certain
Government forces and non-State armed groups has
been made clear, we would add displaced children who
are seeking safe haven from the increasing number of
attacks against schools and hospitals, as well as those
who are victims of abduction, including in particular
girls being held in conflict zones, where they are more
vulnerable to physical violations and the flouting of
their most basic human rights.
Mr. President, we wish to emphasize the value of
your concept note (S/2018/625, annex) in outlining key
areas for the debate, in particular the urgent need to
protect children and safeguard their rights. Although
the report focuses on specific regions, my country
believes that a coordinated response, in a spirit of
solidarity, is a global obligation. Threats to peace and
security increase the natural vulnerability of children,
and collective endeavours to overcome this tragedy are
of the greatest urgency. Human lives are at stake here.
We do not have the right to deprive children of a safe
present and future. States have an obligation to prevent
violations that undermine respect for international law
and for the human rights of children.
Aware of the global responsibility that has brought
us here today and with firm political resolve, my
country has deployed efforts beyond our region to
contribute to the humanitarian assistance needed by
the more than 30,000 Syrian children who are refugees
in the Za’atari camp, in Jordan. With the assistance of
UNICEF, we have dispatched Panamanian teachers who
today are cooperating on an educational programme
for these children, because we firmly believe that

S/PV. 8305

access to education and to a dignified life that offers
opportunities is an inalienable right of all children.
Aware of the significant value of empowering
young people so that they can become actors for peace,
Panama will, in January 2019, host World Youth Day,
to be led by Pope Francis. The event will be aimed at
overcoming cultural and religious barriers and bring
together young people from all corners of the world,
with the common aim of achieving a culture of peace in
order to build a better world.
In recent years, Governments have made forceful
statements, signed conventions and promulgated
legal texts guaranteeing the rights of children under
the worst circumstances. However, implementation
thereof is required in order to urgently translate the
commitments made into realities on the ground. We
therefore welcome the unanimous approval of resolution
2427 (2018), proposed by Sweden, as it contains
elements of great value in this process. The link that
it establishes between the protection, rights, welfare
and empowerment of children is, in my country’s view,
vital in the framework of the preventive approach that
should without a doubt be our objective.
I wish to conclude by reiterating Panama’s firm
commitment to contributing to the global effort to
ensure the full protection of the rights of children in
all areas, in particular when they are faced with the
scourge of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and the representative of Argentina on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Safe Schools Declaration.
I should now like to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Allow me first to thank the Swedish presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this timely debate
and the briefers for their comprehensive presentations.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465), presented
last week, makes clear that the number of children
affected by armed conflict and the severity of the grave
violations affecting them have increased in the past
year. It is appalling that in 2017 the United Nations
verified more than 21,000 grave violations of children’s

18-2140267/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

rights ranging from the use of children as human bombs
to rape and other forms of sexual violence, and from
juvenile detention to the denial of humanitarian access.
Resolution 1261 (1999) formally acknowledged
that the protection of children in armed conflict
is a fundamental peace and security concern. The
Security Council has also since 2001 tasked specific
peacekeeping missions with undertaking childprotection efforts. However, the recruitment and use of
children remain prevalent in areas where peacekeeping
operations are deployed.
Children associated with armed forces or armed
groups both witness and commit acts of violence and
are themselves exploited, injured or killed as a result.
Such situations deprive them of their human rights
and educational opportunities. They often suffer
severe physical and emotional consequences that
dramatically impact their personal development and
can have long-term effects on peace and security in the
countries concerned.
We would like to commend Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba for her efforts
to increase engagement with parties to conflict in order
to achieve progress and implement action plans leading
to concrete results, as more than 10,000 children have
been formally released from armed groups and begun
a process of reintegration. We also commend UNICEF
and its partners for having reintegrated more than
12,000 children into their communities.
Romania supports the Secretary-General’s peace
agenda and the United Nations demarches to build
sustaining peace. Tackling the root causes of conflict
and ensuring children’s access to education are key
factors if we want this approach to succeed. At the
same time, we must keep in mind the best interests of
the child, especially in cases involving former child
soldiers, who require protection and support in order to
reintegrate into their societies.
In this respect, Romania endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration, the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, and the Paris Commitments
and Paris Principles on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups. My country also
endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, and we encourage all parties to implement
the provisions of these initiatives. We also reaffirm
68/96

09/07/2018

our readiness to continue to work closely with United
Nations institutions for the benefit of children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Mrs. Đurišić (Montenegro): Let me first thank
the Swedish presidency for having organized this
timely and important open debate on the protection
of children in armed conflict, as well as for its work
on resolution 2427 (2018), which the Security Council
adopted this morning. We also thank the briefers for
their remarkable presentations and their work on the
protection of children in conflict situations.
Montenegro fully associates itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
I would, however, like to make some additional remarks.
Conflicts have a devastating and enduring impact
on the world and on each individual. We should all be
disturbed by the Secretary-General’s latest report on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465), as well as
by the briefers’ presentations. As stated in the report,
which Montenegro welcomes, it is children in particular
who face obstacles ranging from discrimination,
marginalization and poverty to violence. Young people
are the main victims of conflicts today, and they are
dealing with unacceptable risks to their lives and
suffering as a result of attacks on schools and hospitals
and denials of humanitarian access.
The issue of children and armed conflict is a
global one that demands a shared response. In the
wake of some recent progress, we, as the international
community, must focus more on preventing violations
against children affected by conflict if we are to avoid
the possibility of losing entire generations in many
countries around the world. The Security Council has
made significant progress in this area, and its adoption
of resolution 2427 (2018) today is a step forward in
advancing the agenda on children and armed conflict,
protecting children’s rights and ensuring that those
responsible for grave violations against children are
held to account. Montenegro considers the agreement
and implementation of United Nations action plans to
be a vital step in improving the protection of children.
All the parties listed in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s report should put such measures in place.
We must improve our efforts to prevent human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law. Montenegro has ratified the Optional Protocols
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
endorsed such non-legally binding commitments as
the Paris Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration.
We have also endorsed the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers and we strongly encourage
other Member States to do the same. We support
international peace operations as an efficient and
dynamic instrument for monitoring respect for human
rights and building sustainable institutions in conflict
areas. A strong component for the protection of
children should be incorporated into peacekeeping and
prevention mandates and the sustaining peace agenda.
That would also require peacekeepers, military and
security personnel to receive specialized predeployment
training in child protection.
In addition, we should prioritize the effective
reintegration of children formerly associated with
armed forces or groups. Both girls and boys must
receive the support they need to alleviate their suffering
and help them reintegrate into their communities
without prejudice or stigma. That requires education
and engagement. We believe it is crucial to ensure that
children continue to have access to education even in
times of crisis. Education can have a positive effect on
their development and give them the skills they need to
work for more sustainable peace and advocate for better
future themselves. Children are innocent bystanders in
times of conflict. They deserve protection and support
as well as justice and opportunity. We should redouble
our efforts at every level to protect them, get them back
to school and treat them as every society’s vital assets.
Only that approach can enable us to have an impact
on the well-being of future generations and to face the
challenges of securing a lasting global peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to
express our appreciation to the Swedish presidency
for convening this important debate, in line with
Sweden’s principled defence of international law and
the protection it provides, especially for those who
are most vulnerable, including refugees and migrants
and the children among them. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2018/465), and am grateful
to the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for
their valuable briefings and the representative of
civil society from Colombia for her powerful speech.

S/PV. 8305

The State of Palestine also welcomes the Council’s
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2427 (2018).
The protection of civilians has been seen as a top
priority since the Second World War. More than 70 years
later, it is therefore difficult to explain the gap that has
persisted between States’ clear legal obligations and
their failure to ensure accountability, which continues
to render civilians, including children, extremely
vulnerable in situations of armed conflict around
the world. Prevention, protection and accountability
are indispensable for saving future generations from
the scourge of war. The State of Palestine stresses
the importance of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law, as well as for human rights and
refugee law, as they are central to the protection of
children and all civilians in armed conflict, including
those suffering under foreign occupation. We underline
the importance of international criminal law for holding
the perpetrators of crimes accountable, providing justice
to victims and preventing any recurrence of crimes.
Having acceded to the core conventions relating
to human rights and international humanitarian law,
and to the International Criminal Court, the State of
Palestine has also acceded to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We have
also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and support
the joint statement made today in that regard. We call
for the universal acceptance and implementation of all
the relevant legal instruments.
Children must be protected from killing and
maiming, recruitment, arrest, detention and ill
treatment. Deliberate attacks on schools and closures
of educational institutions, as well as denials of
humanitarian access, must cease. The children of
Palestine have been enduring all of these ills for
decades with a striking lack of protection, despite
the laws intended to protect all children and our
repeated calls for the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population. At a time when everyone stresses
the importance of psychosocial support to children
suffering from the consequences of armed conflicts,
Palestinian children are about to be deprived of such
support, owing to the defunding of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). The Israeli occupying forces’
intentional targeting of peaceful protesters in the Gaza
Strip, including children, and the forced transfer of
civilians in Abu Nuwar and Khan Al-Ahmar, which

18-2140269/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

affects Palestinian children most of all, are only the
most recent examples in that regard. We hope that the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to General Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population, will
include practical recommendations to assure protection
for our people, including children. Palestine emphasizes
that all these well-documented Israeli crimes plead
clearly for including Israel and its settlers on the list of
parties committing grave violations affecting children
in situations of armed conflict. The failure to include
them seriously affects the list’s credibility and makes it
vulnerable to criticisms that it is politicized.
The Secretary-General’s report should have made
specific reference to Israel’s prolonged military and
colonial occupation and its ongoing blockade of the
Gaza Strip as the foundation for its widespread and
systematic violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, international humanitarian law and human
rights, including rules aimed at protecting children.
The absence of such explicit references fails to reflect
the reality on the ground and undermines the efforts to
address the root causes of the conflict and the ongoing
mass violations of the rights of the Palestinian people.
We also call on the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict to publicly denounce the crimes
committed against Palestinian children. We believe that
an expression of this kind would have been important
during Israel’s violent repression of peaceful protests
in the Gaza Strip, in which 19 Palestinian children have
been killed to date.
We do, however, fully recognize the critical role
that the United Nations plays in Palestine, and we would
like to express our appreciation for it, particularly to
UNRWA, which is going through one of the most severe
crises in its history. We want to appeal once again for
urgent support to the Agency so that it can continue
fulfilling its vital mandate, including for the provision
of education, which all agree is central to ensuring
children’s protection, well-being and development. As
the painful situation in Palestine demonstrates, only
by ending impunity for violations and crimes against
children can we preserve their lives, their rights and the
future they embody.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
congratulate Sweden on its presidency of the Security
70/96

09/07/2018

Council and applaud its commitment to gender balance
among the briefers of the Council this month. The
United Arab Emirates supports Sweden’s dedicated
focus on the issue of children and armed conflict, and
its convening of today’s debate.
I also thank Special Representative Virginia
Gamba, UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore,
and civil society representative Yenny Londoño for
their insightful briefings earlier today.
There is nothing more universal than the principle
that children are entitled to special protection. That is
something that we can all agree on, no matter our policy
positions or how entrenched our disagreements may be.
The knot in the pit of your stomach when you realize
what is happening to children around the world affects
us all because it is an affront to our shared humanity.
For this reason, we should all be extremely concerned
by the significant increase of verified grave violations
against children in 2017.
Children are entitled to special protection not only
because they deserve a future, but also because they
represent our future. We know that there is nowhere
on Earth where children’s futures are more under
threat than in my own region, where children suffer
enormously from the deluge of current crises. And this
poses an existential threat to the future of the Middle
East, where 60 per cent of the population of the Arab
World is under the age of 30. Throughout our region,
the United Arab Emirates is firmly committed to the
protection of children affected by conflict, both by
providing humanitarian aid and ensuring their longterm well-being.
As Special Representative Gamba mentioned in
her briefing, the number of violations against children
around the world in 2017 was unacceptably high. In
Syria in particular, there were more abuses against
children than ever before as the unresolved conflict
endures as one of the most heartbreaking crises of our
time. Extremist and terrorist groups in our region also
continue to pose a serious threat to children. Da’esh in
Syria and Iraq and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
in Yemen, for example, kill, abduct, recruit for suicide
bombings, and sexually abuse children. They are
also responsible. for the attacks and the manufacture
of explosive devices that cause child casualties and
damage to infrastructure critical to the welfare and
safety of children. These are deliberate tactics at the
core of the modus operandi of extremists and terrorists.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

We call on the international community to hold violent
perpetrators of such atrocities to account.
Old conflicts create suffering for children equal to
that in newer ones. In the longest and most entrenched
of the crisis in our region, we are appalled by Israel’s
neglect of children in the occupied Palestinian territories
and its detention of hundreds of Palestinian children in
2017. Such actions, as well as violence against children
across the occupied Palestinian territories, will do
nothing but continue to undermine Israel’s security.
We are also concerned with violations in the regions
that surround us. In Somalia, Al-Shabaab continues to
terrorize children and their families through heinous
crimes, including public executions of children. In
Myanmar, Rohingya Muslim children continue to be
persecuted as part of ongoing violence against that very
unprotected community.
Allow me to also address the situation in Yemen,
since the United Arab Emirates is a member of the
coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, which has been
the focus of some in this discussion today. The coalition
takes its responsibility for protecting all civilians
in armed conflict — particularly children — very
seriously. The coalition has sustained efforts and will
continue to do more to minimize the impact of the
conflict on children, because we believe deeply that
every innocent child killed or injured in the conflict
is a loss too many. The coalition closely coordinates
with all United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations on the ground to ensure the protection of
children, and this will continue.
To that end, in coordination with Special
Representative Gamba, the coalition established a
dedicated child protection unit, embedded within
coalition headquarters, as a means of improving
the protection of children. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Special Representative Gamba
for her close engagement with the coalition, and
reiterate the United Arab Emirates’s deep appreciation
for her important mandate. Our continuous efforts to
strengthen the protection of children have yielded
positive results, including through the reintegration
of Yemeni children who were recruited by the Houthi
militia into their communities.
While we work to protect children in Yemen,
the Houthis continue to terrorize the population. We
condemn their complete disregard for children and
their violations of international humanitarian law.

S/PV. 8305

Among their worst offences are the despicable use of
children as child soldiers and human shields, the use of
civilian hospitals and schools for military purposes, the
indiscriminate laying of landmines, as well as missile
attacks on Saudi Arabia against its civilian population.
There is no better way to halt the tragedy of
children being unprotected in armed conflict than
preventing conflict from breaking out in the first
place. To that end, we call for better integrating child
protection and prevention efforts. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s recommendations in his report
(S/2018/465) , and call on the Security Council to
reinforce those actions.
We also call for the full implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda, with its emphasis
on conflict prevention and the meaningful participation
of women. The involvement of women in prevention
efforts will reap dividends for protecting children
in the long term. Moreover, young people and their
active participation in building peaceful and inclusive
societies is also key to protecting children and
preventing conflict. Key to that is education. To that
end, we support the focus in the United Kingdom’s
statement today on educating as part of our security and
development efforts, including achieving Sustainable
Development Goal 4.
Finally, regarding the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms for the Children and Armed Conflict
report, we support the guidelines on which the
mechanisms are based and believe they should depend
on reliable sources and independent United Nations
observers. In addition, we encourage the Special
Representative’s Office to work and consult with
concerned States to share insights and give input ahead
of drawing conclusions in order to better inform and
empower a stronger and more robust child protection
architecture, focused on prevention..
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank
Sweden, this month’s presidency, for holding this open
debate on children and armed conflict. The Maldives
congratulates the Council on today’s adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018), on children in armed conflict,
which the Maldives was pleased to co-sponsor. The
resolution provides a comprehensive framework for
mainstreaming the protection, rights, well-being and
empowerment of children affected by armed conflicts.

18-2140271/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

Children carrying automatic rifles that are taller
than them, or little girls and boys rescued from the
rubble of buildings shattered by missiles, are images
that have endured with us for so many decades. These
are images that come to mind when we think of children
and armed conflicts. There are tens of thousands of
children who are affected by or who suffer from armed
conflicts — the thousands of children who are killed
or massacred, and those who have to live with scars of
abuse in conflicts for the rest of their lives.
Open debates such as this and resolutions such as the
one that the Council adopted today will be meaningful
only if we, the Member States, are sincere in our efforts
in implementing the resolutions. Members of the
Security Council can start such an effort by reducing
the flow of weapons from their countries to conflict
zones. The Council can also forge a closer link between
the topic of children in armed conflict and other
broader topics on conflict resolution, such as sustaining
peace, or the discussions on the protection of civilians
In almost every instance, it is the supply of weapons,
both legal and illegal, that exacerbates conflicts. At the
same time, the Council has to, as a matter of urgency,
take a more holistic approach to promoting the causes
of peace. Attempts to manage crises or to respond to
developments in conflict hotspots should not define
the Council.
The Council should work with UNICEF and the
United Nations Development Programme to encourage
national Governments to take stronger actions in
promoting the key aspects of the resolution. Real
progress can be made through longer-term development
strategies. The Council must recognize the specific
needs and vulnerabilities of children in situations of
armed conflict.
No child should be trapped in any conflict or war,
for it is our responsibility to ensure their safety. We can
achieve that only if we, the international community,
work together to address the most fundamental root
causes of conflicts. We must devise our strategies to
realize the aspirations of children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me join my colleagues
in congratulating the Swedish presidency and expressing
our gratitude for its convening today’s open debate on
children and armed conflict. Let me also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
72/96

09/07/2018

Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, and the
other briefers for their reports and studies.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union earlier today.
In my national capacity, I should like to make the
following remarks.
We welcome the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2018/465),
which unveils gross violations of child rights and the dire
situation facing children in many conflict situations.
According to the report, there were at least 6,000
verified violations against children by Government
forces and more than 15,000 verified violations by the
range of non-State armed groups in 2017. Asymmetric
attacks by non-State armed groups had a particularly
severe impact on children in areas controlled by
non-State armed actors and terrorist groups.
The report also states that in situations where
Governments and armed groups have enhanced the
prevention of grave violations, important advances have
been achieved. Over 10,000 children were released and
over 12,000 children were reintegrated by UNICEF in
2017. And yet we have to see even more tangible results
on the ground. It is therefore vital that the Member
States enhance their engagement in strengthening the
child protection mechanisms.
Georgia has prioritized the protection of the rights
of children in all aspects of life by ratifying the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
optional protocols. My Government spares no effort
to assist children affected by conflicts and forced
displacement, both in Abkhazia and in the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, and to guarantee adequate living
conditions for them by extending welfare programmes
and the implementation of relevant strategy.
At the same time, we are extremely concerned that
the fundamental human rights of children continue to
be violated on a daily basis in both occupied regions of
Georgia. Since 2015, the Georgian language has been
banned as a language of instruction in the first grades
at the remaining Georgian schools in Gali district,
gradually resulting in the total restriction of education
in the native language in the Abkhazia region. In the
academic period 2015-2017, about 4,000 pupils were
deprived of the right to receive their education in their
native Georgian language. A similar process has been
initiated in the Tskhinvali region.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

To make matters worse, the children who cross the
occupation line to attend classes in Georgian schools
located in the adjacent area controlled by the Government
of Georgia fall victim to Russian occupying forces, who
inspect their schoolbags and, in cases of discovering
Georgian books inside, hold them detained for hours.
This kind of treatment, in violation of internationally
recognized norms and principles, places children under
immense psychological and emotional pressure and has
an unbearable impact on their future.
We fully realize the importance of ensuring the
protection of children in the occupied territories of
Georgia and use all the available formats to advance
both the protection of the rights of children and peaceful
conflict resolution. In this respect, the Government
of Georgia recently presented a new peace initiative,
entitled A Step to a Better Future, seeking to improve
the humanitarian, social and economic conditions of
the populations, including children and young people,
residing in the regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali.
Against this backdrop, while reaffirming our
commitment to the protection of the fundamental
rights of the child, we call for increased attention of the
international community in order to protect children’s
rights in the occupied regions of Georgia and other
conflict-affected areas around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania): At the
outset, allow me to welcome the Swedish initiative to
convene this ministerial-level open debate on children
and armed conflict under the theme “Protecting
children today prevents conflict tomorrow”. I thank
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the Executive Director of UNICEF and others
for their briefings.
United Nations reports indicate that more than
10,000 children were killed or maimed amid armed
conflicts worldwide last year, while others were raped,
forced to serve as armed soldiers or caught in attacks
on schools and hospitals. Furthermore, a total of more
than 21,000 violations of children’s rights were reported
in 2017, according to the Secretary-General’s annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2018/465).
The United Republic of Tanzania is greatly
concerned by violations of the rights and interests of
children and supports the efforts of the United Nations

S/PV. 8305

to protect children in armed conflicts. That is why
currently we have over 2,000 troops deployed in various
United Nations peacekeeping missions, including those
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan,
Lebanon, the Central Africa Republic and South Sudan.
In this regard, I would like to emphasize the following
few points.
First, to prevent children from participating in
armed conflict requires a comprehensive solution.
Efforts should be made to prevent, mitigate and resolve
conflicts by addressing root causes. The process should
be owned by the respective States. The United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations should
supplement those efforts.
Secondly, prevention-oriented training programmes
regarding the protection of children through security
sector reform should be given priority.
Thirdly, women security sector actors can make
distinct and valuable contributions to peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding efforts. They can offer
important ideas on communities and cultures and
provide the option of new preventive approaches to
dealing with the use of child soldiers.
Fourthly, increasing aid and capacity-building
to conflict-ridden countries in order to rebuild
infrastructure and health systems could be very helpful.
To conclude, let me reiterate the importance
of addressing the root causes of armed conflicts,
including poverty in some countries, which is the most
conclusive way of ending the majority of them. The
United Republic of Tanzania will continue to work
with the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations in preventing armed conflict and thereby
protect children from the effects of war. Children must
be protected.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania for staying within the
three-minute limit. He was one of the first to have done
so today, and I appreciate that very much.
I now give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this very important open debate. The
protection of children is indeed a moral imperative and
a legal obligation of all States. We thank all briefers
for their insightful statements, which have broadened
our understanding of the achievements and the

18-2140273/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

challenges we continue to face in our collective efforts
to protect children.
Conflict situations put all at great risk and children at
an even greater risk, particularly where non-State armed
groups are involved. They risk being killed, abducted
or maimed. Children are vulnerable in other ways;
they face sexual abuse, recruitment as child soldiers,
trafficking, slavery and other atrocities committed by
armed groups. This situation underscores the need for
States, the United Nations, regional organizations and
other stakeholders to take urgent measures to enhance
the protection of children affected by conflict.
Nigeria condemns, in the strongest terms, the mass
abductions of children, including those carried out
by Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham. We call for the immediate and unconditional
release of all abducted children. We demand that
parties to armed conflicts immediately cease unlawful
attacks and threats of attacks against schools, students
and teachers. To that end, we welcome the release of
the abducted Chibok and Dapchi girls and assure the
Council that our efforts will continue until all abducted
children are released.
On 29 May 2015, Nigeria was among the first
States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration in Oslo,
Norway, thereby making a strong pledge to better
protect schools by, inter alia, using and promoting the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict. We call on
Member States that have not yet done so to endorse the
Declaration. We believe that this initiative will promote
and protect the right of children to education. The
Declaration complements and strengthens our existing
national safe schools initiative, established in 2014 as
part of the response of the Government of Nigeria to
promote safe zones for learning.
The Government of Nigeria has also taken steps to
cater to victims of Boko Haram terrorism — in the form
of rape and other sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children and other grave violations — by
putting in motion several legal and social remedies.
Some of the remedies undertaken by the Government
include the diligent prosecution of more than 200
detained Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts
of law, as well as reintegration, reorientation and
rehabilitation programmes designed to meet the needs
of each victim of sexual violence.
74/96

09/07/2018

Regional and subregional organizations also have
an important role to play in addressing the plight of
children affected by armed conflict. At the subregional
level, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) has shown a strong commitment
to promoting the welfare and well-being of children
affected by conflict through its Accra Declaration on
War-Affected Children in West Africa, adopted in April
2000. The Declaration commits ECOWAS member
States to taking a broad range of measures to protect
and rehabilitate war-affected children.
The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare
of the Child is also an important tool for advancing
children’s rights. While building on the same basic
principles as the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child, the African Union children’s
Charter highlights issues of special importance in the
African context.As of January 2014, all AU member
States had signed the Charter. In that regard, we
welcome the growing cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU in protecting African children from
the impact of armed conflict.
Nigeria is firmly committed to meeting its
obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, as well as the African
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. Those
instruments have been incorporated into our laws at
both the national and sub-national levels. They include
extensive provisions against the abuse of the rights of
children, and we are determined to enforce them.
We would like to take this opportunity to commend
the work of the Security Council on the issue of children
and armed conflict, as well as to acknowledge the
importance of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism
on grave violations against children in armed conflict.
We emphasize the importance of resolutions 1998
(2011) and 2143 (2014), which, inter alia, urge all parties
to armed conflict to refrain from actions that impede
children’s access to education and encourage Member
States to consider concrete measures to deter the use of
schools by armed forces and armed non-State Groups
in contravention of applicable international laws.
In conclusion, it is within our capacity to safeguard
the vulnerable from the ravages of conflict and other
breaches of peace and security. We therefore reiterate our
commitment to continue to work assiduously to improve
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

the welfare of children in line with our obligations
under all the relevant international instruments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your friendly country’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I would also like to thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Stefan Löfven for his personal participation
in part of the Council’s work today. I also express
our appreciation for the convening of this open
debate on the subject of children and armed conflict
under the theme “Protecting children today prevents
conflicts tomorrow”.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia appreciates the
work of the United Nations and its agencies and the
important role they play to spare children the ravages
of war and the pain of the diasporas to which they are
exposed every day in different parts of the world. A
child is killed in Gaza. Another child is recruited in
Afghanistan. Yet another child is being armed in Sa’ada.
Children in Syria are being asphyxiated by toxic gases.
And many children’s rights throughout the world are
violated by various terrorist organizations.
We very much appreciate the efforts made in the
preparation of the report of the Secretary -General on
today’s topic (S/2018/465). We express our country’s
support for all actions and precautionary measures
being taken to safeguard the safety of children, put an
end to the loss of life among civilians and prevent the
destruction of infrastructure.
The Palestinian people continue to face the most
heinous kind of occupation. The children of Gaza in
particular live under an extremely unjust embargo that
has been in place for more than 10 years. We witnessed
the Israeli occupation’s defiance of the international
community and humanity itself several weeks ago
when in the course of several days it killed scores of
innocent children who were peacefully demonstrating
to express themselves and call for their rights. It is truly
painful to note that similar things are taking place at
the hands of Syrian authorities in Dar’a, which is the
cradle of the Syrian revolution. Syrian children took to
the streets in peaceful marches in that city to condemn
injustice and tyranny and call for their rights, justice
and a bright future. The regime responded with a level
of brutality that continues to this day.

S/PV. 8305

We appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, in
putting forward resolution 2427 (2018) in order to
develop an international framework to protect children
from armed conflict. We hope that the resolution will
lead to supporting the task force for protecting children
in armed conflict. However, we had hoped that the
resolution would call on United Nations bodies dealing
with this issue to ensure the accuracy of the data
and statistics they gather and not to use one-side and
unreliable information. We had also hoped that it would
call for supporting the office on children and armed
conflict and providing it with human and financial
resources to make it self-sufficient in collecting
information and avoiding unreliable sources.
The record of my country and its partners in
the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen is an
honourable one. The fact is that during the operation
to liberate Al-Hudaydah the Coalition has proved that
it is exercising a maximum degree of self-restraint and
abiding by all the relevant international conventions,
covenants and laws. The coalition also cooperated
continuously during the recent months with the United
Nations. That led to updating and upgrading the rules
of engagement and the identification of thousands
of prohibited sites, including schools, hospitals,
civilian places and other infrastructure. A unit was
establishment by the coalition to protect children
and to find and reintegrate children bearing arms
and return them through Yemeni authorities to their
families. The programmes carried out by the King
Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre have
become a model in providing children with protection
and rehabilitation. The Centre will cooperate with
the United Nations to share its experience throughout
the world.
The Houthi militias in Yemen, supported by Iran,
recruit children, force them to participate in the war and
use them as human shields. They also launch missiles
from civilian areas. All of that is a flagrant violation of
international law and humanitarian principles. We call
on the Council to condemn such acts in the strongest
terms, as well as the parties supporting the militias,
which continue to fail to implement international
resolutions. They are the same parties that export their
corrupt ideologies, destruction and discord to promote
their sectarian agendas and obscurantist thinking. They
do not take into account the well-being of children, who
are the flowers of life and should be going to school and
playing in parks and playgrounds.

18-2140275/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation congratulates the delegation of the Kingdom
of Sweden on presiding over the Security Council for
this month. I also thank His Excellency Prime Minister
Stefan Löfven for personally presiding over this
constructive and important debate. We would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, and the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Henrietta Fore, for their tireless efforts in assisting
and supporting children all over the world.
Iraq held detailed dialogues with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary -General in
the period leading up to the preparation of this report
(S/2018/465).
Iraq provided very accurate information from
specialized offices — in the Ministries of Justice,
Defence, the Interior, and Labour and Social
Affairs — in response to all of the queries that were
made during the consultations. In that regard, we would
like to clarify our position on some of the points in the
report for the period under review.
First, pertaining to the claims of airstrikes against
schools, generally speaking airstrikes were carried out
by air force jets against military targets of the terrorist
group Da’esh. The strikes were carried out using
confirmed intelligence reports in cooperation with the
coalition air forces joint command, and employing laserguided missiles inside the city to avoid hitting civilians.
Secondly, the air force command was not informed
of any strikes against civilian targets during the
liberation process.
Thirdly, with regard to military use of schools and
hospitals, units of the Ministry of Defence did not use
civilian facilities for military purposes, particularly
schools and hospitals. The units do not remain in any
given area during military operations; they continue to
move in the direction of their targets. Once a city is
liberated there is no need to use civilian facilities.
Fourthly, with regard to accountability when it
comes to children accused of association with the
terrorist group Da’esh, we deal with such children
in accordance with our 1983 Minors Act Number 76
and the amendments thereto. The law provides for
preferential treatment for minors when it comes to
76/96

09/07/2018

investigation and judicial proceedings. In that regard,
special courts for minors have been set up under the
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs.
Fifthly, the process of liberating cities occupied by
terrorist organizations at times required the presence
of military forces in some civilian facilities so that
mine action and the removal of explosive ordnance left
behind by the terrorist group Da’esh could take place,
so as to safeguard civilians from risks and threats and
allow the displaced to return.
Since the publication of last year’s report
(S/2017/821), Iraq has been continuously cooperating
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict to
address the violations against the children of Iraq during
our confrontation with terrorists, so as to rehabilitate
and integrate them into society. In accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005), our Prime Minister sent a letter
to the Special Representative in January in which he
expressed Iraq’s full readiness to cooperate with the
United Nations regional task force on monitoring and
reporting to develop a joint action plan to address any
violations or abuses related to the legal provisions on
recruiting minors, in line with the recommendations
of the Prime Minister and with the National Security
Council as the focal point for the dialogue with the
United Nations.
We must clarify to the international community
that, while there have been images in newspapers of
young men who appear to be under-aged, those have
been exceptional cases from areas subject to direct acts
of aggression by the terrorist group Da’esh. As a result,
some families and clans began defending themselves
while Iraqi armed forces were not yet present. For
example, I would point to the city of Al-Haditha,
where people resisted the terrorists and prevented them
from entering.
On 26 February, Iraq invited the Office of the
Special Representative to visit Iraq and to support
the efforts being made to treat children who were
impacted while combating terrorism. On the basis of
that invitation, a working group from the Office visited
Iraq from 5 to 8 March, during which it met with the
Minister of Labour and Social Affairs, in addition to
other meetings with representatives from the Ministries
of Foreign Affairs and Justice and the National Security
Council. On 22 October 2017, our Prime Minister
authorized the establishment of a high-level national
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

committee on monitoring and reporting with a view to
protecting the rights of children from violations. The
committee, which is chaired by the Minister of Labour
and Social Affairs, also met with the working group
of the Special Representative on 7 March, to which
it subsequently submitted recommendations. Work
and coordination are currently under way in Baghdad
between Iraq, represented by the high-level committee,
and the office of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Iraq and UNICEF with a view to developing a
mutually agreeable action plan.
Consequently, we hope that accuracy is considered
when including information in this report. Such
information should be verified, so as to avoid inaccurate
information and information gleaned from sources
hostile to Iraq. We stress that inaccurate information
contained in the reports that are issued by United
Nations bodies and committees often poses a burden
for a country defending its land and facing some of the
most ferocious terrorist groups in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the Swedish Prime Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Stefan Löfven, for having convened this important
debate on the fate of children in armed conflict under
the theme “Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow”. I should also like to thank Ms. Gamba,
Ms. Fore and Ms. Londoño for their contributions to
today’s debate. We would also like to thank the Swedish
delegation for its concept note prepared for this meeting
(S/2018/625, annex), which once again reflects Sweden’s
commitment to this noble cause.
Djibouti believes that resolution 2427 (2018),
adopted this morning and in which we were involved,
is a concrete response to the call to action launched by
the President.
The changing and complicated nature of conf lict
today means that we must constantly review and
adapt the mechanisms and strategies we use to
protect children in areas of conf lict. According to the
report of the Secretary-General under consideration
today (S/2018/465), children continue to be
disproportionately affected by armed conf lict in many
countries. Unfortunately,

S/PV. 8305

“[i]n 2017, there was a large increase in the number
of violations compared with the number reported
for 2016” (S/2018/465, para. 5).
We view that statement as an urgent call to find
solutions to this issue. Allow me to underscore
Djibouti’s commitment to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and especially to preotecting children,
who are particularly affected. I should like to undercore
four points relative to protecting children caught up in
armed conflict.
Djibouti has always supported and implemented
international instruments on protecting children. We
are proud to have ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on involvement
of children in armed conflict. In that regard, although
most countries have set 18 as the minimum age for
recruitment into the armed forces, 43 other States
have yet to do so. It is inconceivable that we can today
consider continuing to exploit the vulnerable situation
of children and target them for conscription and
recruitment into armed conflict.
Secondly, Djibouti is proud to have joined and
signed the Safe Schools Declaration and is committed
to taking advantage of the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. Respecting and protecting the right to
education in times of armed conflict is a crucial factor
in the reconstruction of a post-conflict country.
Thirdly, we must also strengthen our dialogue
with regional and subregional actors, in particular
the African Union. My delegation would also like to
recall Africa’s contribution to the fight against this
phenomenon, including the adoption, in 1996, of the
Cape Town Principles on the Prevention of Recruitment
of Children into the Armed Forces and Demobilization
and Social Reintegration of Child Soldiers in Africa.
The Cape Town Principles have been a source of
inspiration for the international community in its action
for the protection of children, in particular through the
adoption of the Paris Principles, which today constitute
a key instrument in the field of protecting children
in conflicts.
Fourthly, my country, a haven of peace that is
enjoying great political stability in a troubled region,
has always sought to provide, despite its meagre
resources and reception capacities, an adequate level of
protection for refugees and migrants, and particularly
for children. The Government of Djibouti has always

18-2140277/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

taken the necessary steps to ensure that they receive the
assistance and protection required by their situation.
In the field of education, in 2016, we committed to
providing basic education programmes that meet their
needs. In the health field, medical and hospital care
services are provided to everyone in our territory.
We are currently working with UNICEF to open
a logistics platform in Djibouti. With our support,
UNICEF will expand its operations in Djibouti
to support the various humanitarian programmes
implemented by the United Nations in more than 20
countries in Africa and Asia.
We remain concerned about the ongoing
destabilization activities in the Republic of Djibouti,
in particular through the recruitment, training and
provision of arms and equipment to approximately 100
young Djiboutians, some of them minors, in violation
of international humanitarian law. Successive reports
by the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea have
extensively documented this situation. Eritrea must
definitively cease its destabilization activities and
liberate the territory it has illegally occupied for 10
years now. To demonstrate its desire for a definitive
resolution of the border dispute between Eritrea and
Djibouti, Eritrea must agree to submit to international
arbitration. Djibouti is fully prepared to do so. The
Horn of Africa region needs and deserves peace.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of a comprehensive approach that takes due account
of the political, economic, social and legal dimensions
of child protection and emphasizes a preventive and
proactive approach.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): Venezuela congratulates Sweden on
the convening of today’s open debate, while welcoming
today’s adoption of resolution 2427 (2018). We would
also like to thank Special Representative Virginia
Gamba and UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore
for their briefings, as well as Ms. Yenny Londoño for
her testimony, and express our appreciation for their
efforts to promote and protect the rights of children
affected by armed conflict.
The concept note prepared for today’s debate
(S/2018/625, annex) begins by citing Graça Machel’s
1996 report (see A/51/306), in which she stated that
78/96

09/07/2018

the most effective way to protect children is to prevent
armed conflict. Venezuela fully concurs with this
proposition. We believe that the best strategy to protect
children from participating in and the consequences
of war is to prevent and resolve conflict situations
through a comprehensive approach to their structural
causes. It is a fact that in many cases the socioeconomic
vulnerability, ethnic and religious intolerance,
discrimination and the exclusion of children as a
result of war facilitate their participation in hostilities
and accentuate the harmful impact of armed conflict
on them.
That is why it is essential to prevent the use and
recruitment of children in armed conflict and to ensure
their protection and rights in such situations, thereby
overcoming the vicious cycle of violence. In addition,
another fundamental factor in the prevention of
armed conflicts is the cessation of all foreign military
intervention and induced wars, as well as the end of
destabilizations of entire societies for geopolitical
and economic purposes, the transfer of arms, the
financing and training of extremist and terrorist groups
and the provision of shelter to them. Accordingly, we
urge all States to act in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the provisions of international
instruments and the resolutions of both the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
It is tragic and ethically unacceptable that year after
year we continue to read in the reports on the subject
before us that serious difficulties persist in protecting
children affected by armed conflict who “continue to
be disproportionately affected by war” (S/2018/465,
para. 5), and that in many of these cases the situation
of violations of children’s rights have worsened, as
reflected in the report before the Council today by its
statement that
“[i]n 2017, there was a large increase in the number
of violations compared with the number reported
for 2016” (ibid.).
Venezuela reiterates its categorical opposition to,
and condemnation of, all violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
against children in armed conflict, and calls on all
parties to conflict to comply with their obligations
under international law. Likewise, it must be a moral
imperative for the United Nations to act consistently
when we talk about actions to protect children in armed
conflict. The practice of double standards in these areas
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

only undermines international efforts for the protection
of children.
In that regard, we call for the full application
of international justice to crimes and violations
committed against Palestinian children in the wake
of the multiple acts of aggression that the occupying
Power has imposed on their country. It is observed with
shame when some countries call for the perpetrators
of violations against children in armed conflict to be
brought to justice, yet when Palestinian children are
the subject they remain silent. It is also necessary to
continue to support disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, including the deployment
of capacities specifically dedicated to child protection,
which are being carried out in countries within the
framework of the peacebuilding architecture, as they
are a key factor in an effective and sustainable transition
from war to peace.
In conclusion, Venezuela wishes to reiterate that
the protection of children affected by situations of
armed conflict must be a fundamental premise for all
States Members of the United Nations, as well as for the
entire United Nations system, at all stages of a conflict.
Accordingly, we will continue to be committed to
providing our strong support and assistance to efforts
that, in accordance with international law, help and
protect children as an urgent ethical commitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): Within this Chamber, we
talk about the human rights of children — the right to
life, to a name, to education and to health, inter alia.
Today I want to mention another right — their right
not to know. Children have the right not to know at
first hand the horrors of war. They have the right not to
know the weight of a rifle or the sharpness of its edges
as it strikes them. They have the right not to know
fear, particularly the fear they must feel when they are
staring down the barrel of a gun aimed at them. They
have the right not to know hate, the tempestuous hate
that is assuaged only by murdering its object. Except
perhaps on the screens of their Xboxes and Nintendos,
children have the right not to know what the battlefield
looks like. It is one place where they do not belong
within the militant’s malignant embrace.
The Philippines shares the United Nations profound
desire to keep children away from armed conflict
and — should it be unavoidable that they find themselves

S/PV. 8305

in the middle of battle — to keep them safe. The depth
of our disdain for armed groups recruiting children
and using them as human shields can be measured
only by our grim determination to fight them. Such
armed groups are beneath contempt. Our country has
suffered human, social and economic costs from armed
conflicts waged by them. The suffering is multiplied
when children and youth are involved because of the
psychological cost of war, which is immeasurable, as
it is borne by the children as they grow into adulthood,
and impacts the nation’s future.
In May 2017, militants affiliated with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham took Marawi, a city in the
southern part of the Philippines. After five long months
of fighting, Government forces took back the city, but
not without huge costs in terms of the casualties that they
suffered and damage to the city. Regrettably children
recruited by the militants were hurt in the fighting.
Schools occupied by militants were taken back. The
city was destroyed, thereby confirming the irony that
sometimes a village must be destroyed in order to save
it because it cannot be left in militant hands behind an
advancing army’s back. But one could always surround
or go around a school and leave it behind.
Rebellion and armed conflict are complex issues, but
they do not defy solutions. My Government is tirelessly
seeking a resolution to those conflicts. Achieving
peace remains at the core of the Philippine President’s
agenda. The six-point peace and development agenda
aims to bring about new peace agreements, always
and consistently in compliance with human rights
and our democratic Constitution, while diametrically
opposed to the tyranny of terror and forever adamant
in enforcing the civil and human rights found in
political constitutions familiar to the civilized world. It
is designed to promote a culture of peace and conflict
sensitivity, and achieve a peace that fosters catch-up
economic development in conflict areas.
Earlier this year, the President ordered his Peace
Secretary to resume talks with the communist rebels.
They rejected it. The armed forces of the Philippines
are mandated to be a primary duty-bearer not only
of peace, but especially of the safety of children in
armed conflict. Under its regulation called “children
protection during armed conflict situations”, children
are afforded special protection in armed-conflict
situations. Those rescued or recovered, including those
apprehended for alleged association with rebel armed
groups, are handed over to the local social welfare

18-2140279/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

officer for processing and psychosocial services. Both
the armed forces and the commission for the welfare
of children work with UNICEF to end child rights
violations. For that, the Army has received scant credit,
while enemies of the State are repeatedly eulogized for
their repeatedly avowed and never-fulfilled intention to
end their recruitment of child soldiers.
Childhood should be the most cherished stage of
a person’s life. All are entitled to know the innocent
joys from which we are all compelled to graduate into
the world that adults make. We are committed to the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocols to uphold children’s rights
and welfare. That commitment is guided by the third
national action plan for children in the Philippine
plan of action for the elimination of violence against
children. Executive order 138 strengthens the children
in armed conflict programme which involves human
rights training, monitoring, reporting and responding
to violations of children’s rights in situations of armed
conflict. The militants are not bound by any of those
conventions, protocols or plans in their predation, and
their vision of society is never hospitable to the idea
that children are outside the scope of war as opposed to
one of its spoils.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the Month of July and commend the initiative to hold
this open debate on children and armed conflict. This
forum provides all Member States with the opportunity
to deliberate on the challenges facing children
affected by or involved in armed conflict and seeking
solutions on how to protect children today to prevent
conflicts tomorrow.
I thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as the Executive Director
of UNICEF, for their current report (S/2018/465),
which informs us of the grave violations committed
against children in armed conflict and reminds
us that preventing such violations is a collective
responsibility of the international community and the
primary concern of Member States. We take note of
the recommendations, and, in that regard, I reiterate
Kenya’s commitment to continue supporting their
80/96

09/07/2018

implementation aimed at strengthening the protection
of children in armed conflict.
To effectively protect the rights of the child and
prevent conflicts, we need to address the triggers
of conflict and civil strife, which include poverty,
disenfranchisement and exclusion. Under the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, we outlined
17 Sustainable Development Goals, each of which
is important and relevant to the protection and
empowerment of children. For Kenya, His Excellency
President Uhuru Kenyatta has prioritized the attainment
of food security, nutrition, universal health care,
affordable housing and manufacturing as immediate
and critical to ending poverty, access to quality health
care, education and the creation of youth employment.
We can prevent and end many of those conflicts
in our lifetime by implementing the conventions and
agreements to which we have already subscribed. Those
agreements must be accompanied by the sustained
and flexible funding and development of national
action plans with clear road maps for the acceleration,
empowerment, protection and equal opportunities of
children. Child protection therefore should be part and
parcel of any comprehensive conflict-management and
-prevention policy. We are encouraged by the cases of
released child soldiers from armed groups who have
consequently been rehabilitated and reintegrated into
society by Member States and United Nations agencies,
particularly UNICEF. We should ensure that sustained
psychological and educational reintegration help break
the cycle of violence and promote sustained peace.
In conclusion, Kenya remains committed to
supporting regional and international efforts aimed
at ending conflicts and finding sustainable peace,
especially in the Horn of Africa and the Great Lakes
region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding
over the Security Council, and thank you for convening
this important meeting.
I also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her comprehensive briefing
and continuous efforts to highlight the situation of
children in armed conflict and provide them with
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

effective protection by preparing inclusive, independent
and unbiased reports. I would like also to thank
Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF,
and Ms. Yenny Londoño, civil society representative,
for contributing to this important debate.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends for Children and
Armed Conflict.
The statistics in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/465) are causes of grief and concern.
They indicate a significant increase in the number of
violations against children in armed conflict in 2017,
despite the important progress made, as set out in the
report, in strengthening protection for children as
Governments and armed groups cooperated to prevent
those violations. In that regard, we are truly alarmed by
the ongoing violations against children in many areas
around the world, as noted by the Secretary-General
in his report. Consequently, the protection of children
and their rights is especially important, and we must
pay special attention to that matter, particularly when it
comes to incidents that are considered by the Security
Council, in our region and beyond.
The international community has a collective
responsibility to redouble its efforts and take additional
decisive measures to address the issue as an integral
part of any comprehensive strategy to prevent and
resolve conflicts and establish a sustainable peace
that ensures that children are not deprived of the
protection that is provided for them by their families,
communities and the law. In that regard, we welcome
the manual on integrating the protection of children
into peace processes.
We are pleased to announce that the State of Qatar
will participate in organizing the first international
conference on the participation of youth in peace
processes, in partnership with Finland and Columbia
and in cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, to be
held in Helsinki in December 2018.
The State of Qatar strongly believes that children
and youth hold the keys to peace and security. They are
our hope for the future. We believe in the importance of
investing in developing, protecting and educating those
two categories, especially children. We are convinced
that the right to education shall not cease to exist due
to armed conflict. The State of Qatar has therefore paid

S/PV. 8305

special attention to providing education to children in
emergency situations, especially in armed conflict.
We have established the Education Above
All Foundation and launched other initiatives and
education programmes that are being implemented and
funded by the State, in cooperation with international
organizations. Allow me to highlight the significant
achievement made by the Education Above All
Foundation, in partnership with UNICEF and over 80
global partners. We have provided quality education
to 10 million children deprived of school in over
50 countries around the world, including countries
suffering from armed conflict. That was made public
by Her Highness Sheikha Moza Bint Nasser, the
head of Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and
Community Development, during an event held in New
York last April.
The State of Qatar is committed to protecting
education in emergency situations. We were among the
first countries to join the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.
We also understand the close link between protecting
the rights of children and youth and their empowerment,
on the one hand, and preventing conflicts, on the other.
Therefore, we have paid close attention to creating job
opportunities for youth through policy development
and relief programmes that are implemented by
the State at the national, regional and international
levels. In September 2017, the State of Qatar signed a
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and Silateck, a Qatari
foundation, to enhance the employability of the youth
and build their capacity, as well as launch projects to
protect them from violent extremism.
In conclusion, we welcome resolution 2427
(2018), adopted by the Council this morning. The
State of Qatar co-sponsored the resolution because it
reflects the principles of protecting children in armed
conflict. The resolution is in line with our priorities in
that regard. We emphasize that we will also support
international efforts to achieve the goal of protecting
children. We will do our best to fulfil that goal under
any circumstance and by any means, and to create
an appropriate environment so that they can grow up
in safe and healthy conditions under which they can
develop their potential and make a peaceful, safe and
prosperous future for all the peoples of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.

18-2140281/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Al-Dobhany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like, at the outset, to congratulate Sweden for
presiding over the Security Council for this month.
We wish you, Mr. President, success as you manage
the work of the Council, and thank you for holding
this open debate on children and armed conflict on
the theme “Protecting children today prevents conflict
tomorrow”. The presence of His Excellency the Prime
Minister of Sweden shows the special attention Sweden
accords to the protection of children in particular, and
the protection of human rights in general. I also thank
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and her Office for their efforts to protect children in
armed conflict.
The topic is a priority for the Government of
my country, as we suffer from a conflict caused by
the Houthi militias that carried out a coup. We are
shouldering the responsibility of protecting our children
to spare them the impact of that armed conflict.
The delegation of my country associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of countries that have joined the
Safe Schools Declaration.
The Houthi rebel militias drove over 2 million
children to look for work as a result of waging a barbaric
war. They recruit children and lure them with money
by exploiting the deteriorating situation of Yemeni
families, paying them for fighting in their ranks. They
are even recruiting children from orphanages and youth
shelters, including over 23,000 children of whom 2,500
children were recruited since the beginning of 2018, in
contravention of international agreements and the law
on protecting children.
Those militias have denied over 4 million children
their right to education, including 1.8 million who
were denied the right to enrol in schools for the past
two years. They have bombed and destroyed 2,372
schools, either completely or partially. They have used
over 1,500 schools as prisons and military barracks.
The children of Yemen are being subjected to the worst
forms of killing, suffering and recruitment. They are
denied the right to education and health as well as their
social rights. The Houthi militias are responsible for
all of that, which shows how heinous they are, while
disregarding the rights of children and international
laws that stipulate their protection.
82/96

09/07/2018

The Government of the Republic of Yemen is fully
committed to the protection of children and ensuring
that they are not recruited into armed conflicts. We have
shown that in deeds, and not only in words, whereby the
Government took the following measures.
In November 2012, His Excellency President Abd
Rabbo Mansour Hadi issued a presidential decree that
prevented recruiting children under the age of 18 into the
army or security forces, and stated that the recruitment
of children is illegal. In May 2014, an action plan was
signed between the Yemeni Government and UNICEF
to put an end to the recruitment of children into armed
forces. We have reached an agreement with the Office
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict to create a system to register newborns and
deaths in order to be able to determine the age of those
who are joining military service. We are considering
establishing a unit in the Yemeni army that deals with
protecting children and trains forces of the army to
protect them.
The Republic of Yemen is committed to protecting
children and making sure they are spared the hell
of war. Consequently, last year we joined the Safe
Schools Declaration, which aims to protect children
and their schools in times of conflict. We also issued a
military order on 18 March 2018, signed by the Deputy
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, stressing
the commitment of the Yemeni armed forces to their
rules and regulations, which are in conformity with
international law criminalizing child recruitment.
Furthermore, the order stressed the importance of
committing to the protocol on surrendering children
detained during armed operations to civil child
protection authorities. No photos or video footages
should be taken of recruited children who have been
arrested, and all media content of this sort should
be deleted.
Last week, the Minister for Foreign Affairs sent a
letter to Ms. Gamba to initiate the discussion between
representatives of the Yemeni Government and United
Nations officials with a view to updating the 2014
action plan to prohibit the recruitment of children.
The Government repeatedly called on competent
United Nations organizations to assist the Government
in implementing the plan, including in areas under
the control of Houthi militias. Those militias have
immensely exploited and recruited children, as is
shown in the figures contained in the reports of the
Secretary-General of 2015, 2016 and 2017
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

With regard to the report of the SecretaryGeneral for 2017 (S/2018/465), allow me to make the
following observations.
The Yemeni Government agrees with the SecretaryGeneral that it is critical to prevent violations against
children affected by armed conflict. That should be a
primary concern of the international community. We
must do more to address that challenge by ensuring
that the protection of children is an integral part of
any comprehensive strategy to prevent and resolve
conflicts in order to achieve lasting peace. The Yemeni
Government stresses its legal and moral obligation
to protect the lives and future of all Yemenis without
exception. We are dedicated to protecting the present
and the future of Yemeni children. After all, they are
our future and the pillar of sustainable peace.
We appreciate the praise of the Secretary-General
for the efforts undertaken by the Government of Yemen
to improve the protection of children over the past year.
The Government of Yemen has been removed from the
list of parties that have not put in place measures during
the reporting period to that end. However, we are very
surprised to see that the legitimate Government of
Yemen and its agencies are compared to the armed
militias. The legitimate Government is seeking to
protect its people and is not recruiting children. It
cooperates with the United Nations. It complies with
international law. It is implementing Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015), as
demonstrated in the progress highlighted in the report.
The United Nations continues to rely on civil
organizations and individuals who are affiliated with
the Houthi militias as sources. Those sources are
misleading and seek by all ways and means to change
the current political crisis into a humanitarian one and
to falsify the figures and the reality on the ground in
order to place the blame on the Arab coalition and the
Yemeni Government for everything that is happening
in Yemen. The United Nations is relying on records
from the Ministry of Health and Hospitals, controlled
by Houthi militias, as sources. The Houthi militias
are falsifying those records and providing the United
Nations with false figures in order to achieve their
political goals. We have already rejected the monitoring
mechanism and called for greater transparency, and we
have stated that we are prepared to work with the Office
of Ms. Gamba to uncover the truth.

S/PV. 8305

International organizations are underrepresented
in liberated areas. They do not have enough offices
there so they rely on unreliable sources and the United
Nations continues to ignore the requests of the legitimate
Government in that regard. We underscore that there
are no children in the Yemeni armed forces and that we
are fully prepared to receive a commission of inquiry
from the Office of Ms. Gamba on the allegations
contained in the report concerning the national army of
the Republic of Yemen.
We are working to update and implement the action
plan signed in 2014. We look forward to Ms. Gamba’s
visit to Yemen, especially to the governorates of Aden
and Ma’rib, in order to assess the situation there and the
efforts undertaken by the centre for the rehabilitation
of child soldiers in Ma’rib. We also call on the Office
of Ms. Gamba to provide assistance so that we can
enhance the birth and death registration system in order
to provide better protection for children in the future.
In conclusion, we hope that the progress made and
the commitment of the Yemeni Government to protect
children will lead to the delisting of the Yemeni armed
forces from the report’s annex and also the delisting of
the Arab coalition. We welcome the cooperation with
the Office of Ms. Gamba. We fully agree with her that
we need preventive working methods to protect children
and that we must stay clear of any propaganda that does
not promote cooperation, but rather widens the gap
between the United Nations and its Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia would like to
thank the Swedish presidency for organizing the open
debate on children and armed conflict. We appreciate
the high importance that Sweden attaches to the issue,
as was exemplified by His Excellency the Prime
Minister in presiding over the Council earlier today. We
also thank the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba; the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, and the civil
society representative, Ms. Yenny Londoño, for their
insightful briefings.
We welcome and support the adoption of resolution
2427 (2018), which was drafted by Sweden, aimed at
further enhancing the protection children from violence.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) highlights

18-2140283/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

an alarming increase in the number of violations. The
report is a stark reminder of the gravity of the situation
faced by children in many conflict areas. There is a
pressing need to scale up collective efforts to ensure
that all children, whether in situations of armed
conflict or in peace, live free of violence, exploitation
and coercion.
The mandate of the Special Representative plays
an important role in helping prevent grave violations
and identifying the key challenges and complexities
in implementing effective protection mechanisms on
the ground. In that context, we welcome the efforts
of the Special Representative to establish capacity for
enhanced synergies among United Nations agencies,
international, regional and subregional organizations,
and local non-governmental entities.
Armenia continues to prioritize the protection
of children’s rights, in accordance with our national
policies and the frameworks of international cooperation
we has embraced. Armenia’s commitment to promoting
the safety of children in armed conflict is also reflected
in our endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments, as well as the
Vancouver Principles. Armenia is also a signatory to
the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, and we encourage Member States who
have not yet done so to join those important instruments.
Today’s open debate once again reminds us about
the tragic impact of conflicts on children living in
affected areas and the daily risks they face. We strongly
condemn violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, including and in
particular when they concern the rights and the lives
of children.
Effective protection of children in situations of
armed conflicts requires a strengthened commitment
to the implementation of relevant international
instruments. As a consistent supporter and promoter
of the concept and practice of prevention, Armenia
prioritizes the focus on the early action. Supporting
impartiality and independence in humanitarian action
and providing unimpeded humanitarian access is
crucial to preventing and alleviating the sufferings of
children caught in conflict.
In our region, as a result of the aggression of
Azerbaijan against the people of Nagorno Karabakh,
we have been observing deliberate, indiscriminate
targeting of civilian populations and infrastructure,
84/96

09/07/2018

including schools and hospitals, in which civilians
and schoolchildren were killed and injured. Placing
military installations in civilian settlements and using
them as launch pads for shelling along the borders is a
clear violation of international humanitarian law.
The reports of instances of appalling violations
against children are deeply alarming. No less
disturbing, however, are certain practices, whereby
children — vulnerable as they are — are deliberately
exposed to hate propaganda, which fuels ethnic hatred
and incites violence and intolerance. Such practices are
incompatible with norms and principles of international
human rights and humanitarian law and must be
identified, condemned and eradicated on every level,
without reservation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to sincerely thank Sweden for
organizing this debate on the issue of children. The
debate takes place within the context of the principles
and commitments adopted during the international
conference in Paris in February 2007 and will enable us
to pursue international mobilization in order to protect
and prevent children from being illegally recruited and
sent to battle, and will renew our determination to take
action to ensure a better life for children worldwide.
In today’s conflicts, children are unfortunately
the primary victims. They are victims when they
are directly affected or separated from their loved
ones; when their education is in jeopardy or they are
recruited into armed forces as combatants; when they
are abducted from schools, on the street or from their
homes; when they are forced into slavery or sexually
exploited. The whole world watches in anger and outrage
as children are abducted in waves as a systematic
tactic of war to terrorize, subject and humiliate entire
communities. Children kidnapped during conflicts are
thrown into violence and horror. Their abduction is
often a precursor to more intense violence used against
them. They are separated from their loved ones, robbed
of their childhood and often treated in the most savage
way. Many are used as combatants, sexual slaves,
spies, traffickers, transporters of ammunition. Some
are drugged before being sent to battle, on suicide
missions or forced to commit atrocities against their
own communities.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

While today’s debate has mobilized all stakeholders
in the international community, we must recognize
that the efforts made thus far to put an end to violence
against children and prevent their participation or
their use in armed conflicts, are insufficient. The
efforts of the international community would benefit
from a multifaceted and strategic approach that not
only addresses ongoing conflicts but also focuses on
prevention. Moreover, we need a pragmatic approach
that combines both incentives and more restrictive
measures, particularly in terms of accountability and
the fight against impunity.
Like today’s debate, calls to action are undoubtedly
useful as key tools to monitor the situation and to share
information and reports. They are essential measures
to prevent and eliminate the recruitment of children
in times of conflict. In that context, many concrete
actions will have to be envisaged in the framework of
our collective action.
First, we must advocate a two-fold preventive
approach aimed initially at preventing conflicts and,
when they do occur, at limiting their effects on children.
Second, we must prevent conflict by strengthening
democracy, good governance, sustainable development
and respect for the rule of law and human rights.
Third, we must take legal, political and institutional
measures to prevent and eliminate violence
against children.
Fourth, Governments should ratify and implement
relevant international treaties and incorporate them into
national legislation. They must endorse the Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups and the Paris Commitments
to protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by
armed forces or armed groups.
Fifth, children’s programmes should pay special
attention to those at greatest risk of being recruited into
the armed forces, particularly children separated from
their families or without families.
Sixth, effective age-determination mechanisms
must be put in place to prevent the recruitment of minors.
That requires keeping rigorous birth records — an
essential condition to eliminating the phenomenon of
child soldiers or locating their parents for reunification.
Seventh, we must guarantee access to education for
children as a special protective measure to prevent their

S/PV. 8305

recruitment, especially for children living in refugee
camps or internally displaced children.
Eight, parties to conflicts must reach written
agreements in which they commit to respect a minimum
age for recruitment into armed forces.
Ninth, the fight against impunity plays a key role
in the pursuit of child protection. Parties who recruit
children under the legal age must be prosecuted.
Crimes against children in armed conflicts should be
considered crimes against humanity because children
are the future of their respective nations and the future
of humankind.
Morocco has consistently engaged in international
efforts to end the participation of children in armed
conflicts and has acceded to all international
instruments relating to the rights of the child. It was
among the first countries to sign and ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as
well as the Paris Commitments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Allow me to commend the
Swedish presidency for organizing today’s debate, as
well as for its excellent work so far on this sensitive
issue. I also wish to congratulate all Council members
on the adoption of resolution 2427 (2018).
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add some further remarks.
The protection of children affected by armed
conflict and the safeguarding of their rights constitutes
a priority for Greece. In this vein, my country has
already ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. Moreover, Greece has also
endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Paris Commitments to protect children from unlawful
recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups,
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, as well as the Safe Schools Declaration.
At the national level, Greece is in the process of
drafting a special national action plan dedicated to the
rights of the child — a joint and inclusive endeavour

18-2140285/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

involving the participation of all relevant stakeholders.
The action plan will focus, inter alia, on the protection
of unaccompanied children.
Undoubtedly, Greece considers the protection of
the rights of conflict-affected children who seek asylum
within its national territory, whether unaccompanied or
not, as a matter of utmost priority. Special protection is
provided to foreign minors by the code for migration
and social integration. In order to provide effective
and adequate protection for all refugee and asylumseeking children, the competent national authorities
are cooperating closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as
civil society organizations.
Additionally, in the field of education, a special
office for refugee education has been set up to deal
with refugee education issues aiming at ensuring the
integration of refugee children in the Greek educational
system by providing psychosocial support following
a preparatory, transitional period. Furthermore, the
Ministry of Education has been implementing an
emergency action plan for the education of all refugee
and migrant children, regardless of their status.
Moreover, in the field of public health, the national
action plan on gender equality sets as a strategic goal the
promotion of physical and mental health of all members
of special population groups, including refugee girls.
Focusing on the protection of the rights of conflictaffected children by taking targeted action through
strategic partnerships remains a high priority for all
stakeholders, the international community, States and
civil society organizations. Such inclusive, coordinated
action at the international, regional, national and local
levels should include all stages of armed conflict in
order to achieve sustainable peace in a more effective
way. After all, by safeguarding the rights of children
in the present we invest in shaping the peaceful and
democratic citizens of the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Madam President, as well as the Swedish
presidency of the Security Council, for having convened
this important meeting on an issue that we deem of
great interest and high priority. My thanks also go to
Ms. Virginia Gamba for her valuable briefing on the
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
86/96

09/07/2018

armed conflict (S/2018/465), as well as to Ms. Henrietta
Fore and Ms. Yenny Londoño for their briefings.
More than 245 million children are living in
conflict-affected areas throughout the world. This
year’s report records the highest percentage of
violations of children’s rights since Graça Machel’s
famous study (see A/51/306). Egypt calls on the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to pursue
its positive approach, aimed at ensuring that these
reports are not merely a tool for pointing fingers at one
party or another but can truly sound a warning to the
international community about the threat posed by such
violations and promote the identification of solutions to
protect children in armed conflict areas.
We support her mandate, which will be consolidated
by means of resolution 2427 (2018), which we have just
adopted and which Egypt co-sponsored. The resolution
will complement the legal and institutional framework
of the mandate, and we trust that this will have positive
repercussions for children in areas of conflict next
year. Against this backdrop, we wish to emphasize the
following points.
First, we reiterate that the primary responsibility
for protecting civilians, particularly children, in armed
conflict lies with the Governments concerned.
Second, we will not be able to prevent conflicts,
as resolution 2427 (2018) states, unless we attack the
deep-rooted causes of their outbreak, which include
obstacles to sustainable development and the combating
against poverty. We must link conflict prevention with
cooperation with States so as to build their capacity.
Third, although we support the most recent
developments in terms of the way in which the report
of the Secretary-General is drafted, we believe that
no double standards should be used. The report refers
to positive aspects regarding children in situations of
conflict worldwide, with one exception: the children in
the Palestinian territories, whose suffering continues
as a result of killings, detention and the bombing of
schools under the yoke of Israeli occupation. We wish
to know why the perpetrators of those violations were
not included in the annex to the report. We echo the
Secretary-General in calling on the Israeli Government
to respect international principles relating to justice for
minors; to reconsider its use of administrative detention
for children and of solitary confinement for them as a
punitive measure; and to discourage the use of children
as spies. We call on the Secretary-General to continue,
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

in his next report, to follow up on such violations and
to include their perpetrators on the list annexed to the
report, not to point fingers to one party or another but
to identify solutions that will ensure the protection of
Palestinian children in the occupied territories.
Fourth, the lack of funding for rehabilitation
and reintegration programmes for children remains
a major obstacle in their protection. We therefore
support the appeal made in the resolution adopted
today to the international community, particularly
the donor community, to increase its contribution to
such programmes.
Fifth, Egypt has ratified the 2007 Optional Protocol
on prohibiting child recruitment, and amended its
Constitution to comply therewith. We pay particular
attention to child education and health and to support
their families, with the new strategy for children 20152020. We are also taking special measures to help
refugee or displaced children who have left conflict
zones and are currently on Egyptian territory so that we
can ensure them the same levels of health and education
services as their Egyptian counterparts.
Sixth, Egypt pays tribute to the regional and
sub-regional dimensions reflected in the new resolution
on children and armed conflict, especially since the
exploitation of children can be a cross-border issue.
This drew the attention of Egyptian research centres,
which have done many studies on unaccompanied
children moving across borders to flee conflicts. They
are easy prey for human traffickers and armed terrorist
groups. We are willing here to make available all of the
services of the Cairo International Centre to provide
training on conflict resolution and the maintenance
of peace at the regional and sub-regional levels and to
provide greater protection for children.
Seventh, we cannot eliminate violations
against children’s rights in conflict areas without a
comprehensive implementation of transitional justice
systems or bringing perpetrators to justice.
Eighth, the Peacebuilding Commission plays
a key role in highlighting the issue of the protection
of children in peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath
of conflict. We support the call made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to include specialized child
advisers in the various peacekeeping missions.

S/PV. 8305

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Through you, Madam
President, I should like very sincerely to thank Sweden
for having convened this very timely and salient debate.
The personal participation of His Excellency your
Prime Minister in the debate on this issue places this
issue at the highest political level, which is the level at
which we need to place such an important matter. We
are also very happy to see that a number of very highlevel officials were here this morning. We were here
this morning — not among the high officials — and
were very happy to see that the issue is being put at the
highest political level. This does not come as a surprise
to us; we still recall vividly Sweden’s first presidency of
the Security Council, which put prevention of conflict
at the heart of its work; that was the very first time
our Secretary-General participated in the work of the
Security Council. So it is only fitting that today we are
moving one step forward by putting a focus on children.
Rwanda welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018) and is very pleased to be one
of the sponsors of this important resolution, which
bolsters the mechanisms to prevent violations against
children in conflict situations.
I should like also at this point to thank very much
this morning’s briefers, in particular the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba, as well as the
survivor — I will call her a survivor — Ms. Londoño,
who really shared with us her testimony this morning.
The impact of armed conflicts on children is
catastrophic; we cannot overemphasize this. They have
serious consequences for children’s development, both
in terms of physical scars and of the invisible ones that
can be perceived only in children’s learning and their
emotional and social development.
Nearly 250 million children live in countries
affected by violent conflicts. In the relatively recent
past, Rwanda was a country in conflict, and the
perspective I would like to offer the Council today is
based on the fact that when we were in conflict and
experiencing the genocide of 24 years ago, children
were not spared on the sides of either the killers or the
victims. If it is any inspiration, what I can say is that
a large part of what we are still dealing with today is
related to the trauma experienced by today’s young
adults, who were children then. The consequences are

18-2140287/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

far-reaching and last a very long time. Simply based on
our experience, therefore, I can say that it is not only
absolutely essential to protect children today in order
to enable a country’s rapid and inclusive development,
but also to enable it to be resilient and get back on its
feet as soon as possible. That is what we can share from
our own experience.
My delegation is very concerned about the increase
today in the documented cases of verified violations
of children by both Government forces and non-State
armed groups in conflict. What is even more worrying is
that those are just the documented cases, and the extent
of the undocumented cases is essentially unknown to
any of us. Our efforts to ensure that the international
community provides the tools necessary to address
violations with the greatest possible focus, break the
cycles of violence and address the root causes of armed
conflict, while preventing new armed conflicts from
breaking out, should be our collective focus.
Even if it is stating the obvious, the rights of
children must be respected and protected, regardless of
the context or circumstances, and even when they are
in very poor, vulnerable or disadvantaged conditions.
The fact is that the only side that children belong on in
any armed conflict is the side of the victims. Whether
they are combatants or direct victims of a conflict,
they are still victims. We would like to propose some
recommendations by Rwanda. Many of those here will
already have heard many of them today.
First of all, we really have to focus on prevention,
with preventive tools and strategies for protecting
children at risk of being affected by armed conflict.
Secondly, we must put in place the means for
strengthening accountability. Thirdly, we need to
ensure that the protection of children is included as a
separate part of every peace process and negotiations
on peace agreements. And fourthly, we must support
Member States and the various parties to a conflict
by providing them with the tools to help them protect
children. Lastly, we must ensure that our reintegration
efforts are very specific — specific to girls, for example,
and to children in particular circumstances.
Rwanda believes that it is crucial to strengthen the
links between the protection of children, the rights of the
child and conflict prevention. The importance of access
to education and health care cannot be overemphasized.
I would like to echo the brilliant words of the Prime
Minister of Sweden this morning when he said that this
88/96

09/07/2018

is simple. It is about providing security, safety, health
care, education and food — just putting food on the
table. It is as simple as that. This is not about a very
sophisticated mechanism. More importantly, those are
our obligations. They are not optional. We may have
optional protocols, but our obligations to our children
are not optional. We urge the members of the Security
Council to consider consulting with child protection
experts in order to ensure that adequate capacity
is provided in order to meet the mandates of peace
operations with regard to children and their needs.
I should not conclude without recalling
Ms. Londoño’s powerful remarks this morning, which
showed that all children, including former combatants,
have the power to become agents of change if they are
just given the chance and a platform. Children are more
resilient and more likely to become positive agents for
change if we give them that chance and platform. The
case of Ms. Londoño speaks for itself.
Today the importance of collecting best practices
has also been mentioned, and I would like to share with
the Council one that we in Rwanda provide today and
the platform that we use. Every year in Rwanda we hold
a Children’s Summit, organized by children and held in
our national Parliament. All the recommendations that
emerge from the summit integrate the children’s needs,
priorities and demands. As a Government, we are
accountable for following up and implementing those
recommendations. If that might be of use for others’
consideration, I would be happy to elaborate further on
our annual Children’s Summit.
Lastly, I would again like to echo something
discussed by many speakers today, which is that if we
do not protect and provide children living in conflict
situations with what they need, we will have to deal
with the adults that they will become on the battlefield.
To cite the words of one of our colleagues this morning,
the representative of the United States, if we do not deal
with those children, we will have to deal with the adults
that they will become.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Rwanda’s
commitment to ensuring that the rights of all children
are respected and protected, regardless of the context or
circumstance. Rwanda is a signatory to the Convention
of the Rights of the Child and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

S/PV. 8305

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.

of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, and we call for its universal ratification.

Ms. Andújar (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): The Dominican Republic associates itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of the countries endorsing the Safe
Schools Declaration.

It is imperative to strengthen respect for
international humanitarian law, which provides the
basis for legally binding obligations for all the parties
in conflicts, in addition to continuing to adopt measures
and taking on greater commitments, principally with
the action plans, to protect children from conflict
and contribute to more effective conflict prevention.
We therefore take this opportunity to call for an end
to impunity for those who perpetrate violations of the
rights of children in conflict.

We would like to congratulate Sweden on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council and for
organizing today’s open debate on children in armed
conflict, with the theme of “Protecting children today
prevents conflicts tomorrow”.
Our thanks also go to Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children in
Armed Conflict, and to Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for sharing with us their important
perspectives. Likewise, we thank Ms. Yenny Londoño,
representative of civil society, whose experience
reminds us of our responsibility and the urgency with
which we must act.
We are concerned about the high levels of
violations against children affected by conflict, about
armed groups recruiting children to serve as suicide
terrorists and about alarming rates of kidnapping
of and sexual violence against children. Children
continue to be stigmatized for having been recruited
and used by armed groups, and they are criminalized
for acts they were forced to commit. That results in a
traumatized generation whose childhood has been cut
short and whose future is in jeopardy. It is essential to
ensure justice, protection and full enjoyment of human
rights, putting greater focus on the most vulnerable
children — those in armed conflict — as a means to
prevent conflict and build peace.
Schools, students and teachers are deliberately
targeted in attacks, demonstrating that this is not only
a crisis of security but also of human rights and social
development. Children’s education is always one of
the first casualties during conflict and too often the
last to be recovered. Due to the seriousness of the
situation, the Dominican Republic has endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, and we encourage other
States to endorse those non-legally binding documents.
Furthermore, in 2014 the Dominican Republic ratified
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights

The protection, reintegration and support of children
who have been recruited by armed groups — including
through greater investment in programs for education,
training, counselling and family reunification — is
key in breaking the cycle of violence and directing us
towards the goal that unites us today in this debate.
We believe that it is vital to guarantee the active and
meaningful participation of children and young people
in the processes of building and maintaining peace and
security. Furthermore, we recognize the fundamental
role played by United Nations agencies and by regional
and subregional organizations in addressing the
consequences suffered by children in armed conflicts.
We believe that this problem must continue to be part of
the policies and programmes of peacekeeping missions
in the field.
We still have a way to go in eliminating the abuse
and horrors that children in conflict face. We therefore
reiterate our commitment to continue collaborating with
the United Nations, Member States and civil society
while we occupy our seat in the Security Council as
a non-permanent member beginning in 2019, giving
this agenda and our children the level of priority that
they deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Mr. Brown (Liberia): My delegation thanks you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict; welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/465) and thanks the other
speakers and contributors for their valuable insights.
We have joined other members in support of
strengthening the children and armed conflict agenda
through co-sponsoring resolution 2427 (2018), because

18-2140289/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

Liberia believes in the connection between conflict
prevention and the protection of children.
Earlier this morning, at the opening of a highlevel political forum on sustainable development at
the Economic and Social Council, Professor Jeffrey
Sachs rightly reminded us that the children are our
future — there can be no future without them. And
yet, as we debate today, the uncomfortable truth about
our future looms over this Chamber: children are still
being used as weapons and soldiers of wars. Their
future — our future — is being blighted. The innocence
of their childhood is being stolen and the process of
their growth is perhaps forever violated. We agree
with the Secretary-General that this is unacceptable.
We acknowledge the reported progress in a number
of countries, but the general trend continues to pose a
threat to our collective future. Too many of the world’s
children, by no fault of their own, are being left too
far behind.
Twenty years ago, the report prepared by Graça
Machel on the impact of armed conflict on children
concluded that “the most effective way to protect
children is to prevent the outbreak of armed conflicts”
(A/51/306, para. 253). This conclusion is as true
today as it was then. As we work to promote the new
paradigm of preventing conflict and sustaining peace,
it is also imperative that the Security Council and all
Member States commit to working creatively, selflessly
and aggressively to ensure the protection of children
suffering as a result of current armed conflicts. They
are, in truth, innocent victims of our inability to act.
What is also true is that the most vulnerable to
conscription are poor children, especially those who
have little or no access to education, as they have
a greater chance of being conscripted for service
in armed forces. Hence it is important to elevate the
interlinks between child protection, the rights of the
child and conflict prevention in our national action
plans to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
When we claim protection for the rights of
children, we must do so with the provision of conducive
environments to learn and grow. Important as they are,
conducive environments are more than school buildings,
desks and chairs. They are also about the families
and societies in which they live. Do they possess the
means and systems to live in peace with each other,
sustainably? We have repeatedly seen that where they
do not, school buildings, rather than being centres for
90/96

09/07/2018

moulding minds, are converted into military barracks,
dedicated to fashioning our children into instruments
of war.
Liberia welcomes and supports the children and
armed conflict agenda, not only as a tool to ensure
that children are protected and perpetrators held
accountable, but also as a moral imperative — as if
we needed one — to act with singularity of purpose
and unwavering determination, including here in this
Chamber, to decidedly end the ongoing conflicts. It is
all too obvious: where conflict exists, poor children and
their families will remain at high risk of having their
lives — and our future — ruined, perhaps forever. It is
also true that we must act with equal commitment and
decisiveness to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
Accordingly, where State institutions have clearly
collapsed under the weight of ongoing armed conflict,
perhaps it is time to extend the duty to protect and the
duty to actually end ongoing conflicts to the regions
where conflicts are taking place, as well as to other,
external actors who have vested interests in the
continuation of the conflicts. It is time we truly held
each other duly accountable for ending conflicts as well
as preventing them.
Liberia knows a thing or two about child soldiers.
We commend the work of Special Representative
Gamba and UNICEF in this regard, as well as the work
of many local local actors, including non-governmental
organizations and faith-based groups. Despite having
little or no means, they gave willingly of themselves
and their organizations to advance, in whatever way
they could, not only the process of reintegration but
also disarmament and demobilization.
However, it is also true that these institutions — both
local and international — lack the necessary funding
and donor support for the proper reintegration of
children recruited as soldiers, many of whom have
been exposed to the worst forms of inhumanity and
drugs. And yet, rather than being treated as victims,
they are treated as drags on the society,:ostracized and
vilified, sometimes by their own families and certainly
by their communities.
Even as we have urged them to move along in their
own development, in the case of the few who make
it through the reintegration programme — which in
Liberia consists of three months of skills training and
three years of formal education, regardless of the child’s
starting level — there is no post-process follow up. If we
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

talk about pulling yourself up by the bootstraps — these
children, deprived of their innocence and having their
mentality defiled, they have no boots, let alone straps.
Although the reintegration process is essential,
it is the least supported of efforts to return countries
to peace, despite the fact that — again, in the case of
Liberia — there is an overwhelming eagerness among
child soldiers to be disarmed. Therefore, a sizeable
element of a post-conflict country’s future — its
energetic youth — lies in waste in the streets of cities,
destined for a life of drugs and crime and doomed to a
fate via a path they did not help to create and as such
await the next opportunity to become killing machines.
Having spent the formative years of their lives living by
the gun and in disregard of democratic rules and norms
of society, many of these child combatants are ignorant
of the experience and values of living under peaceful
conditions. We throw them a bucket, a cutlass and
maybe $75 and ask them to reintegrate. We ask them
to forget their past — the only thing they really know.
Of course we can do better than this; we can
support sustained reintegration processes because these
stand among the best guarantees to prevent conflict
and sustain peace. We may not be able to change what
happened to our children in the past, but we can more
meaningfully affect what could happen for them in the
future — our future.
As I conclude, permit me to emphasize that, while
reintegration is a good process to help former child
soldiers regain a sense of normality, our primary
objective should first focus on innovative ways to
mitigate the recruitment of children in armed conflicts.
This should be our social and moral responsibility. We
cannot afford to castigate or isolate them. They are not
to be blamed for their circumstances; they must be seen
as innocent victims standing in need of our support.
UNICEF should be applauded for its initiatives, in
close collaboration with Governments and communities,
to protect and rehabilitate children affected by armed
conflict. We should endeavour to ensure that the
conventions and treaties governing children’s rights are
fully upheld and implemented.
Finally, there are no short cuts to rehabilitation
and reintegration, nor can we afford to invent any.
Rehabilitation and reintegration require long-term
strategies. They require resources that the most affected
and needful countries sadly do not have and cannot
afford to be without in consolidating the foundations of

S/PV. 8305

and sustaining their peace. For post-conflict countries,
rehabilitation and reintegration are an important way
to sustain peace and avoid the slippery slope back into
conflict. When we give each other a chance to be better,
and when we give children a better chance at a better
life, we do not necessarily help the other person — we
actually help ourselves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, for the report before us
(S/2018/465). I would also like to thank the Swedish
presidency for convening such a timely debate and
initiating resolution 2427 (2018) on the protection
of children in conflict zones, which was adopted
today. We are honoured to be a co-sponsor of this
important resolution.
The ever-changing nature of armed conflicts in
today’s increasingly complex world poses a serious
challenge to the international community in protecting
the most defenceless civilian victims — children.
As the future of every society, children need to be
protected, nourished, educated and assured of their
fundamental rights. However, today nearly 250 million
children are affected by armed conflicts globally. The
impact of terrorism and violent extremism on children
is devastating. It robs them of their childhood and
such basic rights as good health and education, and
inflicts lasting trauma that hinders their psychological
development. Above all, it undermines their ability
to lead peaceful and dignified lives and the chance to
prosper and realize their aspirations.
Afghanistan has faced externally imposed
conflict for four decades and our people, including our
innocent children, have suffered tremendously from the
resulting violence over this period of time. Tragically,
in the context of our security challenge, children are
among the scores of innocent victims whose precious
lives are taken away by terrorist and extremist groups
imposed on us from abroad to prevent our stability and
development. As a result of this, in the past year alone
3,179 children have been reported killed or maimed
in Afghanistan.
Moreover, in what amounts to one of the gravest
forms of abuse and violation, children have been
recruited and brainwashed in religious schools in our

18-2140291/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

region to carry out suicide attacks in their teenage or
adult lives. This must be addressed on an urgent basis.
The Afghan Government stands firm in its strong
commitment to safeguarding and advancing the rights
of all children. To that end, we have taken tangible
measures, such as the enactment of national legislation
by which we are implementing commitments under
various international instruments, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. The Government is also implementing various
measures and programmes, in line with our national
and international commitments, aimed at protecting
our children from the horrific effects of armed conflict.
Furthermore, we are dedicated to strengthening
our concerted efforts with the international
community to further the implementation of the joint
action plan, a comprehensive framework aimed at
ensuring the physical and psychological well-being of
Afghan children.
In the past year alone, through the joint action plan
we have taken great strides towards preventing the
recruitment of child soldiers and speedily reintegrating
delinquent juveniles into Afghan society through
vocational training programmes. To preserve these
gains, we will continue to enforce the new penal code
that criminalizes the sexual abuse of children, regulate
juvenile rehabilitation centres, expand the presence of
child protection units in the Afghan National Police
recruitment centres, and continue our campaign to
promote children’s rights within the Afghan National
Police. We have had high-level meetings with the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and other
partners, which have led to increased coordination of
our joint efforts to ensure safe, dignified and prosperous
lives for Afghan children.
For Afghanistan, the protection of children and the
advancement of their rights remain a central focus in
the work of the National Unity Government. We are
working to build on and consolidate recent progress in
the knowledge that children will provide a stable and
prosperous future for our country. We believe that the
rights of children can best be protected and promoted in
an atmosphere of peace.
To meet this end, we have taken new measures aimed
at achieving a lasting settlement to the current conflict
imposed on our country. The three-day ceasefire with
92/96

09/07/2018

the Taliban enforced last month offered a glimmer of
hope that peace is possible. We are working with regional
and international partners for a successful outcome to
our peace efforts and hope that the coming months will
witness more tangible progress on this front. It is our
sincere hope that, this time around, we can achieve a
sustainable peace for our future generations and create
a society where our children can live in peace, free of
fear and violence.
In conclusion, Afghanistan reiterates its firm
commitment to ensuring the full protection and wellbeing of all children worldwide. It is only through our
shared values and objectives that we can alleviate the
suffering of children and build sustainable, peaceful
societies. Let us strive to collectively achieve more
tangible progress on this moral imperative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mikayilli (Azerbaijan): We would like to thank
the Swedish presidency for convening this open debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2018/465), as well as Ms. Virginia Gamba and
the other briefers for their valuable contributions.
Azerbaijan reiterates its strong support for
the children and armed conflict agenda and views
the adoption of resolution 2427 (2018) as the
Council’s continued commitment to the cause of
protecting children.
As the Secretary-General’s report states, in 2017
there was a large increase in the number of violations
compared with the number reported for 2016. We
are deeply alarmed by the extent and gravity of the
violations committed against children in armed conflict,
particularly killing and maiming, recruitment, sexual
violence and attacks on schools and hospitals. The
prevailing disrespect for international humanitarian
law, increasing involvement of non-State armed groups
and the rise of violent extremism bring more misery to
children. The use of the internet and social media to
recruit children is highly disturbing.
We strongly condemn all violations committed
against children in situations of armed conflict. All
parties should comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law to
protect children. Resolute steps should be taken to
address accountability and put an end to impunity for
such violations. Since this problem is multidimensional,
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

greater emphasis should also be placed on the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children formerly
associated with armed forces or armed groups. We share
the Secretary-General’s assessment that predictable
and sustained funding for the reintegration of children
affected by armed conflict is essential to put in place
viable alternatives to military life and prevent their
re-recruitment.
As the groundbreaking report of Graça Machel
underlined, “the most effective way to protect children
is to prevent the outbreak of armed conflicts” (A/51/306,
para. 253). The international community should
therefore redouble its efforts in relation to conflict
prevention and conflict resolution to save children from
the horrors of war.
Regrettably, Azerbaijan is no stranger to this
problem, owing to the continued aggression by Armenia.
Azerbaijan continues to suffer from having one of the
highest numbers of refugees and displaced persons in
the world, many of whom are children. Despite the
formal ceasefire, direct and deliberate attacks by the
armed forces of Armenia against civilians and civilian
objects in Azerbaijan continue. The assessment report
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, following its mission to the affected areas
of Azerbaijan in May 2016, made it abundantly clear
that, due to the use of new and heavier types of military
hardware and intense fighting during the escalation in
April 2016, many schools were damaged and closed
in the areas near the front line in several districts
of Azerbaijan.
To conclude, although the vast majority of atrocities
against children worldwide are attributed to non-State
armed groups, the wrongs of the recent past and the
targeting of civilians in ongoing inter-State conflicts
must not be neglected. Therefore, we once again
reiterate our call on the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
pay attention to the plight of children in all situations
of armed conflict.
We also call on the Special Representative to give
due attention to the protection of internally displaced
children in her work, as internally displaced persons
represent two-thirds of those displaced worldwide.
Furthermore, in line with the provisions of the very
important resolution on the release of women and
children taken hostage, including those subsequently
imprisoned, in armed conflicts, adopted by the

S/PV. 8305

Commission on the Status of Women in March, we
invite the Special Representative to address this
complex issue as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.
Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): It is my honour,
on behalf of the Haitian delegation, to congratulate the
Permanent Mission of Sweden to the United Nations on
having undertaken the initiative to convene this very
timely open debate on strengthening the protection of
children affected by armed conflict.
More than 20 years ago, Graça Machel denounced
in her famous report (see A/51/306) the “moral
vacuum”, a space devoid of the most basic human
values in which children are slaughtered, raped and
maimed, exploited as soldiers, starved and exposed
to extreme brutality as a result of the deliberate and
conscious decisions of adults. Here in this Chamber
last year, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
strongly denounced the alarming level of unacceptable
suffering endured throughout the world by children in
conflict (see S/PV.8082). Children become both the
victims and the perpetrators of violence. This is one
of the most alarming trends in the dynamics of these
armed conflicts, a tragic consequence of which is to
strips away layers of protection afforded by families,
society and law, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/465) rightly notes.
Of course, we welcome the modicum of progress
that has been made. The case of the sisterly Republic
of Colombia is a striking example. The efforts of
Governments, United Nations agencies and civil society
institutions cannot be ignored in circumstances that are
often extremely difficult. Nevertheless, it is clear that,
for the most part, the spiral of horror persisted in 2017
and continues to do so, often with full impunity. At a
fundamental level, nothing has really changed since.
Be it in Syria or Yemen, South Sudan or the
Central African Republic, Afghanistan or Myanmar,
images of destroyed villages, civilian populations
caught in the crossfire, bombed schools and hospitals
and wounded or dead children lying under the rubble.
Such images remind us daily of the bitter truth that
war — whether internal, civil, ethnic, interreligious,
local or regional — violates all children’s rights.
The impact of armed conflict on children must be
everyone’s concern and everyone’s responsibility. We

18-2140293/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

must therefore make the protection of children affected
by armed conflict a genuine priority. That demands that
all actors of the international community redouble their
efforts to translate into real change for those children
the good intentions and commitments made in the
myriad treaties and resolutions adopted over the past
few decades.
Everyone agrees that the issue is a pressing one.
Whether victims of war, children of economic migrants,
displaced persons or refugees fleeing conflict zones,
the tragic plight of children affected by conflict
challenges our universal conscience. It is now time for
action. It is up to us to ensure that child protection is
not merely a slogan, but that it becomes the necessary
and indispensable axis of strategies for establishing,
consolidating and sustaining the peace championed by
the United Nations.
May today’s public debate revive the enthusiasm
of the Security Council so that it can fully play its
irreplaceable role in peacekeeping and sustaining peace,
overcome the challenges that too often paralyse its
efforts to help children affected by armed conflict, take
timely preventive action to protect them from violence
and the atrocities of war, and enforce the legal norms
ensuring their rights to life, to grow up in the midst of
their families and communities, to health, to personality
development, and to be loved and protectedn.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): As is evident from the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465), despite
persistent efforts over the past two decades, the
rights of millions of children continue to be violated
in situations of armed conflict in various parts of the
world. Some progress has been made through greater
engagement among the United Nations agencies and
the Governments concerned, as well as through the
integration of children’s rights issues in mediation
processes. However, much more remains to be done,
especially in keeping up with the changing nature
of armed conflicts that involve a range of non-State
actors. Terrorist entities, including those designated
by the Security Council, continue to exploit children
as part of their terrorist activities with impunity. The
reintegration of children into society after their release
and following mediation processes remains an area that
needs more focus.
94/96

09/07/2018

Through its active participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, India continues to contribute
to the implementation of the Security Council mandate
on this subject. Based on our experience as one of the
largest troop-contributing countries, India remains
concerned about the lack of resources to implement the
provisions of the mandate, including the deployment of
more child protection advisers, and to comprehensively
address the connection between conflict prevention
and the protection of children.
In spite of the clear mandate provided under
resolution 1379 (2001), we are disappointed that the
report of the Secretary-General includes situations
that do not meet the definitions of armed conflict or
of threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security. We would like to point out such distraction
from situations under the mandate of the Security
Council needs to be rectified and the mandate strictly
adhered to.
While this is an important thematic debate, there
has been yet another attempt by a delegation to misuse
this forum by referring to situations that are extraneous
to the discussion. It referred to a so-called report
about the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir — a
document reflecting the clear bias of an official who
was acting without any mandate whatsoever and relied
on unverified sources of information. It is a document
that was not even found fit to be considered by the
membership of the forum where it was submitted.
Such deliberate, self-serving attempts by Pakistan
seek to obfuscate the reality of its own use of terror
organizations to undermine State sovereignty. They
also distract from our discussions of the issues at hand.
Such attempts have not succeeded in the past in any
forum and will not do so now.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s strong support
for the endeavours of the United Nations to protect
children in situation of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): First, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July and thank
you for your initiative to convene today’s debate on the
plight of children in armed conflict. I would also like to
welcome Ms. Virginia Gamba and express our respect
and gratitude for her commitment and dedication to
18-21402

09/07/2018

Children and armed conflict

the cause of the world’s children. Lastly, I would like
to thank His Excellency Secretary-General António
Guterres; Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of
UNICEF, and all those who spoke before me for their
very edifying statements.
The issue of child soldiers is one of the concerns
of our Government, which, at the initiative of the Head
of State, has decided to ban the recruitment and use of
children in our armed forces and security services. To
translate that political will into action, the Head of State
has established an entity to combat sexual violence and
the recruitment and use of children.
We should recall all the legislative and regulatory
measures taken to strengthen the fight against the
recruitment of children, with a view to providing a
better response to the phenomenon and to achieving
de-listing. Such measures include various decrees,
orders and laws pertaining to, first, the demobilization
and reintegration of vulnerable groups existing in
the combatant forces; secondly, the establishment of
the Interministerial Committee for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration; thirdly, the
establishment of the European Union’s national
programme on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; and fourthly, the protection of children.
On 4 October 2012 came the signature of the national
action plan to end the recruitment and the use of
children in armed conflict and other grave violations
of children’s rights perpetrated by the security services
and the Forces Armées de la République Démocratique
du Congo (FARDC).
Undeniable progress has been made in my country’s
fight to end the recruitment and use of children in the
army and intelligence services. Thanks to operational
standards that strengthen the verification of identity,
between July 2015 and May 2016 it was possible to
separate 453 children from among the FARDC recruits,
330 of whom have been reunited with their families. The
123 children separated from the Kamina military have
been reunited with their families in the former Kasaï
provinces, via the city of Lubumbashi, with logistical
support from the Congolese Government and its
partners — UNICEF and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. The use of formal and compulsory
banking services strengthens such measures. In addition,
intensive specialized rehabilitation programmes have
been established and buildings constructed with the
assistance of the National Institute for Professional

S/PV. 8305

Training, with funding from the Government and with
Japanese cooperation.
Since de-listing, FARDC has set itself the goal of
zero children within its ranks. During recruitment,
before recruits are sent to the training centre. they
are checked to remove any minors. FARDC works in
synergy with protection agencies, UNICEF and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
As part of this fight, during the first quarter of 2018,
some activities were conducted with the assistance
of child protection partners. A total of 1,500 exit
certificates were issued by the European Union’s
national programme for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and delivered to UNICEF
for distribution to its implementation partners. Eight
hundred children associated with armed forces or
groups have left those groups and are being reintegrated
by five UNICEF-funded child protection partners — 70
by ACOPE, 308 by the Association des Jeunes pour le
Développement Communautaire, 150 by the Concert
d’actions pour jeunes et enfants défavorisés, 125 by
leProgramme d’Appui à la lutte contre la Misère and
147 by the Union pour la paix et la promotion des droits
de l’enfant au Congo.
Three training workshops on operational standards
for child age assessment have been held this year, in
Kisangani from 13 to 20 February, in Kitona from
26 to 30 March and in Kinshasa from 21 to 23 March.
They were organized for FARDC officers, provincial
police officers and members of the security forces,
as well as child protection agencies and the Réseau
Communautaire de Protection de l’Enfant.
Such activities, conducted with logistical support
from MONUSCO, have also made it possible to
strengthen the capacities of those involved in protection
with regard to various humanitarian rights issues in time
of conflict, gender issues, the responsibility of a troop
commander, and techniques for protecting children,
schools and hospitals. They have bolstered measures
to verify the age of FARDC recruits by the Ministry
of National Defence and Veterans Reintegration,
supported by child protection partners, before recruits
enter training centres. Out of 2,850 verified recruits,
70 children have been separated and returned to
their communities.
The coordination of actions and activities to foster
the DDR of children is done through monthly meetings

18-2140295/96

S/PV.8305

Children and armed conflict

that bring together the local offices of the European
Union’s national DDR programme and child protection
actors at several levels — at the central level, with
UNICEF and partners such as the Réseau des Jeunes
et Enfants de la Rue and Save the Children, and the
children’s DDR focal point; at the ministerial level,
with the Joint Technical Working Group; and at local
level, with the Child Protection Working Group.
Raising funds for this important component of
traditional DDR — DDR children — is vital because
a total of 5,331 children under the age of 18 associated
with armed forces or groups have already been reunited
with their families and are awaiting reintegration into
school or training for work. As long as armed groups
remain active, the situation will continue. That is why
my Government remains determined to continue its
efforts to completely neutralize them and put an end to
the phenomenon.
I cannot conclude without expressing my country’s
gratitude to the United Nations and to several
international partners who continue to support our
efforts in the struggle to end the recruitment and use
of children.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Ali (Pakistan): I take the floor to respond to
the statement made by the representative of India.
Much though some may believe it, repeating
groundless accusations and fabrications do not lend
them credibility. At best, they may satisfy a selfdelusional notion of reality, but a farce can go only so
far. It is unfortunate that the statement made by the
representative of India is emblematic of the malaise that
the Indian State practises as a virtue. India cannot hide
behind false accusations and divert the attention of this
body from the real issue. The human rights violations
and atrocities committed by the Indian occupying

96/96

09/07/2018

forces against innocent Kashmiri men, women and
children are well documented.
The recent report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
completely exposed the real face of India and the
human rights abuses it has been committing in the
occupied territory of Jammu and Kashmir. The report
is a scathing indictment of human rights abuses and
the illegal Indian occupation of Jammu and Kashmir.
India’s brutal occupation of Kashmir has killed more
than 100,000 innocent Kashmiris. Today that campaign
of brutality continues, including the shooting and
blinding of innocent Kashmiri children with pellet
guns. Yet, every day, those Kashmiri children, women
and young people come out on the streets to demand
that India get out occupied Kashmir. We ask that the
Security Council act as the world’s conscience to
ensure that no child is ever blinded again, that no child
is tortured and raped again, that no child is pushed to
the ground or killed.
Pakistan welcomes the proposal by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to establish a
commission of inquiry to conduct an international
investigation into human rights violations in Indianoccupied Jammu and Kashmir. That proposal is
consistent with Pakistan’s many calls to that effect since
2016, even as India has continued to ignore legitimate
demands for the probe and carry out systematic
violations, including the use of pellet guns, excessive
use of force, arbitrary arrests and detentions, including
of children, and continued sexual violence, under the
overall impunity enjoyed by the Indian security forces.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list. Before we adjourn, I wish to thank
the secretariat and interpreters for their hard work and
patience during a long day.
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

18-21402
