S/2011/297

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2011
English
Original: French

Letter dated 11 May 2011 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) and to Security Council resolution 1968 (2011) extending up to three
months the Council’s authorization to temporarily deploy from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to UNOCI, three infantry companies, one aviation unit
comprised of two military utility helicopters and three armed helicopters with crews,
pursuant to the inter-mission cooperation arrangements provided for in paragraphs 4
to 6 of Security Council resolution 1609 (2005) and paragraph 6 of resolution 1938
(2010).
As you know, the security situation in Côte d’Ivoire remains very unstable as a
result of the post-election crisis. There is always a risk that the conflict will flare up
again, particularly in the western part of the country where the situation is extremely
tenuous. The national security and rule of law institutions have disintegrated. Efforts
to reconstitute the police and the gendarmerie will take time. The Republican Forces
of Côte d’Ivoire, which assumed responsibility for restoring security, remain a
motley bunch. The number of armed groups has multiplied further to the distribution
of weapons to the Young Patriots and student groups loyal to the former President
Gbagbo. Large numbers of weapons are still circulating in the communities,
including some in the hands of civilians. The 2,500 members of the Republican
Guard mixed in with the civilian population also constitute a major threat. Some are
armed, including with heavy weapons that could easily be installed on vehicles.
The Government has identified the stabilization of the security situation,
particularly in Abidjan and in the western part of the country, as an immediate
priority and has requested assistance from UNOCI to that end. While the
pro-Gbagbo militias and mercenaries have been dislodged from their main base in
Abidjan, some of them are still in the area. The rest have fled to the west, where the
security risks were already high owing to tensions over ethnic identity and land
ownership, which have been aggravated by the post-election fighting.
In view of the foregoing, an extension of the cooperation arrangements
between UNMIL and UNOCI will give UNOCI the mobility and deterrent capability
it needs in order to provide assistance to the national authorities in responding to the
immediate security challenges on the ground and further consolidating security in
the country, including in Abidjan and in the west. To that end, I wish to propose that
the Security Council authorize another extension, until 31 July 2011, of the
aforementioned inter-mission cooperation arrangements, subject to the extension of

11-33460 (E) 120511 120511

*1133460*

S/2011/297

the mandate of UNOCI and the ongoing assessment of the security situation in both
Côte d’Ivoire and in Liberia during this period.
The Secretariat will make every effort to ensure that the proposed extension of
the inter-mission cooperation arrangements does not compromise the ability of
UNMIL to carry out its mandate, particularly in view of the support it is providing
to the electoral process in Liberia. The Secretariat will keep the Security Council
informed of developments in this connection.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

11-33460
