VI.

Aware that the Commission on Transnational Corporations will examine the report on _the activities o~ the
United Nations Centre on Transnat10nal Corporations
and the study on transnational corporations in the pharmaceutical industry in developing countries, according
to the agenda approved by the Economic and Social
Council in its decision 1980 / 170 of 24 July I 980,
Aware also that many organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system have an interest in
and expertise on this subject and can theref'?re provide
valuable assistance to the Secretary-General m his preparation of the report for next year,
Taking into account that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the Economic
Commission for Europe, the United Nations Centre on
Transnational Corporations, the Division of Narcotic
Drugs of the Secretariat, the International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the World Health Organization
have already been involved in this exercise,
.
Conscious of the importance of the information
system on transnational corporations for the analysis of
transnationals in certain sectors of special social and humanitarian interest to host countries, particularly developing countries,
Mindful of the importance of objective information
about banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products,
I. Invites Member States to provide information on
the measures they have taken to exchange information
on hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical
products that have been banned in their countries;
2. Requests the Commission on Transnational Corporations to study, during its seventh session, the ways
and means within the information system on transnational corporations to improve the exchange of information on banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe
pharmaceutical products, with a view to formulating appropriate recommendations;
3. Requests once again the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the United Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned, to submit a report to the
General Assembly, at its thirty-sixth session, on the
experience of Member States and the United Nations
organs, organizations and bodies concerned;
4. Appeals to the United Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned, especially the World Health
Organization, to provide any assistance, expertise and
co-operation required for the preparation of the abovementioned report.
96th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
35/187.

203

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Refugee and displaced children

The General Assembly,
Noting with deep concern the increasing gravity of the
problems of refugees in various parts of the world,
Stressing that, among the problems posed by the
plight of these populations, the problem of children is
especially anguishing,
Considering the disturbing situation of millions of
refugee and displaced children, particularly children
who have not yet been settled,
Considering that many of them have lost all the members of their immediate families,

Reaffirming the pre-eminently humanitarian character of the activities of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for the benefit of refugees,
I. Expresses its gratitude to the Unite~ Nati<?ns
High Commissioner for Refugees for the act10n which
he has already taken to assist refugee and displaced
children, and requests him to intensify his effor~s in that
respect, endeavouring to ensure as far as possible that
the cultural and family identity of the minors settled is
preserved;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to associate all
the specialized agencies in the action undertaken.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/188.

Protection of human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Conscious of its responsibility to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and determined to remain vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur,
Noting that Governments have an obligation to
protect and promote human rights and to carry out responsibilities they have undertaken under various international instruments,
Recalling its resolutions 31/124 of 16 December 1976,
32/118 of 16 December 1977, 33/175 of 20 December
I 978 and 34 / 179 of 17 December 1979 on the protection of human rights in Chile, and 33 / 173 of 20 December 1978 on disappeared persons,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 11 (XXXV) of 6 March 1979 111 on violations of human rights in Chile, in which the Commission, inter a/ia,
decided to appoint a Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Chile,
Deploring that the Chilean authorities have consistently refused to co-operate with the Special Rapporteur
appointed by the Commission on Human Rights,
Expressing its regret that, according to the report of
the Special Rapporteur, 112 there has not been an improvement in the human rights situation in Chile, and
that in certain respects it has, on the contrary, deteriorated,
Considering that the lack of popular participation in
the preparation of the draft constitution and the existing
restrictions, under the state of emergency, on the freedoms of assembly, association, expression and information do not enable the result of the recent plebiscite to be
regarded as an authentic expression of the will of the
Chilean people,
Noting with increasing concern that the Chilean
authorities continue to ignore the repeated appeal of the
international community reflected in the various resolutions of the General Assembly and other international organs and have failed to take urgent and effective
measures to investigate and clarify the fate of persons
who have disappeared,
Expressing deep concern that the whereabouts of the
numerous persons who have disappeared are still unknown and that this has caused grief and often hardship to their relatives.
111
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1979,
Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
"' See A/35/522.

204

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

I. Commends the Special Rapporteur for his report
on the situation of human rights in Chile, prepared in
accordance with Commission on Human Rights resolution 21 (XXX VI) of 29 February 1980: 1 1 '
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirty-seventh session to study thoroughly the report of
the Special Rapporteur:
3. Expresses its grave concern at the deterioration of
the human rights situation in Chile as reported by the
Special Rapporteur, in comparison with the same period
last year, in particular concerning the alteration of the
traditional democratic legal system and its institutions
and the repression of the human rights activities of the
Catholic Church and of academic life:
4. Strongly urges the Chilean authorities to respect
and promote human rights in accordance with their obligations under various international instruments and, in
particular, to take concrete steps as outlined in Commission on Human Rights resolution 21 (XXXVI);
5. Concludes, on the basis of the report of the
Special Rapporteur, that continued vigilance with regard to the human rights situation in Chile is warranted;
6. Expresses its deep concern about the lack of information on the numerous persons who have disappeared, which continues to be a gross and flagrant violation of human rights:
7. Urges once more the Chilean authorities to investigate and clarify the fate of persons who have disappeared for political reasons, to inform relatives of the
outcome and to institute criminal proceedings against
those responsible for such disappearances:
8. Urges the Chilean authorities scrupulously to
respect the right and duty of the Chilean judiciary to employ fully and without restriction its constitutional
power under habeas corpus and amparo:
9. Urges once more the Chilean authorities to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and to submit their
comments on the findings of his report to the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-seventh session;
10. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for another
year and requests the Commission to report on the
human rights situation in Chile, through the Economic
and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/189.

Protection of human rights of certain categories
of prisoners

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/121 of 16 December 1977
regarding the protection of the human rights of persons
who are detained either in respect of offences which they
committed, or are suspected of having committed, by
reason 0f their political opinions or convictions, or as a
result of their struggle against colonialism, aggression
and foreign occupation and for self-determination, independence, the elimination of apartheid and all forms
of racial discrimination and racism, and the termination of all these violations of human rights,
''' See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. I 980.
Supplement No. J (E/1980/11 and Corr I), chap. XXVI. sect. A.

Recalling also its resolution 33 / 169 of 20 December
1978 regarding the protection of the human rights of
persons who have been arrested or detained as a result
of their trade union activities,
Noting, however, that, although certain prisoners
belonging to the above-mentioned categories may have
been duly convicted of common-law offences, which
may justify their arrest, detention or imprisonment, or
may be detained pending a trial in respect of such offences, the arrest, detention or imprisonment for commonlaw offences cannot be justified when it is based on
laws which are of a discriminatory nature or involve
other serious violations of human rights, including
apartheid.
Realizing that persons belonging to these categories
are exposed to special dangers as regards the protection
of their human rights and freedoms,
Noting that violations of their human rights and fundamental freedoms may consist in the arrest or detention itself. or in the treatment to which they are subjected,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 11 " and the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 11 '
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 1 11• which states that any act of torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is
an offence to human dignity, that no State may permit
or tolerate torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and that exceptional circumstances such as a state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency may not be invoked as a justification of torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also the Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners, 11 '
Emphasizing the particular importance of protecting
the right of prisoners not to be subjected to torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and their right to receive a fair hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal in the determination of any criminal charge against them,
A ware of the fact that, despite releases of prisoners in
some countries, the general situation as regards the arrest and detention of persons belonging to the abovementioned categories remains as serious as before,
I. Recognizes that the arrest and detention, in many
parts of the world, of numerous persons on the abovementioned grounds often give rise to serious human
rights problems and that effective measures should be
taken to eliminate these problems;
2. Reiterates. therefore, the requests to Member
States in General Assembly resolutions 32/121 and
3 3 / 169 regarding the release of such persons and the assurance that their fundamental human rights are protected during their arrest or detention.
96th plenary meeting
I 5 December 1980
'" Resolution 217 A (Ill).
"' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
'"· Resolution 3452 (XXX). annex.
" First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of' Offenders.· report prepared by the Secretariat (United
Nat ions publication. Sales No. 1956. IV .4). annex I.A.
