United Nations

S/PV.5006

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5006

th meeting
Monday, 19 July 2004, 10.55 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Motoc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Romania)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Florent
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Chaudhry
Mr. Baja
Mr. Karev
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo
Mr. King
Mr. Danforth

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Letter dated 1 July 2004 from the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2004/541)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-43000 (E)

*0443000*

S/PV.5006

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/541, which contains the text of a
letter dated 1 July 2004 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
transmitting the Committee’s work programme for its
twelfth 90-day period, covering July to September
2004.

Letter dated 1 July 2004 from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2004/541)

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alexander Konuzin, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism. I
now give him the floor.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia, Israel,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Uzbekistan, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

Mr. Konuzin (spoke in Russian): I am very
pleased to address the Security Council today in my
capacity as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) in order to brief the Council on the
Committee’s activities and to submit for the Council’s
consideration
the
Committee’s
twelfth
work
programme, for the next 90-day period, from 1 July to
30 September 2004.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Alexander Konuzin,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ambassador Konuzin to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

2

As the Council knows, I assumed the position of
Chairman of the CTC at the end of May, succeeding
Ambassador Arias of Spain. On behalf of the
Committee, I would like to express once again our
gratitude and appreciation for the effective leadership
and great creativity which Ambassador Arias
demonstrated throughout his 13 months at the head of
the Committee.
I would also like to introduce Mr. Javier Rupérez
of Spain, who has been appointed Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. He has already started practical planning
work aimed at consolidating the new structure. I am
confident that under his leadership the Executive
Directorate will effectively support the activities of the
CTC.
Before presenting the twelfth work programme, I
shall refer to the implementation of the CTC’s previous
work programme. The adoption of resolution 1535
(2004) on 26 March marked the start of the important
process of revitalization. Since that time, the major
challenge for the Committee has been the maintenance
of an effective balance between reform efforts and the
Committee’s short-term activities.
During this new stage of its work, the CTC has
continued to monitor implementation of resolution

S/PV.5006

1373 (2001), relying on reports submitted by States in
response to the letters addressed to them by the
Committee. It should be noted that during this
transitional period the CTC could not avoid a
slowdown in the review of reports. Of 65 reports
planned for review from 1 April to 30 June 2004, only
25 were actually completed. Nevertheless, the
Committee has taken all possible measures to
accelerate the process and to overcome the delay.
At the same time, the CTC has detected that the
approach to this work also needs to be changed. The
analysis of country assessments of assistance needs
should be integrated into the review process as one of
its major elements. That task was highlighted in the
Committee’s previous, eleventh work programme, but
practical work did not begin until last month.
Assessments of that kind could be instrumental in
developing practical cooperation with donor countries
and organizations and in ensuring that the global
technical assistance efforts are better adjusted to real
needs. The Committee will continue to work in line
with that approach.
Encouraging States to become parties to the
relevant conventions and protocols related to terrorism,
and to implement their provisions in their national
legislation, has remained one of the priorities in the
Committee’s work. Through the efforts of the CTC, the
number of States joining the international conventions
related to terrorism has increased, making an important
contribution to the strengthening of the international
legal basis for the fight against terrorism.
During the Chairman of the Committee’s earlyJuly briefing to interested delegations, the report on the
current status of ratification of the 12 conventions and
on the role in that process of the CTC itself were
presented. We will continue to engage in regular
monitoring of the process of ratification and
implementation of the conventions, and will encourage
States to join the treaties as soon as possible.
In the area of technical assistance, the Committee
has continued to pursue its work with Member States,
in order to develop an approach that is better adjusted
to their needs. The Committee has also continued to
develop
the
Directory
of
Counter-Terrorism
Information and Sources of Assistance as an
information tool on best practices, model laws and
assistance programmes. However, the Directory alone
cannot meet the new requirements. The Committee

intends to assume a more active role in coordinating
the provision of technical assistance, particularly
through the new formats of direct dialogue with
Member States, both in New York and in capitals, and
of information exchange with the donor community.
We will take all necessary measures to promote that
process.
With regard to transparency, the Committee
resumed the practice of regular briefings by the
Chairman for interested delegations. A briefing on the
CTC’s current activities was held on 2 July 2004. It
was attended by more than 50 delegations. At the same
time, we should recognize that the Committee web site
has not been regularly updated. Furthermore,
experience has proven that the Committee’s outreach
efforts have been inadequate to its tasks at this stage of
revitalization. That lack of public awareness about the
CTC’s activities may have led to some misperceptions
about the Committee’s work, adding to the problems of
communication and practical cooperation with Member
States. The Committee will therefore continue its
efforts to improve its communication methods.
The Committee has continued to develop
cooperation and coordination with international,
regional and subregional organizations. During the
eleventh 90-day period, the Committee’s experts
participated in many international conferences and
seminars concerning various aspects of counterterrorism. Briefings to the Committee by a number of
international organizations and bodies — including the
European Union and the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the
Commonwealth of Independent States — provided the
CTC with very important information on their
experiences with and approaches to international
cooperation against terrorism. They also offered an
opportunity to evaluate the capacity of those
organizations to be involved in the process of technical
assistance and information exchange.
Let me now draw the Council’s attention to the
general features of the twelfth report, which covers the
period from July to September 2004. By 30 June 2004,
the Committee had received 515 reports from Member
States and others. That included 160 second reports
from Member States and two from others, as well as
116 third, and 40 fourth, reports from Member States.
Nevertheless, by 30 June 2004, 71 States had not met
the deadline for submission of their respective reports.
I should like to take this opportunity to remind the

3

S/PV.5006

representatives of those States that they should submit
their outstanding reports as soon as possible.
We are open to every possible means of
cooperation and dialogue with Member States in order
to assist them to solve the problems that caused the
delay in the submission of their reports. The review of
reports from Member States will remain a key element
of the CTC’s activities. The Committee will also
continue to call upon States to meet the requirements
of resolution 1373 (2001), as well as to support them in
doing so.
The Committee’s main task during the twelfth 90day period is the implementation of resolution 1535
(2004). On 29 June, Ambassador Javier Rupérez took
office as Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). In
accordance with resolution 1535 (2004), within the
next 30 days, the Executive Director is to submit to the
Committee an organizational plan for the CTED.
Ambassador Rupérez has started consultations about
the draft plan with members of the CTC. We expect to
consider the draft plan in late July, and to present it to
the Security Council for its endorsement. Pursuant to
resolution 1535 (2004), the Secretary-General will then
take the appropriate steps to implement the plan on an
expedited basis, including, at the appropriate time, by
seeking General Assembly approval.
The Committee will pursue the course of closer
coordination with United Nations bodies dealing with
various aspects of the fight against terrorism. First of
all, we plan to strengthen cooperation between the CTC
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al Qaeda and the Taliban. Those issues have already
been discussed at an informal meeting between the
Chairs of the two Committees, and we have agreed on
some forms of cooperation. As the contacts between
our Committees develop, we will be ready to consider
further coordination measures. The CTC will also seek
appropriate working contacts with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) concerning non-proliferation problems in the
context of the terrorist threat.
With regard to technical assistance, we shall
continue the work on country assessments of assistance
needs, bearing in mind the need to create an effective
mechanism to share non-classified information with
potential donors. The CTC intends to cooperate with

4

the Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the Group of
Eight, and plans to discuss information exchanges with
the Action Group that will open the way for the most
effective use of the donor community. In order to build
an effective and flexible system of technical assistance,
the Committee is exploring new types of activities. The
Committee will analyse the possibilities of establishing
more effective contacts between the CTC and donor
countries and organizations.
As provided for in resolution 1535 (2004), the
Committee intends to begin preparations for its first
visit to a Member State, subject to its consent, in order
to engage in direct dialogue with its authorities in the
context of ensuring effective monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Such a
mission is essential to the purpose of creating a climate
of cooperation and of providing technical assistance
based on more accurate assessments of countries’
needs. We plan to invite representatives of participating
international organizations to join the mission. Such
monitoring missions could be instrumental in providing
direct assistance, adjusted to identified needs.
Pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), the
Committee will develop all necessary forms of direct
dialogue with Member States seeking assistance in
strengthening their capacities to combat terrorism.
Along with traditional contacts between interested
countries and the CTC’s subcommittees, whereby
countries may raise questions related to the letters sent
by the CTC in response to their reports, we intend to
explore new approaches to communicating with States.
As Chairman of the Committee, I should like to take
this opportunity to say that we would welcome
messages sent to the CTC and its experts, Bureau,
subcommittees, Vice-Chairmen and Chairman with
proposals on how to improve its work, questions on
participation and requests for donor assistance.
The CTC should not be viewed as some kind of
inquisition. On the contrary, we deem it necessary to
develop the friendliest relationships with States. The
Russian Chair will attempt to ensure that cooperation
between the CTC and States Members of the United
Nations develops in the most effective manner and is
open in nature. In keeping with the principle of
transparency, the Chairman of the Committee will
continue to hold briefings for interested delegations on
the CTC’s activities.

S/PV.5006

The
development
of
cooperation
with
international, regional and subregional organizations
will remain a priority of the CTC’s work. The League
of Arab States has offered to host the Committee’s next
meeting with international organizations in Cairo later
this year, and the Committee has accepted the offer.
Following the approach agreed by the Committee and
the procedures followed at previous such meetings, the
CTC plans to start preparations for the meeting, to be
held in November and December 2004. The meeting
will be open to all States Members of the United
Nations for participation as observers. We expect it to
contribute to a focused and action-oriented dialogue
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, as well as regional States, on the main
problems encountered in the practical implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and in international
cooperation in combating terrorism.
We are open to criticism, suggestions and remarks
from States members of the Security Council and other
Members of the United Nations, which I am sure will
contribute to the CTC’s progress at the current stage of
its revitalization. I invite participants to pose any
questions they may have.
Mr. Danforth (United States of America): I am
sure I join with all members in thanking Ambassador
Konuzin for his report to us this morning and also in
congratulating him and his staff on their work since
assuming the chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) in May.
I would also like to welcome Javier Rupérez, the
Executive Director of the newly established CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), to his first
Council meeting. The establishment of that body marks
a watershed moment in the Council’s effort to deal with
the menacing threat to international peace and security
that is terrorism.
The global campaign against terrorism remains
the highest of priorities for my Government. The
United States is committed to seeing that the United
Nations continues to play an important role in this area,
and my Government is working to find ways to
enhance the United Nations effectiveness. It will
require a team effort to defeat the scourge of terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee has been a valuable
member of that team. Through its capacity-building
work and its global coordination initiatives, the
Committee has helped to energize member States and

organizations around the world to make the fight
against terrorism more of a priority, be it through the
adoption of new or the improvement of existing
counter-terrorism laws or enforcement mechanisms.
As a result of its work, more organizations and
countries have joined the counter-terrorism team.
Nevertheless, much work remains to be done. For
example, while we have seen a significant increase in
the number of States that have become parties to the 12
international counter-terrorism conventions and
protocols, there are still too many that have failed to
take action in this area. Some 40 States are parties to
fewer than half of those instruments. This suggests a
lack of urgency in fighting terrorism and weakens
international solidarity.
Although the CTC has received more than 500
reports from member States, compliance with
resolution 1373 (2001) requires much more than the
submission of reports. Compliance requires action on
various fronts — the legislative, the regulatory and the
operational. The CTC needs to do a better job of
reinforcing that point, both in New York and in
capitals. Perhaps the clearest indication of just how
much more needs to be done is the number of major
terrorist attacks since the CTC opened its doors for
business in October 2001. Simply put, the terrorists and
their supporters have continued to strike, be it in Bali,
Moscow, Casablanca, Riyadh, Baghdad, Mombassa,
Istanbul, Haifa, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem or Madrid.
Terrorism has not been defeated, raising the spectre of
further deadly attacks on innocent victims and
continuing threats to international peace and security.
The Council established the CTED to strengthen
the CTC and provide it with additional tools and
resources. Now we must work to ensure that the CTED
becomes operational as quickly as possible. The CTED
will enable the CTC to be more proactive, to reach out
in different ways to States and organizations and to
encourage more of them to become full partners on the
counter-terrorism team. Through field visits to
different States, it will be able to help the CTC assess
on-the-ground efforts to implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001), thus moving beyond the
current focus on written reports. This is essential if the
CTC eventually hopes to gather enough information to
determine which States are in compliance with the
resolution.

5

S/PV.5006

In addition, we encourage those States that have
asked for technical assistance to consider requesting a
visit from the CTC and the CTED. Even with the work
of those bodies and that of the Council’s other counterterrorism body, the Al Qaeda-Taliban sanctions
Committee, the Council itself must remain at the
forefront of the global campaign to rid the world of the
scourge of terrorism. It must act with a sense of
urgency, as though the events of 11 March 2004 and
11 September 2001 had taken place yesterday, not
months or years ago. It must never forget that, so long
as a few States are not acting quickly enough to raise
their capacity to fight terrorism or are not meeting their
international counter-terrorism obligations, all of us
remain vulnerable.
The Council must be prepared to live up to its
responsibility under the United Nations Charter to
maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I should like to express my gratitude for the
comprehensive briefing given us by Ambassador
Alexander Konuzin, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
concerning the activities of the Committee, and also for
his presentation of the twelfth work programme from
the period from July to September, which we fully
support.
The CTC has this year, through its revitalization,
entered into a new and special phase, aimed at
enhancing its working capacity and at tackling the
challenges relating to the full implementation by
Member States of resolution 1373 (2001). Last March
we supported the proposals to revitalize the Committee
and voted in favour of resolution 1535 (2004). In the
light of the information we have received today, we are
pleased to see that the consensus will of the members
of the Council has gradually been translated into
reality. Proof of this is our welcoming today of
Ambassador Javier Rupérez, who has been appointed
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. We wish him every
success in his work, and we assure him of the fullest
support of the Chilean delegation as he carries out his
important functions.
As regards the achievement of the objectives set
out in the most recent three-month work programme,
we welcome the Committee’s capacity for selfcriticism, as reflected in the report, and also the plainly

6

stated intention and resolve to modify certain
procedures that will in future make possible the full
achievement of the goals that have been set in the area
of the verification and monitoring of the
implementation by States of the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). In that vein, we deem very
important the work done so far with respect to the
scheduling and organization of the work of the CTED.
Along those lines, and in keeping with the
mandate of the sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al Qaeda and the Taliban, which I am chairing, and
determined to enhance the cooperation between that
Committee and the CTC, we have, in recent days, held
an informal meeting between the Chairmen of both
Committees to discuss and examine ways and means of
exploring and establishing new areas of cooperation
and coordination between them.
As Ambassador Konuzin has said, these include
in particular the intention of holding regular meetings,
as part of our usual programme of work, among the
two Chairmen and among the experts charged with
dealing with those issues. We have also considered the
possibility of the Chairmen of the Committees’
participating in one another’s meetings. We have also
looked at ways of promoting and fostering contacts
between the Monitoring Group of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
Panel of Experts of the CTC, so as to exchange
information and share experiences, in accordance with
the rules of procedures of both Committees and the
agreements adopted therein.
We have also looked at ways of passing on the
information that the Al Qaeda Committee regularly
receives with respect to the need for technical
assistance, which is gathered during contact visits by
the States holding the chairmanship and the members
of the 1267 Committee. In short, we have looked at
ways of enhancing cooperation between the two
bodies, and we will continue to do so in future.
I should also like to say that combating terrorism
involves constancy, dedication and perseverance in our
cooperation efforts in order to achieve our objectives,
as well as integration of efforts and actions — all of
this in the context of the work of the Security Council
committees on this issue, in particular in the CTC. All
of this has led to some important achievements.

S/PV.5006

However, as was recently stated in the Council,
terrorism still poses a major threat to international
peace and security. This is clear, as we learn daily of
new terrorist acts being perpetrated in various parts of
the world, in both developed and developing countries.
Therefore we need to uphold the Council’s goal of
continuing to combat this grave threat. This can be
achieved only through the necessary and fundamental
cooperation of States and of the competent
organizations.
For that reason, it is necessary and timely to
reiterate our appeal to those States that are not yet
parties to international conventions relating to counterterrorism to do so, and to enact the necessary
legislation to implement them, and also, as regards the
Committee that I have the honour to chair, they must
comply with the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council.
Lastly, bearing in mind the renewed efforts made
by the Security Council this year to combat
terrorism — as evidenced by the adoption of resolution
1526 (2004) aimed at strengthening the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban;
resolution 1535 (2004), which set up the Executive
Directorate of the CTC; and resolution 1540 (2004) on
non-State actors and weapons of mass destruction —
we, as the international community, must remain
committed to this effort and take this opportunity to
move forward in the combat against terrorism. In that
way we will help ensure that the people of all States
can live in peace, in adequate security, with respect for
human, individual and collective rights, and in full
adherence to the rule of law.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): I should first like to
extend our congratulations to Ambassador Konuzin for
chairing the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
to Ambassador Rupérez on his appointment as
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). I wish also
to thank Ambassador Konuzin for his comprehensive
report on the activities of the CTC.
We welcome this opportunity for the Council to
take stock of its counter-terrorism efforts through the
CTC. The adoption of resolution 1535 (2004) proves
that the Council is sensitive to the need, and is willing
to accept change, to improve its efforts in the area of
counter-terrorism.

We express appreciation for the draft plan that
Ambassador Rupérez has prepared for the organization
of the CTED, and for his openness to views and
suggestions regarding the plan.
I would like to make two comments. First, the
report states that 71 countries have not met the
deadline for the submission of their respective reports.
That is a matter for concern. That phenomenon must be
examined as a serious symptom of a possible bigger
problem. When 71 of 191 members are lagging behind
in complying with Council-imposed deadlines, we
should ask why. We should determine the cause of this
acute problem and find a remedy for it.
Do those States required more technical
assistance than the CTC is able to facilitate? Has the
CTC system of monitoring compliance with reports and
letters reached the point of diminishing returns? Do we
need to consider putting greater emphasis on other
types of engagement with other States, such as direct
dialogue, as the Chairman has suggested? Or, more
ominously, do States have issues with the legitimacy of
the methods of the CTC such that they are now
deciding to ignore them?
The second point concerns the relationship
between counter-terrorism measures and the protection
of human rights. We reiterate our view that there is a
need to incorporate human rights concerns into the
global counter-terrorism struggle. Counter-terrorism
measures could pose dangers to established human
rights protections. Rights violations could undermine
the success of counter-terrorism efforts in countries.
We hope that the CTED and the CTC will add a human
rights component to their structure and their methods.
The global effort against terrorism requires the
Security Council and the rest of the Members of the
United Nations to remain committed partners to both
concerns if success is to be achieved in eradicating the
scourge of terrorism.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): We thank the Chairman
of
the
Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC),
Ambassador Konuzin, for his detailed and substantial
report. My delegation would like to join others in
congratulating him — as well as his team — on having
taken up his important office.
We also welcome the presence of the new
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, Ambassador Javier

7

S/PV.5006

Rupérez. He will, in our view, play a crucial role in
setting up the CTC’s new support structure in the
months to come. We would like to assure him of our
full support in that important and difficult task. We are
confident that he will always be guided by the CTC’s
key objective, that is, to enhance the ongoing dialogue
with all United Nations Member States in the spirit of
cooperation, transparency and even-handedness.

need to maintain a balance between reform efforts and
its short-term activities. We agree with the need, as
expressed by the Chairman, for the Committee to play
a more active role in coordinating the provision of
technical assistance. In that context, the integration of
the analysis of country assessments of assistance needs
into the review process should be done in an objective
manner.

In addition to improving the CTC’s operative
structures, the ongoing revitalization must preserve and
further strengthen the CTC’s legitimacy in the
perception of all United Nations Member States. We
are therefore looking forward to seeing an expert on
human rights and the rule of law included in the senior
staff of the Executive Directorate. In this respect we
fully share the views just expressed by Ambassador
Baja.

On the question of reporting, while emphasizing
the need for the timely submission of reports, the
Committee should also try to address issues such as
reporting fatigue, technical capacity for rendering such
reports and other areas on which Ambassador Baja also
touched.

The Executive Directorate will also offer
increased possibilities for further intensifying the
CTC’s cooperation and coordination with other United
Nations bodies, in particular with the Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee.
Important steps have already been taken in that
respect by the two Committees: by the two Chairmen
and by the current expert teams. We feel that they all
deserve our full recognition, and we will continue to
support the improvement of their important work.
Let me conclude by affirming that Germany fully
subscribes to the statement to be made later by
Ambassador van den Berg on behalf of the Dutch
presidency of the European Union.
Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): We congratulate the
Russian Federation on having assumed the
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), thank the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador
Arias, for his outstanding contribution, and welcome
Ambassador Rupérez, the new Executive Director of
the CTC Executive Directorate (CTED).
We would also like to thank Ambassador Konuzin
for having presented to the Council the twelfth work
programme (see S/2004/541), and to express
appreciation for his leadership role in guiding the work
of the CTC.
The CTC is going through a transitional phase
aimed at its revitalization. We look forward to the
finalization of the organizational plan of the CTED. In
that regard, we share the view that the Committee will

8

We have noted the efforts of the Chairman to
pursue closer coordination with other United Nations
structures dealing with various aspects of counterterrorism. However, we understand that such
coordination will be pursued within the respective
mandates of the Committee and other United Nations
structures.
We have noted the Committee’s intention to begin
preparations for the first visit by the CTC to a Member
State, subject to its consent. Such visits should lead to
the creation of a climate of cooperation and to the
provision of technical assistance, as pointed out by the
Chairman in his statement today.
We support activities aimed at improving
communication between the Committee and Member
States so as to enhance the capacity of States to fight
terrorism more effectively. We also share the view that
the Committee needs to improve its communication
methods to promote transparency and avoid
misperceptions about its work. We look forward to the
meeting of the CTC with international, regional and
subregional organizations to be hosted by the League
of Arab States later this year.
Mr. King (United Kingdom): We are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting,
and to the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) for his briefing.
Like others, we would like to take this
opportunity to offer our best wishes to the new
Chairman of the CTC, Ambassador Konuzin of Russia,
and to the new Executive Director of the CTC
Executive Directorate, Ambassador Rupérez. The
United Kingdom subscribes to the statement to be

S/PV.5006

made shortly by the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.
The threat of terrorism remains as acute today as
it has ever been. Terrorists are tireless in their pursuit
of impossible goals. They know no distinctions of race,
religion or geography. They are united in the disdain
they show for innocent life. So, we must be united in
combating terrorism — from tackling terrorist funding
to tackling the resentments that encourage terrorism.
Since its creation, the CTC has achieved a good
deal. It has helped build unity among States in the fight
against terrorism. It has helped sustain the momentum
of the international community’s efforts to implement
resolution 1373 (2001). It has made States accountable
for their counter-terrorism efforts and, crucially, it has
assisted States in those efforts. But more needs to be
done, and, frankly speaking, there has been a sense that
activity has been levelling off a little as time has gone
on.
So now we need to exploit the appointment of the
new Executive Director and the reinforcement of the
CTC Executive Directorate to take activity to a new
level. We should take this opportunity to review how
the CTC works. It should maintain the best traditions
of efficiency and effectiveness; it should continue to
promote transparency, equal treatment and cooperation
with regional organizations. And the new structure
should also enable it to develop stronger links with
other parts of the United Nations system — notably the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights — allowing the CTC to draw them more
closely into its work and to draw on their expertise,
authority and contacts. The CTC should continue and
develop its close cooperation with the Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee.
It is also right that we take this opportunity to
review what the CTC should do. We should look at
what more the CTC could do to provide technical
expertise to Member States. We welcome plans for an
additional effort to build links with potential donors of
assistance and better to match Member States’ needs
and requirements with available assistance. The CTC
should continue to produce focused, proportional
judgements, building on appropriate reporting
requirements of Member States. And we should look at
the possibility of regional reporting returns so that
some smaller States could focus scarce resources on
implementation rather than on reporting requirements.

As a number of speakers have already noted this
morning, we should also look again at how best to
work with, and deal with, those who have not reported
or responded to the CTC. That will be a key issue for
the next period.
The bottom line is that terrorism remains an
ongoing threat which no one can ignore. We must all
play our part within and beyond the United Nations to
reduce that risk.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like at the outset to express my appreciation
for the detailed briefing presented by Ambassador
Alexander Konuzin of the Russian Federation on
behalf of the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). I am pleased also to congratulate
him on his election as Chairman of the Committee, a
position he is assuming from my predecessor as
Permanent Representative of Spain, Ambassador
Inocencio Arias. I am very grateful for Ambassador
Konuzin’s comments on that subject. I am sure that,
under such efficient leadership, the Committee will be
able to effectively meet the challenges facing it.
I also wish to warmly welcome the first
Executive Director of the CTC Executive Directorate,
Ambassador Javier Rupérez. Not only is he a
compatriot of mine and a colleague of many years’
standing in the Spanish foreign service, but we also
have shared ideals and aspirations in the fight for
freedom, democracy and human rights and have
worked together for peace and security in Europe and
around the world. That is why we have every
confidence in his effectiveness in his work, which will
have the full support of my delegation and myself.
Spain attaches particular importance to these
open Security Council debates as a mechanism for
strengthening transparency, with which the CounterTerrorism Committee has always carried out its work.
That is why we welcome the continued holding of
these debates, which provide the Committee and its
member States with a platform from which to inform
all United Nations Member States and the general
public about its work, while providing non-Councilmember States a forum in which to express to us their
viewpoints on these matters. Therefore, I shall be very
brief, precisely to expedite the exchange of views
among all of us. I take this opportunity to say that we
subscribe fully to the statement to be made shortly by

9

S/PV.5006

the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.
My delegation joins Ambassador Konuzin in
identifying three objectives, or immediate challenges,
facing the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The first is
strengthening the role played by the Committee with
regard to technical assistance to States for
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) so that it can become a true global promoter and
coordinator of such assistance. Among other things,
that should be a concrete way to overcome the current
situation, in which — as was been explained to us — as
many as 71 countries have failed to submit their
respective reports on time.
The second objective is preparing for the
Committee’s first visits to States that they deem it
necessary to visit, with the consent of their respective
Governments, to engage in direct dialogue with the
competent authorities. That will enable us to verify
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) on
the ground, to evaluate the nature of the causes that
hamper such effective implementation and to identify
possible needs or offers of technical assistance.
The last objective is strengthening the
Committee’s cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations whose experience with
and diverse approaches to counter-terrorism are an
essential contribution to ensuring that the Committee
can properly monitor the effective implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We believe that such interinstitutional cooperation should begin with better
interaction and coordination with other United Nations
structures involved in the fight against terrorism, first
and foremost the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban.
Precisely to assist the Committee as it faces those
immediate challenges, Spain promoted a revitalization
process that was ultimately reflected in Security
Council resolution 1535 (2004), whose main result has
been the creation of the Executive Directorate, headed
by Ambassador Rupérez. My delegation wishes to
congratulate him on the draft programme of work he
has prepared for the Executive Directorate — a
programme of work that we fully support. We hope that
its provisions can be adopted and implemented as
swiftly as possible so that the Executive Directorate
can become operational very soon and so that the

10

Committee’s revitalization can begin to materialize.
That will be the most effective way to attain the
objectives set by the Security Council in the global
fight against all forms of terrorism, which jeopardize
international peace and security.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I should like to thank Ambassador
Konuzin, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for his briefing. With Ambassador
Konuzin as Chairman, I believe we can have every
confidence in the work done by the CTC. I support the
points he made in his briefing.
I would like to make three very brief comments.
First, we support reform of the CTC, and we welcome
Ambassador Rupérez as the new Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). We hope that, through the efforts
of the CTED and the Secretariat, the Directorate will
soon get down to work.
Secondly, China supports the visit by the CTC to
a Member State to gather information on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in order to
assess the need for assistance in combating terrorism.
China hopes that the visit will help ease the burden on
Member States in submitting their reports to the CTC
by giving them more time to implement resolution
1373 (2001).
Thirdly, we greatly appreciate the offer by the
League of Arab States to host what will be the fourth
special meeting of the CTC with international, regional
and subregional organizations. The League of Arab
States’ holding of the upcoming special meeting will
be an opportunity to show the resolve of the Arab
world to combine its efforts to combat terrorism and to
demonstrate that all Member States share the common
cause of combating terrorism. That can only be
beneficial to the common cause of the international
fight against terrorism. We are certain that the League
of Arab States will duly complete the preparatory work
that will make the event a success.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Alexander Konuzin for his excellent
presentation of the 90-day work programme of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and for his
efforts to enable the Committee to fulfil its mandate at
a time of transition, when the Executive Directorate is
being put into place. I take this opportunity once again
to extend our congratulations to Mr. Javier Rupérez on

S/PV.5006

his appointment as Executive Director and to assure
him of our full cooperation.
I would like briefly to underline a few elements
of the programme of work under consideration that I
consider to be important. First, we hope that the CTC
will be able to meet the deadline for adopting the
organizational plan of the Executive Directorate in
order to submit it to the Security Council for approval.
This will enable the new executive body to become
operational and to carry out the tasks entrusted to it.
We also believe that it is highly desirable to
maintain the cooperation between the CTC and the Al
Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Committee and to
develop new forms of such cooperation, while fully
respecting the mandates of the two Committees.
We encourage the CTC to continue its work of
assessing the assistance needs of countries. The visits
of CTC experts to certain countries, with their consent
and in accordance with the provisions of resolution
1535 (2004), will help to strengthen monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
establish direct dialogue with the Governments of the
States concerned.
For that reason, we support and encourage the
CTC as it begins preparations for the first of its
intended visits. Those visits require good preparation
and a clear and precise road map with respect to the
objectives to be achieved. They respond to the CTC’s
wish to verify on the ground the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) and should be
carried out without discrimination of any kind, in every
region, regardless of civilization, cultural or religious
background.
We note that 71 countries have failed to report in
a timely fashion. We urge those countries to fulfil their
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001), and we
encourage the Committee to explore all ways and
means of assisting those States so that they can submit
their reports. In particular, the Committee should
reflect on ways to communicate, engage in dialogue
and interact with Member States in order to ensure
their cooperation, rather then limiting interaction to the
mere exchange of correspondence, which is starting to
show its limitations.
We support the CTC in its preparatory efforts
with the League of Arab States for the meeting,
planned to be held in Cairo in December. The

successful holding of that meeting would certainly send
a strong signal from the international community with
respect to the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by congratulating Ambassador Alexander Konuzin
on assuming the chairmanship of the CounterTerrorism Committee at a particularly delicate moment,
when the revitalization process is under way. We also
welcome and congratulate Ambassador Javier Rupérez
on his appointment as Executive Director of the newly
formed Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which will be a central piece in the
revitalization process that the Committee is going
through. We assure Mr. Rupérez of our full cooperation
and wish him every success in the discharge of his
responsibilities.
My delegation took due note of the briefing to the
Council by the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. In that connection, we would like briefly to
underline three issues.
First, the process of revitalizing the CTC, to
which the Security Council and the United Nations
membership at large are committed, is intended to
strengthen the prominent and central role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism. It shows how
Member States are determined to overcome any
difficulty that might hinder universal implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001).
The report of the Chairman on difficulties
encountered by the CTC and by States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) (S/2004/70, annex); the report
of the CTC on its revitalization (S/2004/124, annex);
and the adoption of resolution 1535 (2004): all these
reflect the international community’s resolve to adapt
the fight against terrorism to changing circumstances
and its flexibility to adapt structures to make them best
suited for effectively responding to such an enormous
challenge.
Secondly, the twelfth work programme (S/2004/541,
annex), presented by the CTC Chairman, shows how the
CTC is beginning a new and important phase of its
existence. It states that the main task for the current
period of work is to render fully operational as soon as
possible the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate established by resolution 1535 (2004), with
a view — as stated in the CTC’s report on its
revitalization — to enabling the CTC to fulfil its mandate
of monitoring implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),

11

S/PV.5006

facilitating technical assistance to Member States and
promoting closer cooperation and coordination with
international, regional and subregional organizations:
functions which are crucial to the fight against terrorism
and to the central role that the United Nations plays in that
regard.
Thirdly, the briefing by the CTC refers to the
need to change the approach to monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which now
relies on reports submitted by States, by integrating
country assessments of assistance needs into the
process of reviewing the reports as a means to develop
practical cooperation with donor countries and to better
adapt technical assistance efforts to the real needs of
the countries. The fact that by 30 June 70 States had
not met the deadline for the submission of their
respective reports, and the fact that all of them are
developing countries, is a clear demonstration of the
urgent need to step up efforts to provide technical
assistance to those countries, which are also the most
vulnerable to the presence of terrorists and their acts.
We are pleased that the CTC, in its approach to
revitalization, is looking for innovative ways so as to
make technical assistance, capacity-building and the
upgrading of States’ anti-terrorist capabilities the main
thrust of international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. That is indeed a commendable development.
An important provision of resolution 1535 (2004)
recognized the need for the Committee to visit States
and to engage in a dialogue as part of the monitoring of
the effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
We consider of very crucial importance the fact that the
Committee has undertaken to develop all necessary
forms of direct dialogue with the Member States
seeking assistance in order to strengthen their capacity
to combat terrorism.
In conclusion, we fully support the statement that
the President will deliver as the outcome of this
meeting. It clearly sets out the tasks ahead for the
Committee, as well as those carried out in the quarterly
period under consideration.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Ambassador Konuzin, for his comprehensive
presentation of the work of the Committee, as foreseen
in resolution 1535 (2004). As a member of the Bureau
of that Committee, I wish to associate myself with his
words, which will help to shorten considerably my

12

comments this morning. I would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the Executive Director of the
newly established Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), Ambassador Javier
Rupérez of Spain. I wish him well in his new job.
The most relevant challenge facing the CTC and
the CTED is to persuade countries that it is in their
own interest to take advantage of the various sources of
cooperation made available to them. It is our view that,
up to now, the potential for cooperation with the CTC
is underused. It is not our objective this morning to
exhaust the reasons why the results have been so, but
one issue to which we would like to draw attention is
the lack of stronger feedback mechanisms to ensure
that the cooperation provided by third parties to
countries and to the CTC is fully satisfactory.
We also wish to stress that the CTC and the
CTED are structures designed mainly to shelter States
that are willing to cooperate but, for various reasons,
are unable to do so. We would therefore like to reiterate
that the CTC and, by extension, the CTED, is neither a
sanctions committee nor a court of justice — not even
a police precinct. The work of the Committee is to be
carried out within the limits foreseen in resolution
1373 (2001) and 1535 (2004).
The sense of ownership of what is being done by
the Committee should be strengthened among other
United Nations members. In that regard, the
establishment of direct contact with Member States in
fulfilment of the work of the Committee is a most
useful working method. We especially welcome all
efforts to bring transparency to the work of the CTC.
When it comes to cooperation, creative solutions are
always in order.
In conclusion, I wish to note that the repudiation
of terrorist acts is one of the guiding principles of
Brazilian foreign policy. We are of the view that the
fight against terrorism is to be conducted within the
requirements of due process, human rights and civil
liberties.
The President: At this stage, I wish to make a
brief statement in my national capacity.
I would like to join others in thanking
Ambassador Konuzin for his highly informative and
comprehensive presentation, in congratulating him for
his assumption of the chairmanship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and in wishing

S/PV.5006

him every success in his undertaking. I would also like
to welcome the presence here of the newly appointed
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate
(CTED),
Ambassador Javier Rupérez, to whom I wish every
success in his work.
As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by Ambassador van den Berg of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, I will
confine myself only to a few brief comments.
Following the adoption of resolution 1535 (2004),
through which the CTED was established, the CTC has
now entered into a transitional phase that will end at
the moment the CTED becomes fully operational. It is
of the utmost importance that the CTC continue to
work at the same pace throughout that period, while
also continuing to adapt itself to the new dynamics of
the global fight against terrorism.
As the CTC’s ability to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) remains an
essential prerequisite to effectively combating
terrorism, we note with concern that many States are
still
facing
significant
difficulties
in
fully
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). One relevant
indicator in that respect is the continuously increasing
number of States that are late in submitting their
reports. It is for that reason that we believe that
effectively addressing countries’ assistance needs —
including through a more practically oriented dialogue
with both the donor community and interested
States — should be one of the Committee’s top
priorities.
We recognize the importance of strengthening
cooperation and coordination between the CTC and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as with other United Nations bodies. We
welcome the active approach adopted by the new
Chairman of the CTC in that regard. For Romania’s
part, I would like to assure Ambassador Konuzin of our
full readiness to discuss, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), possible synergies between our two
Committees. Given the fact that the 1540 Committee is
still in the process of launching its activities, such a
step could be considered at a later stage.
Last, but definitely not least, I would like to
express my delegation’s full support for the work
Ambassador Rupérez has already undertaken in putting

in place the new structure. We stand ready to bring our
active contribution to the finalization of the
organizational plan of the Executive Directorate of the
CTC and to its timely endorsement by the Council.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Netherlands. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries of Bulgaria, Romania,
Turkey and Croatia; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries of Norway and Iceland, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
declaration.
The European Union (EU) wishes to express its
appreciation for the briefing provided to us this
morning by Ambassador Konuzin, the new Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), whom we
greet and congratulate on his election. We are confident
that, with Russia as Chair, effective coordination of the
CTC will continue. Furthermore, we are pleased to
greet the new Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee, Ambassador Javier Rupérez.
The European Union also thanks Ambassador Arias for
his able chairmanship of the CTC during the 13 months
of its work.
The European Union attaches great importance to
these periodic open debates and we are happy that this
tradition is being continued under the new leadership
and management. The regular open debates help to
maintain and strengthen the general acceptance and
legitimacy of the CTC within the United Nations
family. We are also pleased to note that Ambassador
Konuzin has continued the informal briefings for
member States, the first of which took place on 2 July.
This possibility for direct questions and answers is
much appreciated. The Chairman was perfectly right in
affirming that transparency should continue to be a
hallmark of the work of the Committee.
Today’s meeting deals with the Committee’s work
programme for the twelfth 90-day period, which covers

13

S/PV.5006

the months from July to September 2004. The
European Union welcomes this document as part of the
process of revitalization of the CTC pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1535 (2004).
The Executive Director will soon submit the
organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. It is good to learn
from the work programme that this will happen through
the Secretary-General. That is important to show that
the revitalization process should honour the SecretaryGeneral in his role as the chief administrative officer of
the Organization.
As the European Union considers respect for
human rights and the rule of law to be a fundamental
condition for overcoming the scourge of terrorism, we
hope to see a human rights expert included in the
Executive Directorate. Furthermore, the European
Union welcomes the further strengthening of
cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee established under Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. We also hope that such a strengthening of
cooperation will extend to other parts of the United
Nations system involved in counter-terrorism, in
particular the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.
The European Union supports your call, Sir, to all
States that have not submitted their reports on time to
do so as soon as possible. The number of 71 States
missing deadlines means that more than one third of
the membership is lagging behind. We must maintain
the universality and the speed of the response which
resolution 1373 (2001) requires.
We encourage the Committee and its Executive
Directorate to enhance their dialogue with member
States with a view to approaching our common goal to
fully and universally implement resolution 1373
(2001). The European Council is squarely behind those
efforts and has appointed an EU counter-terrorism
coordinator. Combating terrorism is now fully
integrated into the external relations policy of the EU
and a key element in the EU political dialogue with
other States. Particular emphasis is put on ratification
without reservation and effective implementation of the
relevant international conventions and protocols related
to terrorism and preventing the financing of terrorism.
Emphasis is also put on addressing other factors that
may contribute to the fight against terrorism, such as

14

non-proliferation and arms control. We applaud the
new energy the CTC is willing to put into that effort to
make the relevant conventions and protocols universal
and we look forward to enhancing its results by our
own contribution. The CTC objectives in this field are
our own.
The European Union understands that the CTC is
in transition and that this has led to a slow-down in the
review of reports. We hope and trust that, with an
extended staff of experts, the CTC will be able to
accelerate its work. More staff should also allow for
better assessing the assistance needs of those countries
that have the sincere political will to fully implement
resolution 1373 (2001) but lack the proper tools to do
so. We share the Chairman’s view that review and
remedy should be more effectively linked.
In this context, the European Union would
welcome a more proactive role of the CTC in the field
of technical assistance. We would welcome more direct
dialogue and information exchange with both the States
in need of assistance and the donor community,
including close dialogue and cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the G-8.
Direct dialogue and information exchange on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) as such are
also essential and we are convinced that such dialogue
and exchange could be enhanced by in-country visits
made by the CTC to States with the concerned State’s
consent. The first such visit by the CTC to a State with
its consent, as envisaged in the new work programme,
is important to mention in this respect.
We commend the fact that the League of Arab
States has offered to co-host, jointly with the CTC, the
fourth special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) in Cairo later this year. A
focused and action-oriented dialogue at that event
should provide a useful follow-up to the three previous
similar meetings.
Finally, allow me to make a pitch for the seminar
that the EU presidency is planning to organize on
22 September in Brussels on ways to combat the
financing of terrorism. We will concentrate on various
issues, such as alternative remittance systems, money
laundering and national and regional implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). We stand
ready to inform those interested.

S/PV.5006

The President: The next speaker is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the Security
Council this month. We also wish to thank the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines and his
mission staff for their successful leadership of the
Council last month.
My delegation also takes this opportunity to
congratulate the representative of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Alexander Konuzin, on his
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). We
thank him for his detailed and comprehensive briefing
this morning, in which he provided the Committee’s
programme of work for the next 90-day period.
We also congratulate Ambassador Javier Rupérez
of Spain on his appointment as Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate.
My delegation commends the work and efforts of
the CTC during the period under consideration. The
Committee strove tirelessly to enhance the capacities
of member States to align their national legislations
with the requirements and provisions of resolution
1373 (2001). My delegation also welcomes the
Committee’s work in creating an open and ongoing
dialogue on cooperation and transparency in order to
increase the counter-terrorism capacities of member
States. In that respect, we commend the interactive and
genuine relationship between the Committee and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as the enhanced contacts with such
organizations.
We
welcome
specifically
the
Committee’s acceptance of the League of Arab States’
proposal to host the fourth special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee with regional and
subregional organizations, to be held in Cairo later this
year, provided that such a meeting is held in
accordance with applicable procedures for such
meetings.
My delegation welcomes the establishment of the
CTC Executive Directorate, which will work in
cooperation with the newly appointed Executive
Director and the Secretariat to enable this new organ to
begin work as soon as possible. We note in the

Committee’s work schedule the fact that it will
consider the organizational plan to be submitted by the
Executive Director. In that respect, we are confident
that members of the Council will discuss the plan in
detail to ensure that it is in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations, other principles of the
Organization and the mandate of the Committee. We
also hope that they will discuss its financial aspects in
the light of the financial rules and regulations of the
United Nations.
International terrorism has reached a very
dangerous stage, and combating it requires coordinated
international efforts. To uproot it, we must seriously
address its causes and roots. Such an approach should
be implemented objectively, without any double
standard, so as to promote international peace and
security on the basis of the purposes and principles of
the Charter.
The threat posed by terrorism increases if
weapons of mass destruction are involved, and that is
why my country has called on the international
community to fight both in parallel. As an expression
of good faith, my country submitted, during its term as
a non-permanent member of the Council, a draft
resolution on behalf of the Arab Group calling for
making the Middle East a region free from all weapons
of mass destruction, with no exceptions for any country
in the region. That draft resolution is still before the
Council, and we truly hope that it will be unanimously
adopted as soon as possible in view of its importance,
particularly in the light of the challenges and dangers
threatening our world today.
In conclusion, I should like to stress once again
my country’s support for the CTC and for all sincere
international efforts to realize the lofty objective of the
international community: to combat terrorism and
thereby help to realize humanity’s aspiration to peace
and security.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Liechtenstein, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is a great
pleasure, Sir, to see you preside over the Council’s
meeting this morning. At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Ambassador Konuzin on his assumption
of the chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and to convey to him our best wishes in the
discharge of his important task. We thank him in

15

S/PV.5006

particular for having upheld the principle of
transparency during his first weeks in that position, and
we are thankful for his intention to continue regularly
to brief interested Member States on the work of the
Committee.
Our congratulations also go to Ambassador
Rupérez in his capacity as the new Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) Executive
Directorate. We are confident that Ambassador
Rupérez will provide the new, enhanced structure with
the necessary leadership, and we pledge our full
support in that respect. We look forward to receiving
the forthcoming organizational plan for the CTC
Executive Directorate, and we hope that the Committee
will soon be in a position to move on from the
transitional arrangements to the new structure, in order
to deal with the challenges lying ahead.
We continue to believe that the CTC’s greatest
strength lies in the field of the coordination of
technical assistance, thereby complementing the
substantial efforts of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, based in Vienna. As the Committee
is making preparations and arrangements for a first
State visit, it is important to underline the consensual
nature of such technical assistance, as well as the need
for a balanced approach integrating human rights
concerns. While assessing the assistance needs of
States and advising them on necessary action, the CTC
and its experts should always be aware, and also
actively raise awareness of, the fact that, in the fight
against terrorism, respect for human rights and the rule
of law is not an impediment to its success, but a
necessary precondition.
It is thus crucial that, in the upcoming recruitment
process within the Executive Directorate, due
consideration be given to any relevant human rights
experience of future staff members. We also hope that
the new arrangements will include an institutionalized
liaison with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in line with
resolution 1535 (2004).
In recent months, the Council has stepped up its
efforts to deal with the activities of non-State actors
that are determined and have the capability to threaten
international peace and security. The strengthening of
the CTC through the establishment of its new
Executive Directorate, including a strong increase in
expert capacity; the strengthening of the sanctions

16

regime against Al Qaeda and the Taliban, in resolution
1526 (2004); and the adoption of new measures on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the
hands of non-State actors, in resolution 1540 (2004),
bear witness to the renewed commitment of Member
States to prevent indiscriminate and terrorist attacks
against their populations.
Those efforts, however, need to be accompanied
by improved coordination between the Committees and
expert bodies involved, in order to use the available
resources in the most efficient manner possible and not
to overburden the administrative resources of Member
States. Such synergetic effects are especially pertinent
between the CTC and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al Qaeda and the Taliban, as both Committees have
developed outstanding capacity and expertise over the
last two years.
The consideration of States’ reports remains an
important pillar of the CTC’s work. Liechtenstein is
one of the 40-odd countries which have already
submitted their fourth report to the Committee. We are
thus aware of the considerable burden that increasing
reporting requirements place on Member States and on
small States in particular. While we encourage the
Council and its various sub-organs to take such
restraints into account, especially in the adoption of
new reporting requirements, States themselves can also
take measures to render reporting on interrelated topics
more efficient.
The Liechtenstein Government recently adopted a
basic document on facts and figures covering
Liechtenstein’s political, legal, economic and social
characteristics, as well as the general framework of
international cooperation within which Liechtenstein
operates in countering terrorism, crime and moneylaundering. Such a basic core document can serve as a
point of reference for various reporting requirements
and thus considerably alleviate the burden placed on
administrations.
Finally, let me once again express Liechtenstein’s
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism and to cooperation with the Council,
the CTC and other relevant United Nations bodies in
this field.
The President: I thank the representative of
Liechtenstein for his kind words addressed to me.

S/PV.5006

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): I would like to take
this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation for
the convening of this open meeting of the Security
Council to review the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) over the past three months. We
would like to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Konuzin, Chairman of the CTC, for his briefing on the
Committee’s work programme. We would also like to
welcome and congratulate Ambassador Javier Rupérez
on his appointment as Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED).
We note the Committee’s twelfth 90-day work
programme, which will run from July to September
2004. It is our belief that the work programme will
continue to enhance the effectiveness of our counterterrorism measures. In this connection, Indonesia
supports measures intended to enhance the counterterrorism capability of States requesting aid and
reiterates the importance of cooperation and
coordination by United Nations Member States in
capacity-building for those States that need assistance.
Allow me to provide an update on Indonesia’s
continuing efforts in combating international terrorism,
especially in our region, since the previous CTC
meeting. On 3 July 2004, President Megawati
Soekarnoputri inaugurated the Jakarta Centre for Law
Enforcement Cooperation. The establishment of the
Centre was an important follow-up to the Bali Regional
Ministerial Meeting on Counter-Terrorism that was
held on 4 and 5 February 2004, under the
co-chairmanship of the Indonesian and Australian
Governments.
The key objective of the Centre is to enhance the
operational expertise of regional law-enforcement
personnel in dealing with transnational crime, with the
primary focus on enhancing counter-terrorism skills.
The Centre will seek to strengthen cooperation among
regional police forces, drawing upon the experience of
Indonesia
and
Australia
in
law-enforcement
cooperation. While it is conceived as a bilateral
initiative, we welcome participation and contributions
by other countries and international organizations
supportive of the goals of the Centre.

Another follow-up of the Bali Ministerial
Meeting was the establishment of two ad hoc working
groups of senior legal officials and law-enforcement
practitioners in the region. The working group of
senior legal officials will report back to ministers on
the adequacy of regional legal frameworks for counterterrorism cooperation and assistance. The working
group will hold its first meeting on 4 and 5 August
2004 in Canberra. The ad hoc working group of lawenforcement practitioners will formulate best-practice
models for fighting terrorism, develop a more effective
information base and facilitate the more effective flow
of intelligence on criminal activity. The ad hoc working
group will have its first meeting on 12 and
13 August 2004 in Bali, Indonesia.
Finally, I would like to stress the conviction of
Indonesia that terrorism is the problem of every nation,
and that we can best fight and vanquish the menace
through multidimensional and multilateral approaches
on the basis of international cooperation, collaboration
and dialogue among all States. Indonesia is one such
party and we stand ready, as we have in the past, to
take the necessary measures and to work with other
States and organizations to ensure that terrorists run
out of room to hide and that terrorism is defeated.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mekel (Israel): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July, and to
express our appreciation to your predecessor in that
position. I would also like to warmly welcome the
Russian chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and, in particular, Ambassador
Konuzin. I welcome also Ambassador Rupérez as the
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). I assure
you, Sir, of Israel’s readiness to do its utmost to assist
in advancing our common counter-terrorism agenda.
Since its establishment, the CTC has faced the
challenge of formulating a clear standard of
international activity against terrorism. While it has not
been easy, we are now beginning to see the positive
fruits of those labours.
For Israel, the past few years have challenged us
to identify our place in the global counter-terrorism
effort and to find ways in which our unfortunately

17

S/PV.5006

extensive experience in combating terrorism can be of
benefit to others. We are encouraged by the increasing
number of countries seeking to ally themselves with us
in this context, and we hope, too, to be able to make a
visibly greater contribution to the CTC. To this end, we
are looking forward to participating in the CTC’s
meeting with international organizations, scheduled for
the fall. Another way in which Israel could contribute
successfully to the CTC would be through the inclusion
of Israeli experts within its efforts.
Like a disease, terrorism spreads quietly and
erupts with deadly effect. Like a disease, it cannot be
successfully fought with partial measures but must be
combated as a whole. It must be faced with steely
resolve and unblinking determination. Terrorism is a
network, interconnected and often global. It must be
fought as such. Terror anywhere in the world should be
acknowledged for what it is and dealt with accordingly.
Left to breathe, abandoned to fester or immorally
discounted as someone else’s problem, it only
strengthens into an undertow that will inevitably reemerge from the depths.
As the international community has recognized,
there is no cause or grievance that justifies terrorism.
There is no such thing as good terrorism and bad
terrorism.
Unfortunately, Israel knows this all too well, for
Israel too often finds itself on the frontline of the
international war on terror. Israel knows the pain and
devastation that terror wreaks because, although we
wish it were not so, Israel sees it first-hand on an
almost constant basis. We are keenly aware of the
excruciating dilemmas democracies in particular face
in confronting an enemy with no respect for life and no
respect for law. Through this agonizing and ongoing
experience, Israel has learned a great deal.
We understand that alongside the success in
international counter-terrorism that the CTC and the
global community have enjoyed, it is also undeniable
that we increasingly face a dangerous proliferation of
terrorism. Terrorism is not just a scattered collection of
individuals, domestic organizations or regional
networks. It is a frantic octopus sending its deadly
tentacles in all directions. This creature is becoming
increasingly sophisticated in initiating joint ventures,
sharing methods and moving investment capital to
where it is needed to be the most lethal. It is constantly

18

refining its practices and strategies, strengthening the
logistics of mass murder.
As this network adapts, so must we. We must
anticipate new directions that terror will take, and we
must cut them off. As terror changes, we must change
with it. We cannot fight future battles based solely on
past experiences; on the contrary, we must pay careful
attention to emerging trends. The fact that terrorists
bombed military installations did not mean that they
would not attack skyscrapers. Because they attacked
skyscrapers did not mean that they would not bomb
subways. Because they bomb subways does not mean
that they will not attempt to devastate cities with
chemical weapons.
We must listen to terrorists’ stated intentions. We
must not underestimate their objectives or their means.
We must take them at their words, and we must never
discount the horrors of which they are capable. They
do not play by the rules of civilized society, and to
expect them to do so is to be constantly caught by
terrible surprise.
One example of this concept is the issue of manportable air defence systems (MANPADS). This is a
danger that Israel has experienced intimately, and it is
one on which much work is still to be done. While
Israel applauds the progress made by organizations
such as the Group of Eight and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe regarding
MANPADS, this body still needs to address the issue in
an operative manner. As Israel has cautioned before,
this is a terror trend that, although it has not yet caused
the great number of deaths of which it is capable,
unquestionably has the potential to turn our skies into
vast killing fields. Anyone who ever flies on a
commercial jetliner anywhere in the world has reason
to fear the ease of proliferation and use of MANPADS
and the tremendous danger that they hold. Israel urges
this body to take the concrete steps necessary to
understand and eliminate this menace.
Another problem requiring immediate attention is
the phenomenon of States harbouring terrorists.
Terrorism, as I have said, is a truly global threat
transcending the borders of States and the very idea of
sovereignty. At the same time, however, it is anchored
geographically and spatially, and States that harbour
the culprits of international terror before, during or
after their atrocious activities have themselves become
an integral part of the terrorist enterprise. As many

S/PV.5006

States have said before in the Council, the international
community’s counter-terrorism campaign is only as
strong as its weakest link. If any segment of our
defence is deficient, the whole will suffer. This body
should demand that States that harbour terrorists desist
from doing so. It should name and shame them, and it
should cooperate with international initiatives to fight
terrorism in all its incarnations and in every locality.
A further demand to States should be an end to
incitement. Incitement is not just an integral part of the
terrorist infrastructure; it is its engine, and we must
react to it accordingly. States that allow and even
encourage their media to incite terrorism through hatefilled propaganda or that tolerate the extremist
teachings of educational and spiritual leaders not only
violate basic human rights obligations; they breed the
next generation of terrorists, and they provide fuel to
the fire of terrorism. They ensure that the years ahead
will be even more dangerous than the years that have
passed. The violence manifested in terror is immoral
and deadly, and everything that provides its
foundations is equally so. If terror is to end, incitement
must end as well. We must hold those who support or
tolerate it accountable, and we must work to replace it
with a culture of tolerance and mutual respect.
Israel believes that if all States confront terror
directly and without compromise, it can be defeated.
The threat of terrorism anywhere is a threat to nations
everywhere. Its branches must be severed and its roots
must be destroyed. This is a struggle we can and will
win. Israel commends the dedication and noble desires
of the CTC and looks forward to doing all it can to aid
in this crucial endeavour.

his distinguished service. I wish to congratulate
Mr. Konuzin on assuming office as the new Chairman
of the CTC and to thank him for his detailed
presentation on the recent work of the CTC. I also
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Rupérez on taking up the post of
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, (CTED) established
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1535
(2004). There can never be any justification
whatsoever for terrorism, which takes the lives of
innocent people, and we expect the CTC, under its new
Chairman, and the CTED, under its Executive Director,
to provide the international community with the
leadership it needs to respond with effective counterterrorism measures.
I would like to make three points.
First, I wish to emphasize the importance of
assistance for capacity-building. Providing assistance
to enhance a Member State’s counter-terrorism
capacity not only helps to prevent acts of terrorism on
its territory and to contribute to its security and
development, but also contributes to maintaining the
security and prosperity of the neighbouring States and
of the region as a whole. For recipient States,
establishing counter-terrorism measures and preventing
terrorism are also important preconditions for
development. We appreciate the priority that the CTC
places on technical assistance. We hope that the CTC
might at the same time endeavour, through its planned
visits, to promote actual, appropriate technical
assistance projects.

Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): The work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) is a matter of great
interest to all Member States of the United Nations,
and I therefore would like to express our appreciation
to you, Mr. President, and to the rest of the Security
Council for providing interested States other than
members with the opportunity to speak today.

We also believe that it is important for Member
States to share information on terrorism. Through the
Secure and Facilitated International Travel Initiative,
announced at the Group of Eight (G-8) Summit
Meeting in June this year, G-8 members will raise
standards, modernize procedures and exchange
information in order to deter threats, reduce costs and
help to ensure the safe and efficient movement of
passengers and cargo. Taking into account that such
international cooperation is being undertaken, we think
it would be worthwhile for the CTC also to consider
setting up a forum for the CTC and other interested
Member States to conduct a joint study on more
effective counter-terrorism measures.

I would first like to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Arias, former Chairman of the CTC, for

My Government provides counter-terrorism
assistance, especially to the countries of South-East

The President: I thank the representative of
Israel for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

19

S/PV.5006

Asia, and it intends to strengthen such efforts. We are
placing particular priority on three areas: capacitybuilding of law-enforcement organizations, preventing
the movement of terrorists across borders through
stricter immigration control and promoting accession to
counter-terrorism-related international treaties and
protocols. We also intend to continue our cooperation
with counter-terrorism measures through official
development assistance and other means. For example,
Japan recently decided to grant approximately $6.8
million to Indonesia in order to improve security at its
airports and seaports. Also, in June this year my
Government hosted the Heads of Asian Coast Guard
Agencies Meeting in Tokyo with a view to building
cooperative relations among agencies and enabling
them to share information on maritime security in the
Asian region.
Next, in relation to my first point — the
importance of capacity-building — we need to put
more effort into preventive measures. If the terrorists
of today have a weakness, it is the routes they use to
procure weapons and funds, which we can cut off. To
do that, however, it is necessary to put in place
preventive
measures
based
on
international
cooperation. In that regard, it is becoming more
important to raise standards with regard to the
capabilities of States to combat terrorism by providing
assistance for capacity-building. I wish to inform the
Council that this month, together with the Malaysian
Government, my Government hosted a seminar on the
prevention of terrorism employing chemical weapons
and managing crises in which they are used. It was the
first cooperative programme of the Southeast Asia
Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism (SEARCCT) in
Malaysia.
Third, my Government has high expectations for
the organizational plan, which is expected to be
submitted to the CTC by the end of this month, as its
implementation will strengthen the counter-terrorism
function of the CTC. On the other hand, upon the
establishment of the new structure, we request that the
Executive Director of the CTED and the CTC create an
efficient organization, one that avoids waste. We wish
to reiterate that although Japan supports the
revitalization of the CTC, that does not mean that
expenditures for such purposes should be allowed to
grow unrestrained. We also request that steps be taken
to ensure transparency with regard to the sources of
financing of the CTC’s activities. In addition, it is

20

important to enhance cooperation with the Al Qaeda
and Taliban Sanctions Committee, in accordance with
the CTC’s work programme for the twelfth 90-day
period — the third quarter of this year. We hope that
the CTED will establish a strong working attitude that
will further strengthen its cooperative relationship with
related organizations such as the Al Qaeda and Taliban
Sanctions Committee and concerned Member States.
Although the CTC is going through a transitional
period while it establishes the CTED, we would like to
see the new organization begin full-scale operations as
soon as possible. My Government wishes to cooperate
in making that process a success. I would again like to
express our appreciation for the dedication shown in
this important period by Mr. Konuzin, Ambassador
Rupérez, their outstanding staff and the Committee
secretariat and experts.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Côte d’Ivoire. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Djangoné-Bi (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation joins preceding speakers in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and for the wise
initiative of holding this public debate on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts.
We also express our great appreciation of the
clear presentation of the twelfth programme of work by
Ambassador Konuzin, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning the combat against terrorism.
As well, my delegation sincerely congratulates
Ambassador Konuzin on his assumption of the
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and congratulates Ambassador Rupérez on his
appointment as head of the Committee’s Executive
Directorate. We wish them every success in carrying
out their new duties.
As we take note of the conclusions and
recommendations of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
I shall make a few general points of principle and of a
general nature concerning the question under
consideration in order to shed light on the practical
problems encountered when implementing the
decisions taken in the fight against terrorism.

S/PV.5006

The Council’s regular, almost bimonthly holding
of public meetings on this agenda item and the ever
greater participation of peoples and nations in these
discussions clearly testify to a universal reality:
terrorist acts have taken their place among the most
important, cruellest and most current threats to
international peace and security.
The shocks caused by the murder and the attacks
against innocent civilians and those, often foreigners,
who happen to be using national property, and the
impact on every household around the world of the
destruction of what we consider to be national
patrimony but which is really, after all, the patrimony
of all humankind, spare no one, no people or nation on
this small planet of ours. Whether those acts take place
in Bali, Jakarta, Madrid, Moscow or New Delhi, they
strike the body, heart and soul of our humanity, assail
our conscience, revolt us, disturb our private and
collective tranquillity and undermine the peace of all
nations and the security of all.
But our analysis of this disease and the treatment
to be prescribed will be right only if we know how to
define and characterize this disease and, above all, if
we can agree on the description of its symptoms and
thoroughly lay bare its causes. The vital need to
promote the primacy of multilateralism, legitimate
defence and the triumph of the latter demand this. It
seems to me that universal agreement on the definition
of acts of terrorism is a prerequisite for any collective,
concerted and coherent strategy to fight terrorism. A
testament to that is the difficulties encountered by the
Ad Hoc Committee tasked with drafting an
international convention on terrorism and an
international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism. In fact the Committee, almost since
its creation pursuant to General Assembly resolution
51/210, has been stuck at an impasse on the definition
of terrorism and the scope of the future convention.
If our peoples, nations and States fail to show the
sufficient political will and active and effective
solidarity to reach a happy and prompt conclusion to
the negotiations under way on those two conventions
essential for reducing the frequency and gravity of
terrorist acts — or even completely removing their
cruel threat to international peace and security — one
hardly need consult a crystal ball to foresee the great
difficulty — even impossibility — of the old
democracies prospering. Not to advance is to recede.
Worse, nascent democracies will die before reaching

adolescence — which, one knows, is not the easiest or
the most gratifying time.
Terrorists would thus have succeeded in their goal
of splitting the international community and,
especially, by exacerbating the negative effects of
globalization, by violent insurrection by the poor
against the rich — sometimes through the unfortunate
resort to terrorism.
Moreover, as a number of international situations
have indicated, the lack of consensus about basic
founding principles of the two future conventions will,
for our poor and non-nuclear countries, continue to
prolong the painful abuses of authority and the attacks
on our sovereignty. When not directly responsible,
some of our rich partners will be complicit in that. I am
referring to State terrorism of the kind imposed upon
us by virtue of the liberties that some powerful and socalled democratic States have taken with multilateral
provisions painstakingly arrived at, including the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Ottawa
Convention on landmines and the Kyoto Protocol on
climate change, among others.
We hail the positive strengthening of cooperation
between the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al Qaeda and the Taliban and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and we encourage
them to continue on that noble course. At the same
time, my delegation appeals to all our peoples, nations
and States — with the unambiguous and irrepressible
sense of solidarity that they share — to quickly
overcome the remaining obstacles to the adoption of
those two conventions, which remain sadly absent from
the list of international legal instruments relating to the
prevention and suppression of international terrorism.
Lastly, as other speakers have done, I would like
to emphasize that the fight against terrorism cannot
make progress without rigorous respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law. We are
devoted to those principles and we would like to assure
Ambassadors Konuzin and Rupérez of our full
willingness to cooperate with the CTC and its
Executive Directorate.

21

S/PV.5006

That is the modest contribution that my
delegation wanted to make to what has been said by all
of today’s speakers on the pressing subject of threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts.
The President: I thank the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Uzbekistan. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan): Allow me, first of all,
to express my appreciation to Mr. Konuzin, Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and acting
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
for his accomplished report on the activities of the
Committee.
We truly welcome the rapid development of
practical mechanisms of international cooperation to
combat terrorism. Security Council resolution 1535
(2004) has given further important impetus to that
effort. In that connection, we welcome the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban. We fully support
the efforts of those Committees to reinforce the
capabilities of United Nations Member States.
In recent years, the Central Asian region, like
other parts of the world, has experienced the brutal
manifestations of criminal terrorist schemes. The
strengthening of the forces of international terrorism,
extremism and separatism casts a shadow over the
stability of the countries of the region. It is necessary
to note that, after a period of decline, international
terrorism has now started to galvanize its capacities
and to employ much more destructive means. The
disturbing reality is that more and more countries and
regions are becoming targets for terrorists.
In view of that fact, I would like to stress several
important factors in countering the threat of terrorism.
First, counter-terrorism is not only a fight against
terrorist acts and their perpetrators. It is first necessary
to combat the numerous radical and extremist centres
that create and disseminate the ideology of hatred.
Those centres are designed to poison people’s minds
and to recruit new zombies to fill the terrorists’ ranks,
primarily among young people.

22

In that connection, I would like to draw the
Council’s attention to a very serious threat, not only to
the stability of Central Asia but to that of the entire
world, that is emanating from the religious-extremist
organization Hizb ut-Tahrir. In dealing with
organizations of this kind it is essential to take into
account the fact that peaceful extremist movements do
not exist at all. By their very nature, they are filled
with a sense of hatred and intolerance that eventually
turns into violence. In that regard, our call is for the
Security Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
to give more serious attention to the danger of
religious-extremist organizations, including Hizb
ut-Tahrir, and to undertake determined measures by
applying strict sanctions against them.
Secondly, it is no secret that international terrorist
organizations are trying to gain access to components
of weapons of mass destruction. In the last three years
alone, Uzbekistan’s law-enforcement bodies have
confiscated 15 containers of radioactive materials as
they made their way across our country. We consider
resolving the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to be a vital element of our foreign
policy and an essential part of regional and global
security. In that context, realizing the initiative to
create a nuclear-free-zone in Central Asia is in the
interest not only of the region but of the entire world
community.
Thirdly, the illicit flow of narcotics has become
one of the main sources of financing for terrorist
structures. To ensure safe corridors and good markets
for their commodities, narco-syndicates are entering
into alliances with destructive forces whose terrorist
acts create favourable conditions for the narcotics
business, as they destabilize situations in different parts
of the world. Having realized that danger, Uzbekistan
has taken the initiative to establish a regional
information and coordination centre in Central Asia to
combat trans-border crime connected with the illegal
flow of narcotics. That initiative was supported by the
Secretary-General, and we hope that many members of
the Council will offer their kind assistance in realizing
this plan.
My fourth point is that positive results in the fight
against international terrorism can be attained only
through a solid global system of counteraction with the
United Nations at its centre. The principle of
indivisibility demands a more active and increased role
by regional organizations in the process. In that

S/PV.5006

connection, we attach great importance to the recently
established regional counter-terrorism structure of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), which is
based in Tashkent, which will coordinate the
interaction of SCO member States with a view to
combating terrorism, separatism and extremism.
In our view, establishing contact mechanisms
between the regional counter-terrorism structure of the
SCO, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) would play a considerable role towards
consolidating international efforts to combat new
challenges. We are of the belief that taking into account
the points I have outlined would contribute to the
effective realization of the international counterterrorism strategy.
We would like to note that, over many years,
Uzbekistan has continuously appealed to the
international community to consolidate common efforts
in the fight against terrorism. The work of the CounterTerrorism Committee reflects our vision for tackling
this problem. The Counter-Terrorism Committee of the
Security Council has made significant progress in its
work and is no doubt an effective mechanism for
coordinating the international efforts against terrorism.
The Government of Uzbekistan welcomes the
programme of work of the Committee for the coming
90-day period. The recommendations and provisions
reflected in the programme will no doubt contribute to
further strengthening the cooperation between the
Committee and member countries to combat terrorism.
In particular, I would like to stress the importance of
the development of the work of assessing countries’
needs for technical assistance. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s experts will play an important role to that
effect by visiting those countries.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Kazakhstan. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in
Russian): I am honoured to address the Security
Council today on behalf of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) in order to lay out the
common position of the States members of that
international regional organization: the Republic of
Armenia, the Republic of Belarus, the Kyrgyz

Republic, the Russian Federation, the Republic of
Tajikistan and the Republic of Kazakhstan.
I wish at the outset to echo the words of high
commendation and gratitude addressed to the former
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Ambassador Arias, and to his successor in that post,
the acting Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Alexander Konuzin, for the dynamic
and multifaceted work being done by the CTC at this
crucial stage of its reform.
International terrorism remains a primary and
constant threat to security and stability throughout the
world. Countering it requires the consolidation and
coordination of global efforts. The countries of the
CSTO intend to make an important contribution to
strengthening the anti-terrorist coalition and to regional
and international security on the basis of the generally
recognized norms and principles of international law,
with the lead coordinating role being played by the
United Nations. In that connection, the CSTO supports
the strengthening and revitalization of the CTC’s work,
pursuant to the provisions of resolution 1535 (2004).
In our unanimous view, the report introduced
today by the Chairman of the CTC on the Committee’s
work over the past three months and its programme of
work for the coming 90-day period confirm the fact
that the process of reforming the CTC is gaining
ground and moving in the right direction. The main
task in that context remains the effective monitoring of
the implementation by member States of resolution
1373 (2001). It is crucial in that respect that the
Committee seek more actively to develop new
approaches to coordinating technical assistance to
States while closely linking it to the strengthening of
interaction
with
international
and
regional
organizations.
We express our support for the work already
under way to prepare countries’ technical needs
assessments and to organize CTC field missions to
interested countries, with their consent. Such work
should enhance direct dialogue and cooperation
between the CTC and States with the aim of ensuring
fuller and more effective implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) and that the
provision of technical assistance will be as targeted as
possible and accurately reflect the requests and needs
of States. We are convinced that the participation of the
appropriate international organizations in such

23

S/PV.5006

missions will help the task at hand to succeed. For its
part, the CSTO is prepared to consider the possibility
of participating in that work in the context of
developing interaction and cooperation with the CTC.
In the context of combating the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, the States members of
the CSTO support the measures set forth in resolution
1540 (2004). Members of the CSTO are at the forefront
of the struggle against international terrorism and are
particularly sensitive to the magnitude of that threat.
Our desire to pool efforts so as effectively to counter
new threats and challenges — in particular those posed
by terrorism, extremism, the traffic in illegal drugs and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction — is
becoming an increasingly significant factor in
deepening the integration processes within the
organization.
Recently, much has been done on a practical level
to increase the operation of the political instruments
available to our organization. Its member States have
already taken steps to implement planned measures to
combat the external drug threat. Recommendations
have been drafted to unify counter-terrorism
legislation. Work has been finalized to establish a joint
rapid-deployment force that will help to meet the
common security challenges faced by our CSTO
partners. The policy of reviving efforts to resolve new
challenges in the area of international security through
close interaction with the United Nations and other
international and regional organizations — including
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization — was further
reaffirmed in the political statement issued by the
States members of the CSTO adopted at their meeting
of 18 June in Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan.
We believe that such interaction should be
mutually complementary. One important practical
outcome of that meeting was the adoption of guidelines
regarding priority areas for the organization’s activities
in 2004 and 2005, including measures to increase
cooperation in countering international terrorism,
militant extremism and the illegal distribution of drugs,
taking national interests into account.
We hope that, in the light of such challenges, the
CTC will in the near future propose effective
mechanisms for the exchange of information, for
disseminating the most recent experiences and for

24

organizing technical assistance in the context of
coordinating the practical counter-terrorism efforts of
international organizations.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Alexander
Konuzin to respond to questions posed and comments
made.
Mr. Konuzin (spoke in Russian): I should like at
the outset sincerely to thank all of those who spoke
today in support of the report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and also for the kind words they
addressed to me. I am grateful for the ideas, comments
and assessments expressed in this Chamber. I thank
them also for the criticism, which is very useful to us,
so that the work of the CTC does not become routine.
As has been noted today, the destruction caused
by terrorist activities is constantly increasing. Today, in
the city of Voronezh, in Central Russia, a terrorist act
was committed, killing one woman and wounding
several other people. There can be no idea of routine in
the combat against terrorism. Russia, as Chairman of
the Committee, will not allow that to happen.
All statements made today will be taken into
consideration in the CTC. All of the points that were
made will be taken into account in our work.
I should now like to touch briefly on some of the
points made today.
We fully agree with the points made regarding the
need to revitalize the work of the CTC, primarily
through reform. That will be our top priority. However,
I should like to assure members of the Security Council
that in carrying out such reform, the CTC will not halt
its ongoing activities and will continue to use the
instruments it has at its disposal in discharging the
tasks entrusted to it by the Security Council.
I would take note here of a point that was made
by many speakers — that is, concern about the fact that
many States have not yet become parties to
Conventions relating to counter-terrorism. I would note
in that connection the view that was expressed that
perhaps many States require technical assistance in
order to become parties to those Conventions, and we
will take that point into account in the work of the
CTC.
A useful view was expressed here that reports
should be received not just from individual States but
from regional organizations as well. I am delighted by

S/PV.5006

the fact that many of those who spoke today supported
the idea of dispatching CTC missions to one country
with the consent of that country. We are now working
on this question in a specific manner, and we hope that
in time such a trip can be made.
One last point: many statements stressed the
importance of assessing the technical needs of States in
order to help them comply with resolution 1373 (2001)
and then to find an opportunity to provide them with
assistance commensurate with their needs. That is an
important area of the activities of the CTC, and, in that
connection, I would appeal to all States Members of
the United Nations not to wait to appeal to the CTC if
they have a specific request or certain preferences in
areas where they are experiencing a need for technical
assistance. They should come to the CTC. Donor
countries come to us and ask us what kind of assistance
is needed by States, and they are prepared to make such
assistance available.
The CTC is prepared to serve as a middleman in
establishing cooperation between donors and those who
need assistance.
The President: I thank Ambassador Konuzin for
the clarifications he has provided.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Chairman of the CTC on the work
of the Committee.
“The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations constitutes one of
the most serious threats to peace and security and
that any acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.
“The Security Council recalls the statement
by its President on 16 October 2003
(S/PRST/2003/17) and resolution 1535 (2004),
which indicated the Council’s intention to review
the structure and activities of the CTC.
“The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for Ambassador Inocencio Arias’
(Spain) activity as Chairman of the CTC and also
expresses its confidence that the new Chairman,
supported by the new Bureau of the Committee,

will continue the effective coordination of the
CTC in the global fight against terrorism under
the aegis of the United Nations, by monitoring
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
“The Security Council invites the CTC to
pursue its agenda as set out in the work programme
for the CTC’s twelfth 90-day period (S/2004/541)
focusing on practical measures to implement
resolution 1535 (2004) on the revitalization of the
Committee, including by considering the
organizational plan for the newly established
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate.
“The Security Council notes the importance
of continuing the CTC’s efforts aimed at
increasing the capabilities of Member States to
combat terrorism; to identify and address the
problems faced by States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001); to facilitate the provision
of technical assistance adjusted to the countries’
needs; to encourage the largest possible number
of States to become parties to the international
conventions and protocols related to counterterrorism, and to strengthen its dialogue and
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations acting in the areas
outlined by resolution 1373 (2001).
“The Security Council invites the CTC to
accelerate its work on country assessments of
assistance needs that can be shared with
interested donor States and organizations and
welcomes the initiation of preparations for the
first visit by the CTC to a Member State with its
consent in order to enhance the monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
focusing in particular on the assistance that might
be available to address States’ needs.
“The Security Council notes that, as of
30 June 2004, 71 States had not met the deadline
for submission of their respective reports to the
CTC as set out in resolution 1373 (2001). It calls
on them urgently to do so, in order to maintain
the universality of response which resolution
1373 (2001) requires.
“The Security Council invites the CTC to
continue reporting on its activities at regular
intervals and expresses its intention to review the
structure and activities of the CTC in October
2004.”

25

S/PV.5006

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/26.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.

26

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
