General Aüembly-Tbirty-fourtb Session

128

20 July 1979, concerning the integrated biological improvement of the Fouta-Djallon massif in the context of
action to combat desertification, 124
l. Invites the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to consider favourably
the inclusion of the pilot project for the restoration and
improvement of the Fouta-Djallon massif in its programme of action against desertification;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the imple-·
mentation of the present resolution.
1()7th plenary meeting
18 Decemher 1979

34/186.

Co-operation in the field of the environment
conceming natural resources shared by two
or more States

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of its resolutions
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, in which
it reaffirmed the principie of full permanent sovereignty
of every State over its natural resources and the responsibili ty of States as set out in the Declaration of the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment125 to ensure that activities within their jurisdiction
or control do not cause damage to the environment of
other States and to co-operate in developing the intemational law regarding liability and compensation for such
damages,
Recalling its resolution 3129 (XXVIII) of 13 December 1973 on co-operation in the field of the environment
conceming natural resources shared by two or more
States,
Recalling also the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974,
Noting that the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, by its decision 6/14 of
19 May 1978, 126 invited the General Assembly to adopt
the draft principies of conduct in the field of the environment for the guidance of States in the conservation and
harmonious utilization of natural resources shared by
two or more States, including the explanatory note, contained in the report of the Intergovernmental W orking
Group of Experts on Natural Resources Shared by Two
or More States121 established under Governing Council
decision 44 (III) of 25 April 1975,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General128
requested by the General Assembly in its resolution
33/87 of 15 December 1978 and containing summaries
of the comments made by Governments regarding
the draft principies, as well as other significant information, recommendations and suggestions in connexion
therewith,
Desiring to promote effective co-operation among
States for the development of international law regarding the conservation and harmonious utilization of
natural resources shared by two or more States,
124 A/34/552,

annex 1, resolution CM/Res.756 (XXXIID.

125 Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment, Stockholm, 5-16 June 1972 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.IJ.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. l.
126 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtythird Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25), annex l.
127 UNEP/GC.6/17.
12s A/34/557 and Corr.1.

Recognizing thc right of States to provide specific
solutions on a bilateral or regional basis,
Recalling that the principies have been drawn up for
the guidance of States in the conservation and harmonious utilization of natural resources shared by two or
more States,
l. Takes note of the report as adopted of the Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on Natural
Resources Shared by Two or More States established
under decision 44 (III) of the Governing Council of the
Unitcd Natiom: Environment Programme in conformity
with General Asscmbly resolution 3129 (XXVIII);
2. Takes note of the draft principies as guidelines
and recommendations in the conservation and harmonious utilization of natural resources shared by two or
more States without prejudice to the binding nature of
those rules already recognized as such in intemational law;
3. Requests ali States to use the principies as guidelines and recommendations in the formulation of bilateral or multilateral conventions regarding natural
resources shared by two or more States, on the basis of
the principie of good faith and in the spirit of good
neighbourliness and in such a way as to en bance and not
adversely affect development and the interests of all
countries, in particular the developing countries;
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, a report on the progress
made in the implemcntation of the present resolution.
l 07th plenary meeting
18 December 1979
34/187.

Implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 170 of 10 December
1977, 32/172 of 19 December 1977 and 33/88 of
15 December 1978, and section JI of Economic and
Social Council resolution 1978/37 of 21 July 1978,
N oting decision 7 / 13 B of 3 May 1979 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme129 and decision 79 /20 of 28 June 1979 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, 130
Reiterating its concern at the particular seriousness of
desertification in the Sudano-Sahelian region and the
persistent critica} situations resulting from it, which
hamper the economic and social development of the
region and have particularly adverse effects on the way
of life of the population,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environrnent
Programme on the implementation in the SudanoSahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification131 and the report of the Secretary-General
on measures taken for the benefit of the SudanoSahelian region; 132
129
See Officíal Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfourth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/34/25), annex l.
13 º See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979. Supplement No. 10 (E/1979/40 and Corr.l), chap. XXI,
sect. H.
131 A/34/ 405, annex.
132

A/34/ 406.

V.

Resolutioos adopted on tbe reports of tbe Second Committee

2. Commends the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme for the
dispatch and effective, co-ordinated manner with which
they established the joint venture called for in General
Assembly resolution 33/88;
3. Notes with satisfaction the progress made by the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in assisting the
Governments of the region, on behalf of the United
Nations Environment Programme, in implementing the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
4. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme to continue to provide support to the joint
venture with a view to helping ensure that the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office continues to carry out
its additional responsibilities at a level commensurate
with the pressing needs of the region;
5. Invites the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to examine at its eighth
session the possibility of including Djibouti, Guinea and
Guinea-Bissau in the Iist of countries which receive assistance through the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian
Office in implementing in the Sudano-Sahelian region the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on
this matter;
6. Urges all Governments, organizations of the
United Nations system, other intergovernmental bodies,
prívate organizations and individuals to respond favourably, bilaterally or through the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office, the Consultative Group for
Desertification Control or any other intermediary, to
requests for assistance from the Governments of the
Sudano-Sahelian region in combating desertification;
7. Also notes with satisfaction the efforts made by
the specialized agencies and other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system concerned
with the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, especially through the Interagency Working Group, to ensure
complete effectiveness of assistance provided to the
fifteen countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region for the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification;
8. Requests the Goveming Council of the United
N ations Environment Programme to continue to report
annually to the General Assembly, through the Economic
and Social Council, on the implementation in the
Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification.
107th plenary meeting
18 December 1979

34/188.

lnternational co-operation in the field of the
environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,

129

Having considered the report of the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its seventh session, 133
Noting the statement made on 29 October 1979 by
the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, 134
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 / 56 of 2 August 1979 on intemational cooperation on the environment,
Noting the results of the high-level meeting on the
protection of the environment, held at Geneva from 13
to 15 November 1979, within the framework of the
Economic Commission for Europe,
Taking into account the note by the Secretary-General
on international conventions and protocols in the field
of the environment, 135
Mindful of possible adverse effects on the marine
environment as a result of off-shore mining and drilling,
Noting the progress achieved at the Third United
N ations Conference on the Law of the Sea with regard to
protection and preservation of the marine environment,
Affi1ming that environmental considerations should
be viewed in the context of national plans and priorities
and development objectives of all countries, in particular
the developing countries,
l. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its seventh session;
2. Notes with appreciation the progress achieved by
the United Nations Environment Programme in the
development of a system-wide, medium-term environment programme and the sustained co-operation of the
organizations of the United Nations system in this
regard;
3. Invites the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to pursue its work on the
technical aspects of environmental assessment and the
integration of environmental factors in the development
process;
4. Requests appropriate multilateral financial institutions to consider, within the framework of the over-all
financing of projects in developing countries, at their
request, the costs of the studies that might be required
on the environmental aspects of such projects;
5. Stresses the need for the United Nations Environment Programme to increase the resources available
for its projects in the developing countries, in accordance
with their requirements and priorities, bearing in mind
the need for regional balance and environmental problems arising from under-development and poverty, as
well as the balance between global and regional programmes as identified in the relevant decisions of the
Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme;
6. W elcomes the collaboration of the United Nations Environment Programme with the Intemational
Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources and the World Wildlife Fund in the development
of guidelines to help Govemments in the management of
their living resources through the formulation of a world
conservation strategy, to be launched in March 1980;
7. Invites Member States, as appropriate, to ratify
and implement the international conventions and pro188 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/34/25).
13• /bid., Thirty-fourth Session, Second Committee 24th meeting, paras. 1-25.
'
135 A/34/296.
