S/2014/330

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 13 of Security Council
resolution 2102 (2013), in which the Council requested me to keep it informed of
the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) every 90 days. The report covers major developments that
occurred during the period from 16 February to 30 April 2014.

II. Political and security developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The political landscape in Somalia was dominated by state formation
processes, with significant regional developments. While the priority of the Federal
Government in 2014 is to advance the state formation process, in particular by
establishing interim regional administrations, the process remained rife with
challenges, primarily in Baidoa and the Juba Dhexe and Juba Hoose regions.
Tension between Puntland and “Somaliland” was also heightened on 15 April
following the temporary occupation by the “Somaliland” military of Taleex in the
disputed Sool region.
3.
In Baidoa, the parliament of the self-declared six-region federal state, which
would encompass the Bay, Bakool and Shabelle Hoose regions, in addition to the
three regions administered by the Interim Juba Administration, elected a former
Member of the Transitional Federal Parliament, Madobe Nunow Mohamed, as
“President” of the “South-West State of Somalia” on 3 March. The rival three-region
federal state initiative, led by the former Speaker of the Transitional Federal
Parliament, Sharif Hassan Sheikh Adan, elected his half-brother, Mohamed Haji
Abdinur, as “President” on 26 March. The President of Somalia, Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, the Speaker of the Federal Parliament, Mohamed Sheikh Osman Jawaari,
and some Cabinet ministers visited Baidoa from 30 March to 1 April to consult
representatives of the two processes. The Federal Government publicly backs a
three-region outcome, although not necessarily through the current three-region
process. The Interim Juba Administration and the Government of Puntland have
both issued statements supporting the three-region process.

14-32126 (E)

150514

*1432126*

S/2014/330

4.
On 20 February, the Interim Juba Administration announced new ministerial
and deputy ministerial appointments, including a woman as State Minister of
Women’s Affairs. The appointments augment those made earlier, which were
incomplete. Efforts to boost the implementation of the Addis Ababa Agreement of
27 August 2013 also continued. Funding was secured from the Government of Japan
to partially support the Kismaayo reconciliation conference, which was called for in
the Agreement. On 28 March, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) convened the first meeting of the technical security committee on the return
of militias to Kismaayo and the integration of militias into the Somali National
Army. The Prime Minster of Somalia, Abdiwali Sheikh Ahmed, concluded a week long official visit to Kismaayo on 18 April, during which negoti ations on the return
of militias began and 16 persons from the Barre Hirale militia returned to Kismaayo.
He also established inter-clan peace committees, comprising elders and women’s
groups, to assist with reconciliation efforts in the Juba Dhexe and Jub a Hoose
regions.
5.
Following elections in January 2014, the Government of Puntland continued to
enhance its relations with regional and international actors. In March, the President
of Puntland, Abdiweli Mohamed Ali Gaas, visited Ethiopia and Djibouti.
6.
Tension between Puntland and “Somaliland” increased over the contested Sool
and Sanaag regions. The visit by the President of “Somaliland”, Ahmed Mohamed
Mohamoud Silanyo, to the coastal town of Laasqoray in the disputed Sanaag region
on 16 March triggered a military build-up from both sides. Accusations made by
senior Puntland officials that “Somaliland” was supporting Al-Shabaab further
strained relations. “Somaliland” refuted the allegations and called upon the Federal
Government to intervene. On 15 April, “Somaliland” deployed its forces to the
disputed Sool region and, on the same day, occupied the town of Taleex. The troops
left the town the next day, after less than 24 hours.
7.
Meanwhile, the fourth session of the Federal Parliament began in Moga dishu
on 22 March. On 24 March, the Council of Ministers approved a revised
government budget of $218 million for the fiscal year 2014, nearly doubling its
2013 budget of $114 million. It is projected that 52 per cent of the resources for the
budget will be generated internally. As part of continuing efforts to enhance
transparency and financial accountability, the Speaker announced on 29 March that
cash withdrawals from the Central Bank would be made only with parliamentary
approval, effective from 1 April. On 24 April, the Cabinet approved the appointment
of Bashir Isse Ali as the Bank’s Governor, a post that he had occupied ad interim
since November 2013. Maryam Abdullahi Yusuf was confirmed as the Deputy
Governor.
8.
The Federal Government continued its international diplomatic engagement to
raise the profile of Somalia and mobilize financial support. The President visited
Japan from 10 to 16 March. He also attended the twenty-fifth summit of the League
of Arab States, held in Kuwait on 24 and 25 March. On 1 April, he travelled to
Brussels to attend the fourth European Union-Africa Summit. The Prime Minister
held regional consultations in Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda. He also attended a
meeting of the International Labour Organization in Geneva from 19 to 2 3 March
and visited the United Arab Emirates on 31 March.

2/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

B.

Security situation
9.
Early in March, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
army launched Operation Eagle. During the first phase of the joint operations,
significant gains were achieved on multiple fronts in territory controlled by
Al-Shabaab. At the same time, protracted insecurity was experienced in Mogadishu.
On 21 February, 11 Al-Shabaab fighters carried out a complex attack on Villa
Somalia using explosives and small arms, resulting in eight fatalities. On
27 February, a car bomb targeting army officers in the Shibis district killed eight
people and injured six. On 15 March, an explosive-laden vehicle detonated
prematurely in front of the Maka al-Mukarama hotel, injuring four security guards
and seven civilians. On 21 and 22 April, respectively, two members of the Federal
Parliament, Isak Mohamed Rino and Abdul Aziz Isaq Mursal, were assassinated in
Mogadishu.
10. Separately, mortar shelling, likely perpetrated by Al-Shabaab with the support
of local sympathizers, continued in Mogadishu. On 25 March, a shell landed in front
of the police station at Mogadishu International Airport, while two rounds landed
inside a camp for internally displaced persons in the Dayniile dist rict, injuring
10 civilians. Armed attacks and remote-controlled explosions against Somali and
AMISOM troops occurred almost weekly. Grenade attacks and targeted
assassinations of army officers, in addition to civilian “collaborators”, were also
reported on a weekly basis.
11. On 7 and 8 March, joint operations by AMISOM and Somali troops captured
Xuddur and Waajid, Bakool region, without resistance from insurgents. On 9 March,
the allied forces seized Burdhubo, Gedo region. Mortar shelling and clashes hav e
been reported in and around Burdhubo every week since the takeover. On 13 March,
AMISOM and Somali forces captured Buulobarde, Hiraan region. On 18 March,
Al-Shabaab fighters carried out a complex attack at a hotel that served as a base for
both forces in Buulobarde, resulting in two AMISOM and five national army
fatalities.
12. On 16 March, AMISOM and Somali troops recovered the coastal town of
Warshiikh, Shabelle Dhexe region. On 18 March, they captured Fidow, on the
border with the Hiraan region. Furthermore, on 22 March, the joint forces advanced
from Marka and seized Qoryooley in the Shabelle Hoose region. In addition to the
resumed military offensive, the Shabelle Hoose region continued to experience high
levels of instability owing to probing attacks by Al-Shabaab, in addition to criminal
activities reportedly carried out by Somali troops, including illegal checkpoints,
shootings and armed robberies. On 25 March, AMISOM and Somali forces took
over Maxas, on the border between the Hiraan and Galguduud regions, and further
advanced towards Ceel Buur, Galguduud region, which was captured on 26 March
without resistance from Al-Shabaab.
13. Kismaayo remained volatile. On 17 February, the chief of intelligence of the
Interim Juba Administration was assassinated, with Al-Shabaab claiming
responsibility. On 26 March, four small missiles were fired towards the airport
during a meeting between administration officials and representatives and the
United Nations delegation. No one was injured. AMISOM and Interim Juba
Administration forces continued to face guerrilla and terrorist attacks inside

14-32126

3/19

S/2014/330

Kismaayo and in the wider Juba Hoose area, in particular around Afmadow and
along the road between Taabta and Dhobley.
14. On 7 April, two international consultants working with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) were shot dead by a security guard at the
airport in Gaalkacyo. The assailant and three suspects were arrested and an
investigation is under way. Fresh reports of Al-Shabaab sightings and infiltrations in
and around Boosaaso, Garoowe and Gaalkacyo suggest that some militants are
relocating to Puntland, in particular the mountainous Galgala area, seeking
temporary refuge from the offensive in central and southern Somalia. The Puntland
authorities have tightened security in all major towns and increased checkpoints
along the road from Boosaaso to Gaalkacyo.
15. On 20 April, the President launched a three-day national security conference in
Mogadishu, organized by the Ministry of National Security, with the participation of
a cross section of Somali security institutions, businesspeople and civil society.
AMISOM, UNSOM and the international community attended as observers. The
participants deliberated on security issues with the aim of developing a
comprehensive strategic framework for an internal security policy. This is an
unprecedented step for the Federal Government towards taking ownership of the
security of the country.

III. United Nations support to peace consolidation
16. The United Nations continued to work with the international community on the
implementation of the Somali Compact and Vision 2016 as a basis for aligning
international support through a unified national platform. The Cabinet engaged in
the development of a programme of work for 2014, fully aligned with the Compact,
which was submitted by the Prime Minister to the Federal Parliament early in April.
17. UNSOM and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) are
working with the Federal Government to build its capacity t o implement key
legislative priorities, including by supporting the legislative drafting office in the
Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and supporting the Federal Parliament
with regard to its legislative agenda for 2014. UNSOM and UNDP are a lso working
with the executive branch of the Federal Government to build systems and
organizational capacity at the Cabinet and secretariat levels as part of an
institutional capacity development flagship programme, in collaboration with the
World Bank.
18. UNSOM has established monthly political discussions with Somali opinion
leaders and representatives of civil society on moving forward the Federal
Government’s political priorities.

A.

Good offices and political support
19. My Special Representative for Somalia and Head of UNSOM, Nicholas Kay,
continued to provide good offices to the Federal Government and to regional actors.
On the tense situation in Baidoa, he urged the Federal Government to mediate
between the two competing processes and reaffirmed the readiness of the United
Nations and international partners to support a negotiated solution. Efforts

4/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

continued to build cooperative relations between Mogadishu and Garoowe. In
coordination with other partners, he continued to engage the Government s of
Puntland and “Somaliland” to urge both sides to exercise restraint, avoid
confrontation and enter into dialogue.
20. On 21 and 22 March, my Special Representative held consultations with
various partners in Nairobi, during which he held a joint brief ing for the diplomatic
community with the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Mahamat Saleh Annadif, and the IGAD Envoy to
Somalia, Mohammed Abdi Affey, on Operation Eagle and key political
developments in Somalia.
21. On 24 March, my Special Representative addressed the African Union Peace
and Security Council at its 425th meeting, held in Addis Ababa. He emphasized the
importance of harmonizing the military campaign with political processes and
stabilization activities in southern and central Somalia and encouraged the Federal
Government to continue to take the lead in engendering a peaceful state formation
process. He subsequently travelled to Djibouti, where he held consultations with the
President, Ismaël Omar Guelleh.
22. On 26 March, my Deputy Special Representative, Fatiha Serour, met the First
Deputy Leader of the Interim Juba Administration, Abdullahi Ismail Fartaag, in
Kismaayo. She underscored that it was important for the Federal Government and
the Interim Juba Administration to implement the Addis Ababa Agreement and
encouraged direct dialogue between both parties. She also encouraged the Interim
Juba Administration to participate in the working groups established under the
peacebuilding and State-building goals for the implementation of the Somali
Compact.

B.

Support to peacebuilding and State-building
Development of a federal system and constitutional review/democratic politics
and governance
23. The United Nations continued to provide strategic and policy advice to support
state formation in Somalia. Early in February, the Office of the President shared a
preliminary draft of the Federal Government’s framework of action for the
implementation of the Vision 2016 political road map with members of the
international community. UNSOM provided advice to the Federal Government, at
its request, on the implementation of that road map, including a recommendation to
integrate the coordination frameworks for peacebuilding and State -building goal 1
of the Somali Compact and Vision 2016 framework of action.
24. With the establishment of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs,
and following the appointment of the new Cabinet in January 2014, discussions are
under way between the executive and legislative branches to build consensus on the
roles and responsibilities of stakeholders in the constitutional process and to
develop a joint approach to civic education and public outreach. The processes are
jointly supported by UNDP and UNSOM.
25. UNSOM and UNDP, with support from the Electoral Assistance Division of
the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, deployed an electoral adviser
to provide initial advice to the Federal Government on electoral priorities and

14-32126

5/19

S/2014/330

legislation. The Federal Government has agreed in principle to form an electoral law
committee, comprising representatives of the Ministry of the Interior and
Federalism, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Federal
Parliament, to draft an initial bill to establish a national independent electoral
commission, which will be supported by UNSOM and UNDP.
Security sector and rule of law
Security sector reform
26. On 3 March, the Federal Government and the international community agreed
on the terms of reference for the Working Group on peacebuilding and State building Goal 2, which will help the Federal Government to coordinate support
towards developing unified, capable and accountable federal security institutions
that provide basic security for Somalis. UNSOM provides secretariat support. On
1 April, a National Security Council secretariat architecture project was initiated
with the Federal Government to facilitate the offering of improved planning and
direction to the Council.
27. The security sector public expenditure review being conducted by the Federal
Government with support from the World Bank and UNSOM continued. The review
will help the Federal Government to engage with regional authorities on a national
security strategy and policy development and make informed decisions on resource
allocation, policy priorities and financial gaps throughout the security sector.
Meanwhile, the Federal Government signalled its intention to stop private security
companies from operating in Somalia. It ended the renewal of licences for existing
companies in January 2014, with only temporary extensions being granted since.
Capacity development needs remain significant.
28. The Defence Policy Working Group, which is a subcommittee of the Defence
Working Group, co-chaired by UNSOM and the Ministry of Defence, provided
support to the Federal Government to draft the ministerial guidance on defence
sector policy for the period 2014-2016, which was signed on 23 March.
29. The Training Steering Group, supported by UNSOM, continues to coordinate
training at the Jazeera Training Camp in Mogadishu for 1,500 army personnel.
UNSOM also assisted AMISOM and the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM (UNSOA) in the implementation of the military concept of operations.
Disengaging fighters
30. UNSOM continued its activities in support of the national programme for
disengaged combatants, with increased focus on options for support in the Kismaayo
area. The Government of Luxembourg provided additional funding to cover high risk combatants.
Police
31. The United Nations Joint Police Section continued to support the Somali
police force to strengthen strategic planning and operational capacity, including in
newly recovered areas. The Ministry of National Security announced its intention to
establish a police planning team to set national priorities and improve oversight. The
police sections of UNSOM and AMISOM collaborated to train Somali police
officers who will be deployed to newly recovered areas.

6/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

32. The United Nations rehabilitated seven police stations in the Banadir and Bay
regions, in addition to constructing a model police station in Garoowe as part of
continuing efforts to enhance operational capacity and strengthen community
policing. The twenty-first stipends payment cycle for some 5,700 police officers in
southern and central Somalia concluded. All police officers in southern and central
Somalia were registered in the human resources database.
33. UNDP developed guidance for police station commanders on basic police
functions and operational procedures for a modern police station. On 9 March, nine
police officers, supported with scholarships from UNDP, graduated from the Law
Faculty of Puntland State University. In “Somaliland”, training for police officers on
operational procedures for a model police station began and a new monitoring
process linked to performance and payments was introduced for the special police
unit.
Justice and corrections
34. The United Nations continued to support the Ministry of Justice an d
Constitutional Affairs on peacebuilding and State-building goal 3 by building
institutional capacity and facilitating agreements between the United Nations and
the Ministry, including on programme implementation procedures. On 26 March,
UNSOM met representatives of the Interim Juba Administration in Kismaayo to
determine the latter ’s priority needs and discuss building relations with the Federal
Government.
35. The United Nations is preparing a joint rule of law programming framework
(2014-2016), in line with the joint global focal point arrangement, aimed at making
UNSOM and United Nations agency support operational and coordinating their
interventions under peacebuilding and State-building goals 2 and 3. The framework
is being coordinated with the Federal Government and is under review. A highsecurity prison was opened in Garoowe on 2 April. It will further facilitate the
transfer of Somali pirates convicted in other countries to serve their sentences in
Somalia. The project was funded and completed by UNODC in partnership with the
United Nations Office for Project Services. Between 25 and 27 March,
25 corrections officers (including 7 women) received training in Mogadishu from
UNSOM, UNODC and the United Nations Children’s Fund on the treatment of
prisoners, prison management, gender and juvenile justice. On 4 April, 15 prisoners
escaped from the prison in Boosaaso; 13 have since been recaptured.
Maritime security
36. While incidents of piracy remain low, the threat continues to be latent and the
gains could be reversed in the absence of sustainable development and a robust
maritime security apparatus in Somalia. The arrest of two pirate groups indicates
that Somali piracy has not been suppressed. The suspects were transferred to
Seychelles for trial.
37. As part of the implementation of the Somali maritime resource and security
strategy, the United Nations and the International Maritime Organization are
providing technical assistance to the Federal Government. From 24 to 27 March,
UNODC conducted a legal workshop for Somali judges and prosecutors and
convened a meeting of the legal working group of the Regional Maritime
Coordination Mechanism on 28 March. The Food and Agriculture Organization of

14-32126

7/19

S/2014/330

the United Nations conducted a workshop on fisheries from 1 to 5 April. Separately,
the development of the maritime security architecture under the National Security
Council has been slow owing to a lack of consensus by the Council on the Somali
exclusive economic zone and the delineation of roles and responsibilities between
the maritime police, the coast guard and the navy.
Mine action
38. The United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) continued to provide
technical advice to the Somali Explosive Management Authority and the mine
action centres in “Somaliland” and Puntland. UNMAS emergency explosive risk
education teams delivered training on safe behaviour to 1,675 returnees from Saudi
Arabia in March and carried out risk education activities in the Gedo, Bakool and
Galguduud regions throughout April.
39. Continuing clearance by UNMAS teams in the Dayniile district of Mogadishu
destroyed 1,609 items of unexploded ordnance, reducing opportunities to harvest
those explosives for use in improvised explosive devices. UNMAS supported the
Federal Government’s efforts to comply with sanctions obligations by initiating
physical security improvements at an army weapons and ammunition storage facility
in Mogadishu. From 21 to 23 April, 10 army personnel were trained in weapons
marking and record-keeping.
40. UNMAS continued to provide explosive management support to AMISOM and
the national security forces throughout southern and central Somalia. Training and
mentoring on explosive ordnance disposal and improvised explosive device defeat
was extended to the Ethiopian contingents of AMISOM. The Somali police received
training, mentoring and equipment for explosive ordnance disposal, improvised
explosive device defeat and explosive dog detection. UNMAS also supported police
searches at key infrastructure/government locations. In Mogadishu, Baidoa in the
Bay region, Beledweyne in the Hiraan region and Afgooye in the Shabelle Hoose
region, there were 28 improvised explosive device incidents and 36 items of
unexploded ordnance were identified and destroyed.
41. UNMAS continued to support UNSOA resupply convoys by surveying routes
for explosive hazards and conducting searches for explosives in United Nations
camps.

C.

Human rights and protection
Human rights
42. UNSOM continued to offer technical assistance to the Ministry of Human
Rights and Women’s Affairs. It also continued to provide technical assistance in the
form of training to a Puntland parliamentary committee on human rights, the
“Somaliland” Human Rights Commission and civil society organizations in
“Somaliland” and in southern and central Somalia and Puntland.
43. On 11 March, three men were executed by firing squad in Mogadishu after
having been found guilty of murder in the military justice system. To date in 2014,
four people have been executed by the Federal Government, its commitment in 2011
to a moratorium on the death penalty notwithstanding.

8/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

44. UNSOM and its partners continued to receive reports of human rights
violations, some of which were allegedly perpetrated in relation to the continuing
military campaign. Owing to the prevailing security environment, it has been
difficult to verify those reports, however.
45. Forced evictions of internally displaced persons continued. In March, an
eviction of families in the Hodan district of Mogadishu resulted in protests. I note
with concern that the police responded by firing weapons and burning tyres.
46. The Federal Government, with the support of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of internally displaced persons, finalized its policy framework on
internal displacement, which provides the policy basis necessary for securing a
predictable, systematic, coordinated and principled approach to the situation of the
more than 1 million internally displaced persons and returning refugees.
47. Some 6,000 Somali migrants were deported to Mogadishu from Saudi Arabia.
UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration are monitoring the
deportations, providing emergency assistance in vulnerable cases and supporting
persons with protection needs.
48. On 9 April, Kenya deported 83 Somali nationals, part of a group arrested
following fatal explosions in a Somali-dominated neighbourhood in Nairobi on
31 March. On 5 April, the President met his Kenyan counterpart, Uhuru Kenyatta, to
discuss the detention and deportation of Somali refugees reportedly without legal
documentation. On 17 April, Kenya deported a further 91 Somali nationals. The
group was accompanied by the Somali Ambassador to Kenya.
49. On 20 March, the Federal Government signed an agreement establishing a
decent work programme and ratified three fundamental International Labour
Organization conventions: the Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right
to Organize Convention, 1948 (No. 87), the Right to Organize and Collective
Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No. 98) and the Worst Forms of Child Labour
Convention, 1999 (No. 182).
Child protection
50. A total of 61 incidents of grave violations affecting 58 children (50 boy s and
8 girls) were reported. The violations mostly involved the recruitment and use of
children by security forces linked to the army and allied militias, the police and
Al-Shabaab, sexual violence and arbitrary arrest and detention. The standard
operating procedures for handling children formerly associated with armed forces
and groups were signed by the Minister of Defence and the Minister of National
Security.
51. UNSOM provided training to 192 non-commissioned officers and a core group
of 32 trainers on child protection, as part of an effort to build the capacity of the
army. The soldiers are members of the newly formed multi-clan intervention
infantry company. Community-based reintegration programmes in southern and
central Somalia, which include psychosocial support for trauma relating to conflict,
violence and abuse, life skills training, back-to-school programmes and vocational
training, continued for 498 children.

14-32126

9/19

S/2014/330

Gender mainstreaming and empowerment of women
52. On 19 February, representatives of Somali women’s organizations met in
Mogadishu to determine action required to ensure that gender issues were
mainstreamed throughout the peacebuilding and State-building goals in the Somali
Compact. The United Nations also continued to facilitate meeting s of the Somali
Women Leadership Initiative, so as to shape a strategy for enhancing women ’s
participation in national, regional and local decision-making. The consultations will
feed into a joint programme on women’s participation in peacebuilding and local,
regional and national decision-making, which will be supported by UNDP, the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and
UNSOM. On 19 March, the Somali Women Leadership Initiative met in Puntland to
discuss priorities for the joint programme.
53. In March, AMISOM finalized its gender policy, which is intended to
strengthen responsiveness in the delivery of its mandate. With funding from UNDP,
UNFPA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, 14 representatives of the Federal Government, the Government of Puntland
and “Somaliland” civil society organizations attended the fifty-eighth session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York.
Sexual violence in conflict and gender-based violence
54. United Nations Children’s Fund partners assisted 256 survivors of genderbased violence, including 50 children. On 23 February, the family of a 3 -year-old
rape survivor in Puntland opted to settle the case through the traditional just ice
system, UNSOM attempts to facilitate access to formal justice mechanisms
notwithstanding.

D.

Humanitarian situation
55. The humanitarian crisis in Somalia remains among the largest and most
complex in the world, with some 30 per cent of the population in need, recent
improvements in food security notwithstanding. An estimated 2.9 million people are
in need of immediate lifesaving and livelihood support. Poor and inadequate basic
social services continue to undermine the resilience of the people, wh ile
635,000 people in settlements need support to meet basic minimum standards,
including education, health, shelter and water, sanitation and hygiene.
56. The difficult operating environment notwithstanding, humanitarian partners
provided food and livelihood assistance to 794,000 people, temporary access to safe
and sustainable water to 133,000 people, treatment for acute malnutrition to
47,000 children under 5 years of age, basic health care to 363,000 people, learning
space for 232,000 people and emergency shelter and household items to
18,000 people.
57. Most of the humanitarian needs reported in the wake of Operation Eagle
concern population movement. According to UNHCR, some 50,000 people have
been temporarily displaced as a result of the operation, with another 20,000 reported
temporary displacements yet to be verified. Those movements may overstretch
scarce water resources as most people return to urban and peri -urban locations prone
to disease, seasonal flooding and drought.

10/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

58. Owing to the lack of safe and unimpeded access, humanitarian partners are
facing difficulties in establishing their operations to move goods and personnel in a
sustainable manner. They have, however, conducted rapid needs assessments in
Baidoa, Bay region, and Xuddur and Waajid, Bakool region. Road access to newly
recovered areas has been hampered by security checkpoints, while a trade embargo
imposed by Al-Shabaab in the Bakool region has resulted in a significant surge in
food prices in Xuddur. A key priority is to ensure safe and predictable access to
undertake vaccinations in newly accessible areas and to ensure that water, sanitation
and hygiene needs are met.
59. Emergency response, including shelter kits and household items, was provided
to some 6,800 people who arrived in Baidoa. Health services were also made
available, while 4,600 people were assisted with water, sanitation and hygiene
supplies. In Xuddur, an estimated 1,800 people have returned and integrated with
host communities since early March. A medical team was deployed to Xuddur to
provide lifesaving services.
60. The number of polio cases in Somalia stands at 194. After several emergency
campaigns, transmission has declined, with no new cases reported from Banadir, the
epicentre of the outbreak, since July 2013, and no new cases country-wide in 2014.
The response activities will continue throughout 2014 to halt the outbreak and
prevent further importation. By the end of March, the nationwide polio campaign
had immunized more than 2 million children under 5 years of age.

E.

Stabilization
61. Efforts to bring stability to territory recovered through Operation Eagle
intensified as the Federal Government began to establish caretaker administrations
for the 25 districts included in that phase of joint militar y operations. Those
arrangements should be succeeded by interim regional administrations after two
months. Pre-existing administrations are also being reinstated, such as in Xuddur
during the first week of March. To date, caretaker administrations have bee n
nominated in 8 of the 10 recovered districts. In addition, high -level delegations of
the Federal Government began visiting newly recovered areas. In March, the
Minister of the Interior and Federalism and the Prime Minister led delegations to
Xuddur and Buulobarde, respectively.
62. The Federal Government and international partners identified the support
requirements for the newly recovered areas where there are urgent security and
governance requirements and humanitarian and livelihood needs. The United
Nations is working with the Federal Government to develop a proposal to support
those areas, which will be presented to the Peacebuilding Fund for resources
through the Immediate Response Facility. The Peacebuilding Support Office sent
surge capacity on 14 April to provide support to UNSOM and the United Nations
country team to help to finalize the proposal and review the Fun d’s overall support
to Somalia.

F.

Socioeconomic recovery and development
63. Rehabilitation work on the Ansalooti market in the Hamarjabjab district of
Mogadishu began on 22 February, under a sustainable employment creation and

14-32126

11/19

S/2014/330

improved livelihoods project, which is a partnership between the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme, the Banadir regional administration and local
non-governmental organizations. On 6 March, the World Food Programme
purchased 200 tons of maize from farmer cooperatives in the Shabelle Hoose region.
The first purchase of its kind, it follows a joint pilot initiative with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to procure local Somali grains
initiated in 2013 to link producers and markets.
64. Outside Somalia, UNDP and the United Nations Office for South-South
Cooperation provided support to the Federal Government to send representativ es to
participate in the first Arab States Regional South-South Development Expo, held in
Doha from 18 to 20 February. A special session on Somalia highlighted the value of
South-South and triangular cooperation to the Somali Compact. The first Somali
Producers Exhibition and Conference for more than two decades was held on
17 and 18 March in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. The exhibition showcased Somali
livestock, agriculture and fisheries, bringing together producers, investors, experts,
policymakers and donors.
65. On 24 April, the Minister of Finance signed a memorandum of agreement for
the national funding stream of the Somali Multi-Partner Trust Fund administered by
the United Nations. It aligns the trust fund with the Somali Compact commitment to
progressively using national systems, for example by allowing donor funding to be
channelled to relevant national entities through the Treasury.

G.

Targeted sanctions
66. In its midterm briefing to the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, held on
27 March, the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group encouraged the Committee to
designate individuals or entities that the Group found to be in breach of sanctions.
The Group also advised the Committee that the trade in Somali charcoal was
increasing, the best efforts by some destination States to implement the ban
notwithstanding.
67. On 4 April, as requested by the Security Council, I presented in my letter to
the Council (S/2014/243) my recommendations for United Nations and other
technical assistance to the Federal Government in complying with req uirements set
out by the Council in its resolution 2142 (2014).

H.

Coordination of international efforts
68. The first meeting of the High-level Partnership Forum, the highest body for the
oversight and implementation of the Somali Compact, was held on 24 February in
Mogadishu. This coordination body is chaired by the President and my Special
Representative for Somalia. Representatives of the Federal Government, the Federal
Parliament and several regions, in addition to civil society and the international
community, stressed the importance of urgently delivering on commitments made
under the Compact and improving security in Somalia. International partners urged
the Federal Government to finalize its draft Vision 2016 framework and to develop
action plans for each of the peacebuilding and State -building goals under the
Compact. The Government of Puntland, which has expressed its commitment to the

12/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

New Deal, sent its regrets and called for a high-level meeting with international
partners to discuss the way forward.

IV. Implementation of Security Council resolution 2124 (2013)
69. Significant progress was achieved in the implementation of resolution 2124
(2013) with the launch early in March of Operation Eagle against Al -Shabaab. Joint
AMISOM and Somali forces recovered territory in the Gedo, Bay, Bakool, Hiraan,
Galguduud, Shabelle Dhexe and Shabelle Hoose regions.
70. UNSOM continued to work with AMISOM on implementing the human rights
due diligence policy. A joint United Nations and AMISOM working group on the
policy was inaugurated on 15 February. It identified mechanisms established by
AMISOM to ensure its compliance with the policy. It also identified gaps in
compliance and recommended measures to fill them. UNSOM provided
predeployment induction training on basic human rights to 180 AMISOM
commanders and 240 Somali soldiers.
71. Following the UNSOM-AMISOM retreat held in Addis Ababa on 12 and
13 February, cooperation was strengthened in various areas. A joint information sharing platform was established with the AMISOM military and civilian
components.
Logistical support to the African Union Mission in Somalia and the army
72. UNSOA continued to provide logistical support to AMISOM and the army, as
authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 2124 (2013) and in line with the
revised AMISOM concept of operations. UNSOA supported AMISOM relief in
place to align the disposition of troops in the areas of operations with the concept of
operations, thereby moving 1,100 Burundian and 1,200 Ugandan troops from the
Bay and Bakool regions to the Shabelle Dhexe and Shabelle Hoose regions and
200 Burundian troops from the Bay region to Kismaayo.
73. The construction of AMISOM sector hubs continues, with the required
equipment delivered for sector 4 (Hiraan and Galguduud). Resupplying the sector
remains a challenge, however, because supply lines are stretched and insecure,
requiring UNSOA to use its limited air assets. AMISOM has submitted a request to
the Federal Government for land to construct the Kismaayo supply hub. A new
subhub is planned in Dhobley, Juba Hoose (sector 2), where work has begun. An
aviation hub and sector support subhub are also under construction in Baledogle,
Shabelle Dhexe (sector 1).
74. UNSOA began delivering rations to Ethiopian troops in sectors 3 and 4 on
1 April, following the end of the self-sustainment period. The provision of both
potable and bulk water remains a challenge, however, as troops move further away
from the resupply hubs in Baidoa, Kismaayo and Beledweyne. That the main supply
route between Mogadishu and Baidoa is not fully secure hampers UNSOA resupply
operations.
75. UNSOA has put in place mechanisms for the phased provision of logistical
support to the army and for ensuring that all army forces involved in joint
operations with AMISOM meet the preconditions set out in resolution 2124 (2013).
The Federal Government and AMISOM have agreed that a maximum of

14-32126

13/19

S/2014/330

10,900 national troops will be supported by UNSOA in joint operations. UNSOA
has begun providing logistical support to the army, drawing on the first donations to
the trust fund for the supply of non-lethal support. The Ethiopian and Djiboutian
contingents are training 3,600 and 1,000 national troops in sectors 3 and 4,
respectively. Training in other sectors will begin soon. A dedicated support cell has
been established in UNSOA to coordinate support to the army. Troop -contributing
countries have been requested to provide transportation to the Somali forces
conducting joint operations on a cost-reimbursable basis. To date, Ethiopia has
provided 50 troop carriers with drivers to transport army units in sectors 3 and 4.
76. The funding of army support needs has been incorporated into the United
Nations Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM. Further to expert -level meetings with
Member States held in New York and Nairobi, a high-level fundraising event was
held in New York on 24 April. Pledges amounting to $8 million have been received
from the Governments of Ethiopia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America against the $22 million required
to support the army during the first 12 months of operation. The absence of
sufficient funding will limit the support that can be provided by the United Nations.
77. The United Nations Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM remains integral to
improving operations and enhancing the effectiveness of the logistical support
package to AMISOM. UNSOA received the $2.5 million previously pledged by the
Government of Canada and immediately procured transport and engineering assets,
in addition to broadcast equipment in support of AMISOM.
78. UNSOA continued to provide critical strategic communication support to both
AMISOM and UNSOM. In addition, it provided predeployment, in -mission and
other training for 340 AMISOM personnel, bringing the total number of personnel
trained since April 2009 to 8,816. UNSOA increased its medical support to
AMISOM and the army.
79. UNSOA supported AMISOM efforts to establish a civilian casualty tracking,
analysis and response cell. Recruitment for a senior adviser to lead the cell began.
Funding was secured to support the cell during start-up. The African Union
Commission is expected to launch the recruitment process for the remaining
10 civilian and uniformed personnel immediately.

V. United Nations presence in Somalia
Expansion of the United Nations presence in Somalia
80. On 26 February, the United Nations signed a status-of-mission agreement with
the Federal Government.
81. As at 28 April, a total of 316 international staff and 972 national staff members
from UNSOM and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes had been
deployed: 379 in Mogadishu, 65 in Hargeysa, 13 in Boosaaso, 41 in Garoowe and
9 in Gaalkacyo. In southern and central Somalia, the presence of international staff
remained limited, with eight deployed in Baidoa, three in Dollow and four in
Kismaayo. UNSOM deployment strength stood at 66 international and 19 national
staff.

14/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

Integration
82. The United Nations is now operating as an integrated presence. The integrated
strategic framework is being developed as the United Nations response and
contribution to the implementation of the Somali Compact. The strategic component
of the framework is expected to be finalized by May 2014, whereas its operational
component will be completed in tandem with the finalization of the action plans for
the peacebuilding and State-building goals.
Staff safety and security
83. Following the heightened security situation in Mogadishu, and especially afte r
the complex attack at Villa Somalia on 21 February and persistent reported threats
against the United Nations, internal measures were implemented to strengthen
security measures further, including at Mogadishu International Airport. The phased
reoccupation of compounds along the airport road began on 23 April.
84. In anticipation of the deployment of the United Nations guard unit in
accordance with resolution 2124 (2013), the United Nations presented a protocol of
amendment to the status-of-mission agreement to the Federal Government on
5 April. It will facilitate the activities of the unit, for which Uganda is contributing
troops and equipment. The Federal Government’s response is awaited. Meanwhile,
the advance party of the unit arrived in Mogadishu on 17 April.
85. During the period from 17 March to 10 April, the Compliance, Evaluation and
Monitoring Section of the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat
evaluated the efficacy of United Nations security measures in Somalia. Compliance
was found to be good.
86. An immediate review of security in Puntland was made following the killing
of the two UNODC consultants on 7 April. UNODC and the Department of Safety
and Security are assisting the Puntland authorities with their investigation. It is a
priority to bring those responsible to justice.

VI. Observations
87. The joint AMISOM-national army offensive is changing the political
landscape of Somalia. More territory is being recovered from Al-Shabaab, providing
the Federal Government with opportunities to extend its authority throughout the
country. I pay tribute to AMISOM and to the army for the sacrifices that they
continue to make in the fight against Al-Shabaab. The Somali people must capitalize
on those opportunities by embracing a spirit of compromise and reconciliation as
they rebuild their country after decades of conflict.
88. I commend the leadership of the African Union Commission for successfully
implementing the new AMISOM concept of operations. I remain concerned,
however, by the persistent lack of enablers, in particular military helicopters, which
threatens to limit the impact of the extended effort authorized by the Security
Council in its resolution 2124 (2013). Time is of the essence. I call upon Member
States to expedite the deployment of helicopters and other force enablers in line
with the AMISOM concept of operations. The United Nations stands ready to
reimburse contributing countries for their equipment. I remain grateful to the
international community and in particular to the European Union for their support.

14-32126

15/19

S/2014/330

89. The United Nations has begun to provide support to the Federal Government
to enable the army to conduct joint operations in line with the requirements set by
the Security Council in resolution 2124 (2013), including the full implementation of
the human rights due diligence policy. The army’s requirements, however, are vast
and far exceed the current and projected funds in the trust fund for the supply of
non-lethal support to the army. I am grateful to the Governments of the United
Kingdom and the United States for their generous contributions to the Fund. I am
also grateful to the Governments of Ethiopia, Italy and Sweden for their pledges of
support. I appeal to the international community to share the burden and make
sustained and generous contributions to support the Federal Government.
90. I welcome the renewed momentum generated by Vision 2016 and urge the
Federal Government to move swiftly to finalize its framework for action, in
particular to pass enabling legislation for the National Independent Electoral
Commission and the Boundaries and Federation Commission. I strongly urge the
Federal Government and the international community to accelerate the
implementation of their respective political and financial commitments under the
Somali Compact and Vision 2016. There must be focus on converting existing pl ans
and frameworks into more specific assistance. The continuing effort to promote the
participation of Somali regional representatives in coordination mechanisms is a
welcome development that promotes inclusiveness and reflects evolving needs
beyond Mogadishu. Much remains to be accomplished, however, to guarantee
stronger State and regional engagement to ensure that the needs of all Somalis are
met.
91. I note the efforts being made in the formation of regional administrations and
welcome the Federal Government’s continued commitment to ensuring an inclusive
approach. Federal states will be the building blocks for a stable, peaceful Somalia
and critical to creating a cohesive and effective structure that represents and serves
the interests of all Somalis. I am concerned, however, that the pace at which the
processes are unfolding may not be matching expectations.
92. The Somali people need to see tangible benefits from changes in their local
and regional administrations, especially in newly recovered area s. Stabilization in
those areas will require the collective effort of the Federal Government, the United
Nations, AMISOM and international partners. I call for pledges, including from the
New Deal for Somalia Conference, held in Brussels in 2013, to be hon oured so as to
match the needs.
93. I am deeply concerned about the heightened tension in Baidoa. I welcome the
recent efforts by the Federal Government to resolve the differences between the
competing three-region and six-region processes. I encourage all parties to strive for
a peaceful solution that is in line with the provisional Federal Constitution. The
United Nations and its partners stand ready to support the efforts of the Federal
Government to resolve the situation peacefully.
94. I am similarly concerned about the potential for confrontation between
Puntland and “Somaliland”. I call upon both sides to avoid escalating tensions and
to exercise restraint. At a time when the people of Somalia are making a long awaited breakthrough towards achieving durable peace and stability, it is important
to refrain from confrontation. My Special Representative will continue to provide
his good offices to assist in resolving disputes peacefully. I call upon all regional
actors to cooperate fully with UNSOM in this regard.

16/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

95. I welcome the efforts of the Federal Government, the Interim Juba
Administration and IGAD to continue the implementation of the Addis Ababa
Agreement. I note further steps recently initiated by the Prime Minister to promote
the return of militias to Kismaayo and reconciliation among clans in the Juba Dhexe
and Juba Hoose regions. I call upon all parties concerned to participate in the
process and reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to assisting in the
implementation of the Agreement.
96. The Federal Government has requested international assistance and support to
manage weapons and military equipment and to help it to meet its reporting
obligations to the Security Council under resolution 2142 (2014). I reiterate my call
upon the Federal Government to ensure that the urgent gaps identified in my letter
of 4 April (S/2014/243) are met and urge Member States to provide assistance in
line with my recommendations.
97. I remain concerned about the continued export of Somali charcoal in violation
of the ban by the Security Council in its resolution 2036 (2012) and the significant
resources that such trade generates for Al-Shabaab. I encourage the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia
and Eritrea to list the individuals and entities responsible.
98. I again call upon the Federal Government to place human rights at the
forefront of its State-building agenda, in line with the provisional Federal
Constitution and international obligations. I remain concerned about reports of
grave violations against children and urge the Federal Government to ratify the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Operational Protocols thereto. I also
urge the Federal Government to place a moratorium on the death penalty, in line
with the commitments of Somalia under General Assembly resolution 67/176.
99. I continue to be concerned about the underrepresentation of Somali women in
peacebuilding. I urge the Somali authorities to ensure the full representation of
women in constitutional, electoral and state formation processes, in line with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Special attention should be given to
supporting women in the recovered areas, where they bear the brunt of heavy
socioeconomic burdens. I call upon the Somali authorities to ratify the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
100. I remain extremely concerned about the humanitarian situation in Somalia and
that of Somali refugees and migrants in third countries. Only 13 per cent of the
funding of $933 million requested for humanitarian activities in Somalia has been
provided to date. The tactic recently adopted by Al-Shabaab of blocking supply
routes into towns in southern and central Somalia could cause a further deterioration
in humanitarian conditions. Consequently, Somalia runs the risk of losing the fragile
gains made in 2013. Urgent and sustained funding is required to continue to provide
lifesaving humanitarian assistance and livelihood support and to strengthen the
resilience of vulnerable people. I urge the international community urgently to
provide additional resources for humanitarian assistance in Somalia. I also call upon
countries generously providing refuge to Somalis who have fled the conflict to
comply with their obligations under international law and not to return them
forcefully to Somalia, where their lives could be at risk.
101. The coming months will be critical to the future of Somalia. Many milestones
must be met between now and 2016. Federal states need to be formed and a new

14-32126

17/19

S/2014/330

constitution agreed upon. National reconciliation must be fast -tracked. Increasing
peace and security in Somalia need to be underpinned by effective governance and
government-provided basic services, especially in areas that have recently been
recovered from Al-Shabaab through the sacrifice of AMISOM and the army.
Somalis must see and feel the benefit of that hard work. Local compromise and
reconciliation will be needed. This is ultimately a Somali responsibility.
102. To attain these goals, the Federal Government will need the support of the
United Nations and the international community to improve security for Somalis
and help them to reconcile long-standing differences. With the first anniversary of
UNSOM approaching, the United Nations is now well positioned to assist the
Federal Government to implement its policy priorities and to continue to provide
good offices to facilitate the political process. The international community must
remain committed to supporting the Federal Government and people of Somalia and
I reaffirm the strong commitment of the United Nations to strengthening its support
and presence in Somalia at this critical juncture. In this regard, I strongly
recommend to the Security Council an extension of the mandate of UNSOM for one
year to 3 June 2015.
103. I wish to thank my Special Representative, Nicholas Kay, his deputies and the
members of staff of UNSOM, UNSOA and of the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes and other international and regional organizations in Somalia for
their continued hard work under extremely difficult and dangerous conditions. I pay
particular tribute to the two slain UNODC colleagues who gave their lives to help
Somalia. I also express my deep appreciation to the African Union, AMISOM,
IGAD and the European Union for their sustained support to the search for peace in
Somalia. We must continue to strengthen our partnership so that together we can
help Somalis to enjoy lasting peace.

18/19

14-32126

S/2014/330

14-32126

19/19
