S/PV.9269

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9269th meeting

Friday, 24 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Borg/Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Xhaçka
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Holguín Maldonado
Ms. Colonna
Mr. Biang
Mr. Ampratwum-Sarpong
Mr. Hayashi
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Cassis
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Cleverly
Mr. Blinken

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05863 (E)
*2305863*

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to say a few words regarding a
point of order.
We would like to ask you, Mr. President, to please
clarify the basis on which you propose to give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
Mr. Dmytro Kuleba, before the members of the Council
speak. We have nothing against his statement, but the
Council has its rules, which were established long
before Malta became a member of the Security Council.
You, Mr. President, should abide by them. I would like
to get an answer to my question.
The President: I take note of the points raised by
the representative of the Russian Federation.
This debate is being held on the one-year
anniversary of the beginning of the war in Ukraine,
and the presidency sees value in allowing Ukraine’s
Foreign Minister to take the floor before the members
of the Council on this occasion, as per paragraph 33 of
presidential note S/2017/507.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to warn you, Sir, that the
moment you strike the gavel, thereby formalizing
your decisions, you will create an egregious precedent
whereby the representatives of Ukraine in the Council
are given the kind of privileges that are denied to
representatives of other regions of the world. Let me
give you some specific examples from recent practice:
the meeting on the Central African Republic held on
21 February (see S/PV.9265), where Ms. Sylvie Valérie
Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Republic, spoke after the members
Council; the meeting held on 27 January on Mali (see
S/PV.9251), where the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
that country, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, also spoke after
the members of the Council; the meeting held on
11 January on Colombia (see S/PV.9240), where the
Vice-President — I emphasize, not even the Minister
for Foreign Affairs but the Vice-President, Ms. Francia
Márquez Mina — spoke after the members of the
2/35

24/02/2023

Security Council; the meeting held on 24 January on
Haiti (see S/PV.9247), where the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Roberto
Álvarez Gil, spoke after all the members of the Security
Council. Similarly, Mr. Álvarez Gil spoke after the
members of the Security Council at the meeting on
Haiti held on 21 December 2022 (see S/PV.9233). The
list of such examples can go on and on.
If we talk about precedents, then Mr. Dmytro
Kuleba himself spoke in the Security Council on
22 September 2022 (see S/PV.9135) after all the
members of the Security Council. Not once did any
Western delegation offer to hear representatives of
African, Latin American, or indeed any other regions,
except Ukraine speak before the members of the
Security Council spoke at meetings that those regions
are directly affected by.
Do you understand, Sir, how it will look in the
eyes of the rest of the world if you decide today to give
Mr. Kuleba the privileged right to speak at the beginning
of the meeting? I want to emphasize once again that
we have nothing against the statement to be made by
Mr. Dmytro Kuleba as such; we are ready to listen to
him. But that should be in strict accordance with the
prevailing practice under rule 37, that is, delegations
take the floor after the members of the Council.
What we are seeing now is another attempt to give
certain rights to a given country, whereby you, Sir, as
a representative of the “golden billion”, openly give
preference to Ukraine just because it is part of your
geopolitical project. It would seem that the problems of
the rest the world are of no concern to you. The same
goes for the unprecedented number of delegations to
be invited today under rule 37 — 12 European Union
(EU) countries, in addition to High Representative
Joseph Borrell Fontelles. It is obvious that all those
countries, sharing the same EU position dictated by
Brussels, will add no value the discussion. Such an
approach degrades the value of our debate and damages
the Council’s reputation.
Your British colleagues have already gone down in
history as a bad-faith President of the Council when they
rejected our request for a special emergency meeting of
the Council — something unprecedented.
We regret the fact that, time and again, the Maltese
presidency has openly ignored the Security Council’s
rules of procedures and practices and put its own
national position and the EU common position over its
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

responsibilities as President of the Security Council,
which is supposed to be the guardian of the Council’s
procedures and to adopt an impartial stance. We are
forced to say that Malta is not up to the task. That serves
to confirm our belief that there is no added value in
expanding the Council with Western countries, because
they are turning the Council into the instrument for
satisfying their whims.
The President: Once again, I take note of the points
raised by the representative of the Russian Federation.
May I also recall, for instance, that the Foreign
Minister of Serbia spoke before the members of the
Security Council at least twice, during the past two
meetings on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (see S/PV.9155 and S/PV.9019).
With regard to the list of speakers under rule 37, the
presidency took note that all those requests came from
Foreign Ministers who took the time to travel to New
York to be at the United Nations on this anniversary.
That clearly indicates that they feel that their countries
have been, and are still being, directly impacted by
this war.
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General and the distinguished Ministers
and other high-level representatives. Their presence
here today underscores the importance of the subject
matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Croatia, Czechia, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, Italy,
Latvia, the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Poland, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Spain and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.

S/PV.9269

The Secretary-General: The purposes and
principles embedded in the Charter of the United
Nations are not a matter of convenience. They are not
merely words on paper. They are at the core of who
we are. They reflect the driving mission of our United
Nations. And they exist precisely to address any
grievance, whatever it might be.
One year ago, following a Security Council meeting
on Ukraine (see S/PV.8974), I urged,
“[i]n the name of humanity do not allow to start
in Europe what could be the worst war since the
beginning of the century, with consequences not
only devastating for Ukraine, not only tragic for the
Russian Federation, but with an impact we cannot
even foresee in relation to the consequences for the
global economy”.
I said then that we must give peace a chance, but peace
has had no chance. War has ruled the day.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine is a blatant
violation of the United Nations Charter and
international law. It has unleashed widespread death,
destruction and displacement. Attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure have caused many casualties
and terrible suffering. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has documented
dozens of cases of conflict-related sexual violence
against men, women and girls. Serious violations of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law against prisoners of war — and hundreds
of cases of enforced disappearances and arbitrary
detentions of civilians — were also documented.
Life is a living hell for the people of Ukraine. An
estimated 17.6 million people — nearly 40 per cent
of the population of Ukraine — require humanitarian
assistance and protection. The crisis has erased 30 per
cent of pre-war jobs. The World Food Programme
estimates that nearly 40 per cent of Ukrainians are
unable to afford or access enough food. The war has
sparked a displacement crisis not seen in Europe in
decades. More than 8 million Ukrainian refugees
have been recorded across Europe, in addition to an
estimated 5.4 million people who have been internally
displaced. More than half of all Ukrainian children have
been forced from their homes, with unaccompanied and
separated children facing grave risks of violence, abuse
and exploitation. Vital infrastructure is under fire.
Water, energy and heating systems have been destroyed
in the depths of a freezing winter. The World Health

23-058633/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Organization has verified over 700 attacks on healthcare facilities. More than 3,000 schools and colleges
have been damaged or destroyed. Millions of students
have had their education severely disrupted.
Less measurable, but no less important, is the
devastating impact of months of displacement and
bombardment on the mental health of Ukrainians.
Nearly 10 million people, including 7.8 million children,
are at risk of acute post-traumatic stress disorder.

24/02/2023

now been safely reconnected to global supply chains
on more than 700 ships, helping to bring down prices
around the world. I want to underscore the importance
of all parties remaining engaged in the Initiative,
and reiterate our call for it to be extended beyond
March 2023.

(spoke in French)

The United Nations is firmly committed to working
to remove remaining obstacles to Russian food and
fertilizer exports, including ammonia. Those exports
are essential to our broader efforts to bring down prices
and ease food insecurity around the globe. Both efforts
demonstrate that international cooperation is essential,
valuable and possible, even in the midst of conflict.

We need peace — peace in line with the United
Nations Charter and international law. As we work
for peace, we will continue calling for action on
many fronts. The protection of civilians must remain
the top priority. Attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure must stop. The use of explosive weapons
with wide-area effects in populated areas — in towns,
cities and villages — must end. Safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access for life-saving assistance must
be ensured.

Over the past year, the Security Council has
held more than 40 debates on Ukraine. The guns are
talking now, but in the end we all know that the path of
diplomacy and accountability is the road to a just and
sustainable peace, peace in line with the United Nations
Charter, international law and the resolution adopted
yesterday (General Assembly resolution ES-11/6) by the
General Assembly. We must prevent further escalation.
We must all encourage every meaningful effort to end
the bloodshed and, at long last, give peace a chance.

We must also invest in Ukraine’s recovery and
reconstruction. At the request of the Ukrainian
Government and on behalf of the United Nations
system, the United Nations Development Programme
is co-leading an assessment of damage to energy
infrastructure, jointly with the World Bank.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

And make no mistake, the Russian Federation is
also suffering the deadly consequences.

Since the start of the war, the International Atomic
Energy Agency has supported Ukraine to ensure the
safety and security of its 15 operating reactors at four
nuclear plants, including Europe’s largest nuclear power
plant in Zaporizhzhya. We continue to urge all parties
to swiftly agree and implement a nuclear safety and
security protection zone at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant to avoid a serious accident with potentially
disastrous consequences.
Veiled threats to use nuclear weapons in the context
of the conflict have spiked nuclear risks to levels not
seen since the darkest days of the Cold War. Those
threats are unacceptable.
(spoke in English)
Progress continues to be made under the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, an agreement brokered with the parties
by the United Nations and the Government of Türkiye.
More than 20 million metric tons of foodstuffs have
4/35

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Kuleba (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank the presidency of Malta for convening this
important meeting.
The General Assembly just adopted a resolution
(General Assembly resolution ES-11/6) on the principles
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine.
One hundred and forty-one Member States took the
side of the Charter of the United Nations, while seven
took the side of Russia. No additional explanations are
required. The resolution follows the logic of President
Zelenskyy’s peace formula. The goal of his 10-point
plan is to restore respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders, in full compliance with the United Nations
Charter, which we all have committed to respect and
uphold. In brief, the goal of the plan is to get Russia out
of Ukraine and make the world a safer place. Obviously,
any new peace proposals should now be aligned with
the demands set forth by the Assembly’s resolution. We
invite all countries from every corner of the world to
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

facilitate the implementation of the resolution and the
peace formula.
We need to act jointly and quickly: to ensure nuclear
safety and security, by forcing Russia to withdraw from
the illegally occupied Zaporizhzhya nuclear plant and
stopping missile attacks that endanger nuclear power
plants across the territory of Ukraine; to avoid the
threat of hunger, by furthering the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and countering Russian efforts to undermine
it, as well as by developing our Grain From Ukraine
initiative; to prevent an energy crisis, which will
require the cessation of Russian missile terror against
the critical infrastructure of Ukraine; and to protect the
environment, as the Russian shelling that has burned
millions of hectares of Ukrainian forests threatens our
efforts to counter global warming.

S/PV.9269

equipment to Russia means complicity in the trampling
of the Charter. Whoever gives weapons to Russia is
committing a crime.
In the short term, Ukraine needs to restore
its sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders. In the long term,
justice must be served. The verdict of the Nuremberg
International Military Tribunal was crystal clear: a war
of aggression is not only a war crime; it is the supreme
international crime, distinguishing itself from other
war crimes only in that it contains the accumulated evil
of the whole. We therefore call for the establishment
of a special tribunal with specific jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression against Ukraine and with the ability
to deal with the personal immunities of the principal
perpetrators of that crime.

But first and foremost, people must be saved. Their
lives and their rights are at the centre of our struggle
for peace. The magnitude of the humanitarian crisis
brought on by Russia’s aggression against Ukraine
cannot be overstated. I would like to highlight here
one of the numerous horrendous facts — Russia is now
implementing in Ukraine what is probably the largest
instance of State-sponsored kidnapping of children in
modern history.

The geography of Russian crimes against
international peace and security goes far beyond the
borders of Ukraine and reaches Africa, Asia and the
Middle East. Russia not only incites conflicts, but also
systematically obstructs the Security Council decisions
needed to resolve them. Today Russia argued that the
Council is overly focused on Ukraine and ignores
problems in the rest of the world. Let us all remember
the truth — Russia is the problem of the world.

Ukraine will resist as it has done so far, and Ukraine
will win. Putin is going to lose much sooner than he
thinks. Here is what Russian officials and servicemen
have to know. You think you will get away with what you
did? No, you will end up on trial. You will be testifying
about how strongly you were opposed to the aggression
and how you just followed orders. You think that the
world will get tired of supporting Ukraine? The support
will only grow stronger. You think that Ukraine will
eventually tire of defending itself? The more and the
longer you keep attacking Ukraine, the more resolve we
will have and the more humiliating your defeat will be.

I open the United Nations Charter and I do not see the
words “Member States can attack other Member States
at their will”. I do not see the words “violating borders
is allowed”. Furthermore and most important, I do not
see the words “the Russian Federation” in the Charter
on the list of permanent Security Council members. In
1991, Russia usurped the seat of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics as a permanent Security Council
member and turned it into the throne of impunity.
The future of Russia in the United Nations should be
determined in the context of the illegitimate change of
plates from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to
Russia in 1991 and responsibility for crimes committed
on the territory of Ukraine, including war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide.

Russian propaganda has fabricated this hypocritical
narrative that supplying Ukraine with weapons fuels
the war. Ukraine indeed needs weapons, just as a
firefighter needs water to extinguish a fire, the fire that
is destroying your home and killing innocent people.
The sooner and the more we get, the sooner the fire
will be extinguished. Arming a country that defends
itself from aggression is absolutely legitimate and is
an act of defending the United Nations Charter. On
the contrary, helping an aggressor is illegitimate and
defies the Charter. Any supply of weapons or military

I say it again and again — peace means justice,
and all the peace-loving nations will win peace on the
battlefield and at the diplomatic table.
Finally, on this tragic day, as we mourn lives and
destinies broken by Russia, I kindly ask everyone to
observe a minute of silence in memory of the victims
of the aggression.

23-058635/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

24/02/2023

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a statement.

tragic impact of those transfers and deportations on
Ukraine’s children will be felt for generations to come.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are on our feet to honour the memory
of all the victims of what has happened in Ukraine,
starting in 2014 — all of those who perished. All lives
are priceless, and that is why we are standing, to honour
the memory of them all.

We must redouble our efforts to ensure
accountability for violations of the United Nations
Charter and international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
That must include justice for victims of atrocity crimes
and sexual violence. Perpetrators must be brought to
justice and held to account without delay. We therefore
welcome the important work being carried out by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign and European
Affairs and Trade of Malta.
I begin by thanking Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing and Minister Kuleba for his statement.
We have convened to mark one year since the
Russian Federation launched its aggression against
Ukraine. This brutal, unprovoked and unjustified
war is a blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. It has brought about
immense suffering, destruction and misery on Ukraine
and its population. The war is also a stain on the very
principles that we here are bound to uphold. It has
also compounded the global food and energy crisis,
further exacerbating the already difficult humanitarian
situations being experienced by vulnerable countries
and populations around the globe.
At the outset, I reiterate that every State has the
sovereign right to self-determination, including the
choice of its own destiny in order to ensure its safety
and security. Over the past 12 months, Ukrainians have
shown incredible courage and resilience by defending
not only their right to exist in the face of a brutal
military aggression, but also the values and principles
underpinning the international rules-based order. Over
the past year, various United Nations and international
mechanisms have provided evidence of indiscriminate
killings of civilians, attacks on civilian infrastructure,
torture and other forms of cruel, inhumane and
degrading treatment, sexual and gender-based violence,
abductions and forcible deportation of children.
Such actions constitute serious violations of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law and are a gave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Those children must be returned
to their families or legal guardians without delay. The
6/35

We also reaffirm our support for the mechanisms
that are working in this fight against impunity. We stand
with the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
in his investigations and continue to consider ways
to ensure accountability for the crime of aggression.
We also call on the Russian Federation to respect the
ruling of the International Court of Justice ordering an
immediate suspension of military operations.
On this occasion, I must also express our deep concern
with regard to nuclear safety in Ukraine. Shelling in
and around nuclear power plants in Ukraine, including
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, constitutes a
grave environmental and health threat and a serious
risk to international peace and security. Such actions
can lead to a grave humanitarian and environmental
catastrophe, with long-term repercussions.
In the context of a deteriorating global
non-proliferation architecture, any declaration by
Russia suggesting that the possible use of nuclear
weapons is in any way justified are unacceptable. Such
rhetoric leads only to uncertainty, further undermines
trust between the parties and serves only as a means to
escalate the conflict and heighten tensions.
This aggression has also had serious repercussions
for the rules-based international order to which we all
agreed. As members of the international community,
our collective security depends on such common
principles, underpinned by the notion that might is not
right. No State or Power has the right to redraw borders
in accordance with its geopolitical interests. Malta
reaffirms its full support for Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. As committed
multilateralists, it is our duty to defend and promote
such principles and counter contempt for them.
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In conclusion, as a member of the Security Council,
Malta will continue to support all efforts to address the
consequences of Russia’s aggression. We also reiterate
that the only step towards a lasting peace would be
for Russia to immediately cease all hostilities and
unconditionally completely withdraw all its forces and
military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now call on the Secretary of State of the United
States of America.
Mr. Blinken (United States of America): One year
and one week ago, on 17 February 2022, I warned the
Security Council that Russia was planning to invade
Ukraine (see S/PV.8968). I said that Russia would
manufacture a pretext and then use missiles, tanks,
soldiers and cyberattacks to strike pre-identified
targets, including Kyiv. with the aim of toppling
Ukraine’s democratically elected Government. Russia’s
representative — the same representative who will
speak today — called those “groundless accusations”.
Seven days later, on 24 February 2022, Russia launched
its full-scale invasion.
Due to fierce resistance by Ukraine’s defenders,
President Putin failed in his primary objective to conquer
Ukraine and its existence as an independent country
and absorb it into Russia. He then dusted off his Crimea
playbook from 2014. He called snap referendums in
four occupied parts of Ukraine, deported Ukrainians,
bussed in Russians, held sham votes at gunpoint and
then manipulated the results to claim unanimous
support for joining the Russian Federation.
When President Putin could not break the Ukrainian
military, he intensified efforts to break the Ukrainian
spirit. Over the past year, Russia has killed tens of
thousands of Ukrainian men, women and children,
uprooted more than 13 million people from their homes,
destroyed more than half the country’s energy grid,
bombed more than 700 hospitals and 2,600 schools,
abducted at least 6,000 Ukrainian children, some as
young as four months old, and relocated them to Russia.
Yet the spirit of the Ukrainians remains unbroken. If
anything, it is stronger than ever.
When Ukraine launched a counter-offensive that
retook large swathes of its territory, President Putin
conscripted an additional 300,000 men, throwing an

S/PV.9269

increasing number of Russia’s young people into a meat
grinder of his own making. He unleashed the Wagner
Group — mercenaries who have committed atrocities
from Africa to the Middle East, and now in Ukraine.
Of course, that is not the whole story of the past
year. There is also the story of Ukraine’s people. Vastly
outnumbered, they have fought bravely to defend their
nation, their freedom and the right to determine their
own future, and they have demonstrated inspiring unity
in helping one another to endure Moscow’s relentless
assault. Teachers and community members give classes
to children in bunkers. City workers improvised
patches to restore heat, power and water to residents.
Neighbours set up soup kitchens to feed the hungry.
There is also the story of how the international
community has come together. The vast majority
of Member States voted multiple times to condemn
Russia’s violations of the Charter of the United Nations
and reject its illegal attempt to seize Ukrainian territory.
Yesterday in the General Assembly, 141 countries voted
in favour of resolution ES-11/6, which reaffirms the
core principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity,
denounces Russia’s atrocities and expresses support for
a just and comprehensive peace, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.
When President Putin tried to weaponize hunger,
exploiting the worst global food crisis since the
creation of the United Nations, the international
community responded swiftly. Since the United States
presided over a meeting on food security last May (see
S/PV.9036), more than 100 countries have signed up
to a set of concrete commitments to alleviate hunger.
Thanks in large part to Secretary-General Guterres
and Türkiye, the Black Sea Grain Initiative loosened
Russia’s stranglehold on Ukraine’s ports and brought
down the cost of grain for the world. As Moscow again
tries to throttle its output, we now have to ensure that
the Initiative is extended and expanded. When President
Putin tried to weaponize energy, we redirected natural
gas supplies from across the world so that the countries
that Russia targeted could keep their people warm in
the winter, and Europe took extraordinary steps to end
its dependence on Russian energy.
No country has endured greater hardship as a result
of Russia’s war than Ukraine, but almost every country
has felt the pain. Yet nations around the world continue
to stand with Ukraine because we all recognize that, if
we abandon Ukraine, we abandon the United Nations

23-058637/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Charter itself and the principles and rules that make all
countries safer and more secure — no seizing of land
by force, no erasing of another country’s borders, no
targeting civilians in war and no wars of aggression.
If we do not defend those basic principles, we invite
a world in which might makes right and the strong
dominate the weak. That is the world that this organ
was created to end, and members of the Council have a
unique responsibility to ensure that we do not return to
it. We can do that in three ways.
First. we must push for a just and durable peace.
I expect that many countries will call for peace today.
No one wants peace more than the Ukrainian people.
The United States has long made clear, even before this
war, that we are prepared to engage in any meaningful
diplomatic effort to stop Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine. But history teaches us that it is the nature
of peace that matters. For peace to be just, it must
uphold the principles at the heart of the United Nations
Charter — sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence. For peace to be durable, it must ensure
that Russia cannot simply rest, rearm and relaunch
the war in a few months or a few years. Any peace
that legitimizes Russia’s seizure of land by force will
weaken the Charter and send a message to would-be
aggressors everywhere that they can invade countries
and get away with it.
President Zelenskyy has put forward a 10-point
plan for a just and durable peace. By contrast, President
Putin has made it clear that there is nothing to talk about
until Ukraine accepts “the new territorial realities”,
while doubling down on his brutal tactics.
Members of the Security Council have a
fundamental responsibility to ensure that any peace is
just and durable. Council members should not be fooled
by calls for a temporary or unconditional ceasefire.
Russia will use any pause in fighting to consolidate
control over the territory that it illegally seized and
will replenish its forces for further attacks. That is what
happened when Russia’s first assault on Ukraine froze
in 2015. We should look at what followed.
Members of the Security Council should not fall
into the false equivalency of calling on both sides to
stop fighting or of calling on other nations to stop
supporting Ukraine in the name of peace. No member
of the Council should call for peace while supporting
Russia’s war on Ukraine and on the United Nations
Charter. In this war, there is an aggressor and there is a
8/35

24/02/2023

victim. Russia fights for conquest. Ukraine fights for its
freedom. If Russia stops fighting and leaves Ukraine,
the war ends. If Ukraine stops fighting, Ukraine ends.
The fact remains that one man, Vladimir Putin, started
this war. One man can end it.
Secondly, even as we work to end Russia’s war
against Ukraine, members of the Council must
continue to address other challenges to international
peace and security. We hear the concerns of countries
who worry that standing with Ukraine and holding
Russia accountable is diverting focus and resources
from others in need. To those countries, I would say
simply: look at our actions. And when you hear Russia
and its defenders accuse the countries who support
Ukraine of ignoring the rest of the world, I say look at
Moscow’s actions. Compare the numbers. In addition
to the $13.5 billion in food aid that the United States
contributed to fighting hunger over the past year, we
also fund more than 40 per cent of the World Food
Programme’s budget. Russia contributes less than 1 per
cent of that budget. That is not an outlier. Based on the
latest United Nations figures, the United States donates
more than nine times as much as Russia to United
Nations peacekeeping. We donate 390 times as much
as Russia to UNICEF. We give nearly 1,000 times as
much as Russia to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
Thirdly, we must reaffirm our commitment to
upholding what the Charter of the United Nations
calls “the dignity and worth of the human person”. We
must continue to compile evidence of Russia’s ongoing
and widespread atrocities, including executions,
torture, rape and sexual violence and the deportation
of thousands of Ukrainian civilians to Russia. We
must continue to document Russia’s war crimes and
crimes against humanity and share that evidence
with investigators and prosecutors so that one day
the perpetrators can be held accountable. With day
after day of witnessing Russia’s atrocities, it is easy
to become numb to the horror — to lose our ability to
feel shock and outrage. But we can never let the crimes
Russia is committing become our new normal. Bucha is
not normal. Mariupol is not normal. Irpin is not normal.
Bombing schools, hospitals and apartment buildings to
rubble is not normal. Stealing Ukrainian children from
their families and giving them to people in Russia is
not normal. We must not let President Putin’s callous
indifference for human life become our own. We must
force ourselves to remember that behind every atrocity
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in this wretched war and conflicts around the world is
a human being.
I recently visited an exhibit of artwork made by
Ukrainian children affected by the war. One painting
I saw was made by a 10-year-old girl named Veronika.
Last April, Russian forces shelled her home in Vuhledar,
killing her whole family. When first responders dug
her from the rubble, a piece of shrapnel was lodged in
her skull. Her left thumb had been ripped off. Doctors
saved her life. But the attack left her right hand mostly
paralysed, and she cannot see out of her left eye. In her
painting, Veronika drew herself in a bright pink and
orange dress, holding a bouquet of flowers. A building
stands next to her. When asked who lived there, she
said it was a place where all the people she knew who
had been killed in the war could be safe.
We, the peoples of the United Nations, determined
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war — that is how the Charter begins. Now is the
time to meet that promise. There are so many people
in Ukraine who want the same thing as that little girl,
Veronika — a world where they can live in peace in
their own country and keep the people they love safe.
We have the power. We have the responsibility to create
that world today and for generations to come. We cannot
and will not let one country destroy it.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of Albania.
Ms. Xhaçka (Albania): Let me start by thanking
Malta for organizing today’s meeting and you, Minister,
for chairing it. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for his powerful words, his continued genuine efforts to
end the war in Ukraine and, above all, his moral clarity
during this unprecedented crisis.
This is a tragic anniversary. There is nothing to
celebrate, but rather everything to regret. But still,
there is one crucial thing to note and never forget. Out
of a disastrous war and its terrible consequences, we
have seen a world remarkably united in condemning a
war of choice, refusing territorial annexation by force,
upholding international law and defending the Charter
of the United Nations. Yesterday (see A/ES-11/PV.19),
141 Member States from all corners of the world once
again confirmed with a resounding voice that they
do not want a world according to Russia, but a world
according to the Charter. They want peace — a just
peace for Ukraine and its people, in line with President
Zelenskyy’s peace plan.

S/PV.9269

One year ago, Russian troops rushed across the
borders of Ukraine, and Russian missiles filled its
sky, unleashing the brutal war that continues to this
hour. What Russia started on this very day last year
has been cataclysmic for Ukraine, earth-shattering for
Europe and history-shaping for the world. Thousands
of civilians have lost their lives. Millions of children
have lost their schools. Countless people have lost
their homes. Millions more have been displaced. And
the damage to the infrastructure and economy of
Ukraine is simply unfathomable. Millions around the
world, especially the poorest and most vulnerable, have
suffered greatly because of the global ripple effects,
especially the spike in the food crisis.
Throughout the year, the world has witnessed
with dismay and verified and documented despicable
crimes, executions, rape, pillaging, torture, deportation
of children, war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed by the invader. We have witnessed thousands
of convicts being pressed into service and used as
cannon fodder in the ranks of the Wagner Group, a
murderous machine with a notorious footprint in other
parts of the world. And the most appalling of all of it is
that an unjust, illegal and unprovoked war of aggression
against an innocent country and people is perpetrated
by a permanent member of the Council, who bears a
special responsibility for guaranteeing peace and
security and upholding the Charter and international
law. Instead, it has chosen to behave like a rogue State,
going against the law, the rules and the world. The
truth is that despite everything, Ukraine is still here. Its
people are suffering, but fighting, resisting bravely in
defending their land, freedom and future. And they are
not alone. Their fight is also the fight of everyone who
aspires to peace. And I have to echo Minister Kuleba
and strongly agree with him that peace means justice.
Russia’s leaders like to talk about history and their
country’s role in it. And of course, Russia has had much
to be proud of throughout its history. But countries and
their leaders are judged, above all, by their ability to
learn from the past and their actions in the present.
And at present, Russia has nothing to be proud of. With
its wrong actions, disastrous policy and criminal war,
Russia has isolated itself and has only itself to blame
for that. The sooner ordinary Russians understand that,
the sooner this madness will stop.
This war must end, and it will end. But the end we
envisage is the end of aggression, not the end of the
rules-based world order. It is the end of the presence

23-058639/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of Russian troops in Ukraine, not the end of life there.
It is the end of unnecessary suffering, not the end
of hope. There must and will be a future with a just
and stable peace and a free and secure Ukraine that
is sovereign and with its territorial integrity restored.
We look forward to the day — I hope soon — of the
start of a process of healing and reconstruction. But
until that day comes, Ukraine and its people deserve
all our political, economic and military support and all
our continued solidarity in their heroic resistance to
defend themselves and to defend what is right and just.
Slava Ukraini.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Human Mobility of Ecuador.
Mr. Holguín Maldonado (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I hank you, Sir, for convening this debate
on the one-year anniversary of the military aggression
against Ukraine. The first bombardments, which
began while the Security Council was meeting in this
very Chamber, crushed the diplomatic efforts of the
international community and the plea by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, who called on the Russian
Federation to give peace a chance.
I will focus on three key points today: first, the
grave humanitarian and global consequences of the
war; secondly, what the Council and the United Nations
have been able to do; and, thirdly, what is needed to
restore peace and security.
The consequences of the military aggression have
been disastrous from its first day. In fact, 72 hours after
it began, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator briefed this
organ (see S/PV.8983) on the horrific humanitarian
situation. Among the hundreds of thousands of people
who sought to flee Russia’s preposterous aggression,
there were close to a thousand Ecuadorians, many
of whom we had to evacuate through emergency
operations in coordination with other South American
countries, such as Colombia, Peru and Mexico. Many
of the fleeing Ecuadorians provide a living testimony
for us of the serious humanitarian consequences of the
invasion that continue to worsen every day and every
minute, even as we speak. The war is not solely focused
on Ukraine — it was an attack against the world.
It is also an aggression against Latin America. With
14 million people forced from their homes, 8 million
refugees in Europe and almost 6 million internally
displaced persons, those most affected are women and
10/35

24/02/2023

children. The war has left approximately 18 million
people in need of protection and assistance. The loss
of jobs and economic devastation have exacerbated this
preventable tragedy and put human rights protection
mechanisms under stress. Summary executions, sexual
and gender-based violence, torture and other inhumane
and degrading treatment are part of the cruel calculus
of the war.
A year ago, the Council was warned of how brutal
and prolonged such an urban war would be. That
warning was not enough to stop the use of explosives
in populated areas and the attacks targeting critical
energy, residential, health, educational and productive
infrastructure and Ukrainian cultural identity and
heritage sites, including museums and religious sites.
The conflict, which is inflicting pain and destruction
on the people of Ukraine, has moreover increased the
nuclear threat, has exacerbated global food insecurity
and has affected economies, particularly in developing
countries. Likewise, it has also affected the dynamics
of the work of the Council and confidence in the United
Nations system, which brings me to my second point.
Over the past 12 months that the United Nations
system has been seized of the matter, the Security
Council has met at least 40 times to consider the situation
in Ukraine, and its President has been able to participate
in the relevant meetings via video-teleconference.
Through the “uniting for peace” mechanism, through its
resolution 2623 (2022), the Security Council convened
the eleventh emergency special session of the General
Assembly, which adopted six resolutions focusing,
inter alia, on territorial integrity (resolution ES-11/4),
humanitarian issues (resolution ES-11/2), accountability
(resolution ES-11/5) and — the subject of the resolution
we adopted yesterday by an overwhelming majority
(resolution ES-11/6) — the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations underlying a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace.
For its part, on 16 March 2022, the International
Court of Justice ordered the Russian Federation to
immediately suspend its military operations, and
the Secretary-General has been instrumental in
implementing that order in terms of the evacuation of
civilians, the release of prisoners and other humanitarian
measures, including the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has also
been deployed to Ukraine’s nuclear power plants to
reduce the current risks.
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

As I have stated, the United Nations is mobilized,
but no effort will be enough to address the pain of the
thousands of fathers and mothers who continue to bury
their children and the tragic fate of the thousands of
orphaned children. How do we justify our actions to a
generation of Ukrainians who one day woke up under
the onslaught of bombs, missiles and ammunition to
never again see their loved ones, because they either
died or fled? How many other horrors must they endure
for this absurd war to end? How many more Council
meetings are needed to stop the military aggression
against Ukraine?
That brings me to my third and last point about
what we still can and must do.
First, the Council must unequivocally reject
attempts to annex territories by force and violence as a
tool of domination between States. This is not a vision
of the West, as we have heard time and again; this is
a sacred principle for developing countries, whose
only arsenal is international law, and ammunition the
provisions of the Charter.
Secondly, the abuse and partial application of
Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter, whereby a party
to a dispute must abstain from voting, must end.
Thirdly, members of the Council must collectively
or individually redouble their support for the efforts
and good offices of the Secretary-General and
inter-agency work.
Fourthly, what better way is there to honour the
lives of the victims of this conflict than by ensuring
independent investigative mechanisms, accountability
and reparations, as tools for providing remedy
and deterrence?
Lastly and most importantly, the Russian Federation
must immediately end the unprovoked and unjustifiable
war by withdrawing its occupying troops to allow for a
realistic ceasefire aimed at restoring peace and security
in Ukraine, based on respect for its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence. Today,
for all the children who have died, who have been
injured and who continue to live under the spectre of
bombs, we call for this war to not continue for even one
more day.
The President: I now call on the Federal Councillor
and Head of the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs
of the Swiss Confederation.

S/PV.9269

Mr. Cassis (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
commitment to peace. I would like to assure you,
Mr. President, of Switzerland’s support for the work of
the Security Council.
During my first visit to Ukraine in October 2021,
I discussed reforms and development with the political
authorities. At the time, we talked about a stable and
prosperous future for the country. The contrast of that
visit to my second last fall to bomb-struck Kyiv was
chilling and distressing. Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine has been a huge shock for Switzerland, as the
depositary and a party to the Geneva Conventions. My
country is committed to the principles of peace and
sovereignty, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Over the past 12 months, the Charter has been
violated and the Geneva Conventions, which set out
limits to the barbarity of war, have been flouted.
Switzerland, however, believes in the rule of law.
I therefore call for full respect for the fundamental
provisions of international humanitarian law. The
civilian population, those injured, those taken prisoner
and vital infrastructure must be protected by all
parties to the conflict and all combatants. It is more
than necessary to recall those commitments to which
all of us in this Chamber, at the United Nations, have
subscribed. We must do everything possible to ensure
that they are respected on the territory of Ukraine,
which is being torn apart by war. And what can we do,
specifically?
We could, for example, meet in the spirit of the
Geneva Conventions. We could meet to together
discuss the means necessary to ensure that, in the midst
of this heart-wrenching conflict, we do not forget what
defines us as human beings: the principle of humanity.
Switzerland is ready at any time to gather everyone
around the table in order to work for greater respect
for international humanitarian law and, ultimately, for
peace. Next year we will commemorate the seventyfifth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. Let us not
wait a year, we must act now.
After a year of war, we must pool our strength,
ideas and resources to restore security in Europe
and ensure the return of a complete, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine. Switzerland therefore welcomes the
resolution adopted yesterday by the General Assembly
(resolution ES-11/6). It is a clear signal from the vast

23-0586311/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

majority of Member States in favour of solidarity,
dialogue and peace.
In order to make peace in Ukraine possible, I
reiterate today our appeal to Russia: it is high time to
cease all hostilities and to withdraw all its troops from
Ukrainian territory without delay.
Aggression, threats and misinformation undermine
the basis of the international order. To prevent that, we
need strong and effective multilateralism. We need to
restore our mutual trust and to ensure that justice is
done, so that peace can be built on solid foundations.
As a permanently neutral State, Switzerland fully
respects its obligations under the law of neutrality. It
does not favour any of the belligerents in military terms,
but neutrality does not mean indifference. We cannot
be indifferent to violations of our fundamental rights.
Along with 40 other States, Switzerland has referred
the situation in Ukraine to the International Criminal
Court. And I now call on all States to cooperate with
the Court. Faced with reports of war crimes, sexual
violence and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights, we cannot stand
idly by.
Switzerland continues to support Ukraine. At the
same time, Switzerland does not forget the victims
of all other conflicts in the world. The Charter of
the United Nations must serve as a compass beyond
borders and convictions. Switzerland is on the side
of international law. That is an essential condition for
lasting peace — the goal to which we have committed
ourselves as members of the Security Council.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Hayashi (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important meeting. My appreciation
also goes to the Secretary-General.
One year ago today, right here in this very
Chamber, right in the middle of the discussion on how
to prevent aggression against Ukraine (see S/PV.8974),
a permanent member of the Security Council,
launched an aggression against Ukraine, in front of
the wide-open eyes of Council members. It was an
insult to the Security Council and to the entire United
Nations. It demonstrated how little Russia cares about
the United Nations.
12/35

24/02/2023

At that very moment, I remember vividly,
Secretary-General Guterres called on the Russian
leader, “President Putin, stop the military operation.
Bring the troops back to Russia.” His call still echoes
in my ears.
The call of the Secretary-General represents the
collective will of the Member States — maybe except
for a few — and it is reflected in the resolutions of
the General Assembly, including the one adopted just
yesterday (resolution ES-11/6), and in the International
Court of Justice order on provisional measures. It is
unfortunate that, one year later, we still have to repeat
the same call.
Japan condemns Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine in the strongest possible terms. It is a clear
violation of international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations, by a permanent member of the
Security Council, which is supposed to bear the heaviest
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Russia must immediately stop its war of aggression,
withdraw all its troops and military equipment
from Ukraine, and respect Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders. No country is
allowed to rewrite borders by force or coercion.
Japan also condemns Russia’s attacks against critical
infrastructure. Indiscriminate attacks on innocent
civilians are a violation of international humanitarian
law and constitute a war crime.
Russia’s irresponsible nuclear rhetoric and its
seizure and militarization of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant must be denounced as well. We commend
and fully support the work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to ensure nuclear safety and security
at the plant. We must hold Russia accountable in
accordance with international law.
We will stand firmly with Ukraine. Japan welcomes
President Zelenskyy’s sincere efforts to demonstrate
fundamental principles in his peace formula and to
promote a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
accordance with the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations.
Before conclusion, allow me to reiterate that any
attempts to change the status quo of territory by force
or coercion anywhere in the world must be rejected. At
the same time, the Security Council should not leave
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

behind the many other challenges that it has to deal
with. Let us return to the unshakeable principles that
the Member States have built upon since 1945. Let us
unite for the rule of law. Let us uphold the rule of law
for peace.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
Ms. Colonna (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting and to express my special thanks to
the Secretary-General and Mr. Dmytro Kuleba for
their statements.
On 24 February 2022, Russia launched a war of
aggression against Ukraine. It had already occupied
part of the country’s territory for eight years. It did
so with no other justification than its obsessive desire
to resurrect the past — which had nonetheless been
condemned by history — and since then, it has used the
most extreme violence to deny the identity of a country
and a people.
Today marks one year of Russia sowing death and
destruction, one year — 365 long days — of it flagrantly
violating the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, even though it is a permanent
member of the Security Council. It has been one year
of inhuman suffering for the Ukrainian people, whose
resistance and courage commands admiration; one
year of war crimes and crimes against humanity; one
year of abuses, executions, shelling of civilian targets,
torture, rape, abductions and deportations of children;
and one year of systematic violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, crimes that the
International Criminal Court is investigating and
for which it will, when the time comes, establish
the responsibilities of both the perpetrators and
their sponsors. It has been one year, and millions of
lives have been stolen, destroyed or disrupted.
It has been a year in which Russia has blatantly
violated numerous Security Council resolutions. This
is the case, for example, with resolution 2231 (2015), on
Iran. Accordingly, we again call on the United Nations
to investigate Iran’s transfers of drones to Russia and
North Korea’s deliveries of missiles and ammunition
to Russia.
For a year, Russia has been using nuclear
rhetoric irresponsible for a nuclear-weapon State and
endangering the safety of Ukrainian power plants,

S/PV.9269

which it has not hesitated to occupy to support its
aggression. I therefore would like to commend the
efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency and
its Director General to ensure the safety and security of
the Zaporizhzhya plant and other nuclear power plants
in Ukraine.
One year on, many countries are forced to deal with
growing food insecurity and energy price pressures as
a direct result of the Russian war.
It is one year later, and the facts are clear: there is
an aggressor, Russia, which denies its responsibilities,
and an aggressee, Ukraine, which defends itself but
also speaks of peace and has made a proposal to that
end respectful of the principles of our shared Charter
and the values of the Organization, which are the
foundation of our collective security. This is the path to
be followed that the General Assembly, by a very large
majority of 141 States, called for yesterday (General
Assembly resolution ES-11/6), as it has done in recent
months in resolutions condemning Russian aggression
and illegal annexations.
Ukraine is exercising its right to defence, a right
recognized by the United Nations Charter. That is why
we and our partners will continue to give Ukraine the
support it needs for as long as it takes, because there
will be no peace and stability anywhere if aggression is
rewarded — no peace and stability anywhere.
One year on, Russian aggression must stop. The
rules of international law must at last be respected,
and Ukraine must regain its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The International Court of Justice demanded
it on 16 March 2022. We therefore call on Russia to
finally show itself worthy of its responsibilities as a
permanent member of the Security Council and put an
immediate end to its war of aggression against Ukraine.
The President: I now call on the Secretary of
State for Foreign, Commonwealth and Development
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
Mr. Cleverly (United Kingdom): Today we mark
one year since President Putin began his full-scale
invasion of Ukraine.
Three months ago, I travelled to Kyiv. Ukraine’s
Foreign Minister, who is sitting with us in the Chamber
today, greeted me. He had promised to host me for
lunch, as representatives of countries often do. But I
arrived just after another Russian missile attack on

23-0586313/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

civilian infrastructure had knocked out the water and
electricity supply to that city. But Foreign Minister
Kuleba — Kyiv — was not going to let Putin’s bomb
stop him from doing his job. The restaurant that hosted
us rigged up a generator, brought in litres of bottled
water and provided the lunch.
We have all given and received diplomatic
hospitality in our jobs, but that is the kind of diplomatic
hospitality that shows something very important. It was
a clear demonstration that while the Ukrainians may
have been hit —and hit hard — their spirit will not be
broken. That restaurant’s personnel wanted to show me
that they would not give up, but they would keep calm
and carry on.
Foreign Minister Kuleba kept his promise to me,
and all of us in the Security Council Chamber today
need to keep our promise to Ukraine and keep our
promise to world to protect and defend the United
Nations Charter.
Over the past year, Putin has shown us that he
is willing to wage a war of attrition. The twentieth
century’s two World Wars have shown us what a horror
that would be — hundreds of thousands more dead
or wounded, global shortages of fuel and food, and
skyrocketing prices. For these reasons and many more,
Putin cannot and must not win in Ukraine.
What is at stake on the battlefield is the international
order itself, and that is at the heart of the United Nations.
The United Nations Charter, territorial integrity and
international law exist to protect countries that do not
themselves have big and powerful armies; they are there
to protect them from the aggression of those countries
that do.
At the end of the Second World War, the United
Nations saw a unique thing in human history. Powerful,
victorious nations chose to limit their own power to
protect the countries less powerful than themselves.
That is the bottom line. That is why the United Nations
Charter needs to be protected and why it needs to be
enforced. It is also why three quarters of the entire
membership of the United Nations have repeatedly voted
to condemn this invasion in the General Assembly.
But President Putin ignores the will of the United
Nations. He does not care about the United Nations
Charter. On 24 February last year, he told us it was
not Russia’s plan to occupy Ukrainian territory. On
8 December, he called his illegal so-called annexations
14/35

24/02/2023

a significant result for Russia. His land grabs in eastern
and southern Ukraine show us that his heart is set on
imperial expansion. But 800 Russian soldiers a day are
dying for his hopeless ambitions; they are paying for
his ego with their lives.
As he sees that his aggression against Ukraine is
failing, we should expect him to try and strong arm us
into backing down with every dirty coercive instrument
at his disposal: with cuts to grain and energy shipments,
with threats of escalation, and with poisonous
disinformation and cyberattacks. We must be prepared
for this, and we must recognize that these things are a
sign of weakness, rather than a sign of strength.
Those of us in this Chamber have a special
responsibility to the United Nations Charter. We cannot
allow Putin’s invasion or his threats to succeed. We
must not deviate from our resolve. The United Kingdom
is proud of the support that we have given to Ukraine.
But military assistance and humanitarian aid are
not enough. When this war is over — and it will be over
with Ukraine’s successful defence of its territory — we
must never allow Ukraine to be left vulnerable to attack
again. We must make sure that Ukraine is safe and
secure and economically viable. That is why the United
Kingdom is proud to co-host the Ukraine recovery
conference in London in June 2023.
Together, we must mobilize the combined might
of public and private finance to ensure that Ukraine
gets the reconstruction investment it needs. But what
Ukraine wants — what we all want — is for this war
to end now, and to end with a victory for Ukraine
and a just and enduring peace, based on the United
Nations Charter. Only this can bring an end to the
food and fuel shortages from which the whole world
is suffering.
One year on, on year into this terrible war, let us
in the Chamber send a clear message. Our support for
Ukraine is not and will never be time-limited. Our
defence of the Charter of the United Nations is not and
will never be time-limited. We will keep the promises
that we made to the United Nations Charter and to the
Ukrainian people. We will give the Ukrainians the help
that they need for as long as it takes, until Ukraine
prevails, until its sovereignty and territorial integrity
are restored and until the Charter of the Organization
is upheld.
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Ampratwum-Sarpong (Ghana): I thank Malta,
in its capacity as the President of the Security Council,
for convening today’s debate on the maintenance of
peace and security in Ukraine.
I also thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his statement and for his leadership over the past
12 months on the humanitarian, security and political
aspects of the war, in support of our shared ambition for
an end to the war in Ukraine and a return to the cherished
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
At the outset, I wish to reaffirm Ghana’s deep
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We reiterate our
solidarity with the people of Ukraine as war ravages
their farms, towns and cities. We recall that as the
Security Council convened in an emergency session on
the night of 24 February 2022, amid widening concerns
of an imminent attack against Ukraine, our worst fears
were borne out before our very eyes. Given the firm
denials by the Russian Federation of any assertions
that the mounting presence of its troops along its
shared borders with Ukraine was in preparation for an
invasion of Ukraine, Ghana, at that time, had urged
for the de-escalation of tensions and the tempering of
war rhetoric.
Regrettably, that night, as the Council met, the
Russian Federation, without justification, began its
actions to violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of its neighbour, Ukraine. As has been asserted so many
times, the aggression by the Russian Federation against
Ukraine constitutes a serious violation of international
law and stands today as one of the clearest violations of
the prohibition against the use of force under Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV.9269

a permanent member of the Security Council, entrusted
with the distinct responsibility for the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security, would
choose the path of war to the exclusion of the diplomatic
and internationally acceptable means at its disposal.
The veto by the Russian Federation on 25 February
of the Security Council’s draft resolution intended to
end the military offensive has, regrettably, prevented
the Council from taking decisive action. The present
circumstances underscore the long-standing arguments
for the urgent reform of the Council and for a prohibition
on the use of the veto, especially in matters affecting
international peace and security, more so where a
permanent member of the Council is the one in breach
of the Charter and international law.
The war on Ukraine, as we know, was preceded
by efforts to address certain concerns about the postCold War European security architecture. We believe
that any revisions to existing structures that guarantee
the collective security of its members must emerge
from broad dialogue, involving all relevant actors
in the region. We are concerned that the fallout from
the continuing war in Ukraine attempts to create or
reinforce opposing alliances — a situation that took us
to two world wars. We believe that this is the time for
cooler heads and a rededication to mutually beneficial
cooperation and multilateralism, not competition for
hegemonic advantage. Those who wish to dig in their
heels for selfish advantage in the geopolitics of the
twenty-first century would lead us down the path of
even greater disaster.

Over the past year, as we have called upon the Russian
Federation to end that destructive war, we have listened
carefully, at each turn, to its attempts to rationalize
its ongoing actions in Ukraine. Between the reality on
the ground and the changing narratives, including the
protection of ethnic Russians in parts of Ukraine from
Russophobic attacks, our assessment remains that the
ongoing aggression against Ukraine is by all standards,
unlawful, unjustified and unacceptable.

The war has unleashed a devastating humanitarian
toll and claimed thousands of lives. Sustained missile
bombardments mainly targeted at civilian populated
areas have resulted in more than 21,000 casualties,
including 8,006 deaths and 13,287 injured. It is
saddening to note that 478 innocent children have
been killed, and 954 injured. Millions of people have
been displaced, with 8 million living as refugees in
neighbouring countries. Our own national compatriots,
most of whom were college students, had their education
disrupted and truncated when they were forced to flee
from Ukraine.

In our view, conventional frameworks and judicial
mechanisms such as the Human Rights Council and the
International Court of Justice should serve as the only
acceptable recourse in addressing any claims of human
rights violations. We therefore consider it untenable that

We are informed that approximately 50 per cent
of Ukraine’s energy infrastructure has been destroyed
or damaged. That situation has left many households
without heating or water and at the mercy of the
harrowing winter conditions. We regret that hostilities

23-0586315/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

24/02/2023

have carried on without regard for the principles
of proportionality and distinction and, therefore,
we reiterate our condemnation for the targeted
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Warring parties have obligations under international
humanitarian law, with which they must comply.

to ease global market volatilities that hold long-term
economic effects. The necessary attention must also
be paid to realizing the effective implementation of
the memorandum of understanding between the United
Nations and the Russian Federation on the export of
agricultural products and fertilizers.

It is impossible to see the aggression against
Ukraine in any other light than as an attack on the
accepted standards of our international order, and
allowing it to stand imperils the independence and
equality of States, especially less powerful States,
under the Charter. We must therefore sustain the
political will for accountability, first to ensure
justice for the people of Ukraine and not least for the
preservation of the present international order. The
coordination of ongoing investigative processes, as
well as the strengthening of our international justice
system, including the universalization of the Rome
Statute and the International Criminal Court, remain
crucial to ensuring that the perpetrators of atrocities in
Ukraine, as elsewhere, do not go unpunished.

We are acutely concerned about the growing appeal
of military logic and the hardening of the conflict into
a war of attrition. The war in Ukraine is moving in a
direction that is cause for great concern, as the events
of the past 12 months have demonstrated that no one is
immune to its consequences. We have a responsibility
to redouble our efforts to avert the catastrophe of a war
that is even more brutal than what we have witnessed
so far.

We recognize the courageous efforts of the
humanitarian workers who have worked under very
difficult circumstances to provide life-saving and
life-sustaining assistance to some 16 million people. We
urge international support to help fund the Ukrainian
humanitarian response plan with the $3.9 billion that
is required to aid nearly 40 per cent of the population,
with varying humanitarian requirements.
The rest of the world has not been spared the
aftershocks of the war, which continue to reverberate,
with crippling and systemic impacts on global food,
energy and finance systems. Developing countries,
already hard-hit by the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, debt and inflation, have little coping
capacity for the worsening economic conditions.
We take note of the useful policy recommendations
put forward by the Global Crisis Response Group
on Food, Energy and Finance to address the vicious
cycle of the crisis, including the restructuring of the
global debt architecture. We believe priority should
be given to implementing those recommendations,
especially to support Africa’s economic transformation
and its capacity to address the growing debt crisis
and the interlinked consequences of the war. Given
the centrality of the Russian Federation and Ukraine
to the global grain and fertilizer markets, we support
the further renewal of the Black Sea Grain Initiative
16/35

General Assembly resolution A/ES-11/6, on a just
peace in Ukraine, adopted yesterday by the Assembly
at its eleventh emergency special session (see A/ES11/PV.19) in affirmation of the purposes and values
of the Charter of the United Nations, should ignite a
renewed commitment to taking the action needed to
realize our collective desire for lasting peace between
the two countries. We strongly believe that the channels
of diplomacy and dialogue offer the best chance of a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace, and we urge the
members of the Council to strengthen their efforts in
support of credible negotiations between the two parties.
We have few options other than to invest in peace.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on the Russian
Federation to return to the status quo ante through the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of its troops
from all areas within the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and I welcome
the participation of Ukraine’s Foreign Minister in this
meeting today.
We cannot begin without expressing our deep
sorrow for the lives lost and shattered in the war
in Ukraine. We mourn the deaths of at least 8,000
civilians and share in the grief of their loved ones. We
are appalled, as we mark one year of this cruel war, that
we do so in the knowledge that it enters its second year
Over the past two days, from the rostrum of the
General Assembly, we heard a virtually uninterrupted
appeal for peace A global, diverse and representative
majority issued an unambiguous message — enough.
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

That majority is united neither in allegiance to one side
nor hostility to the other. They come together not to
preserve geopolitical gain or reverse loss, they are not
motivated by petty grievance or grand ambition and
they have no interest in or ability to wade into greatPower conflict. In the historical processes and events
that forged today’s Europe, they were — for the most
part — observers, too often unwillingly affected. Yet
the incontestable fact is that an overwhelming majority
of Member States are rising to the defence of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is the Charter that upholds
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. It is
the Charter that rejects wars of aggression, conquest
and annexation. It is the Charter that organizes our
open and cooperative international order. The question
is simple and it is settled.
Those truths, however self-evident, are nonetheless
challenged by the war still raging in Ukraine. Military
setbacks have been met with military escalation,
while the front lines are little changed. The costs,
however, have only grown — in Ukrainian lives and
livelihoods, in the damage to cities and towns and in
the destruction of civilian infrastructure. The war’s
reach has extended far beyond Ukraine, disrupting food
and energy markets, worsening the global debt crisis
and weakening international norms, rules and laws.
Exactly one year ago today, the global call for
diplomacy and peace went unheeded as the war broke
out. Now we risk seeing it escalate as more battalions
mobilize for new offensives. Yesterday Member
States renewed their urgent and sincere call for an
end to the war (see A/ES-11/PV.19). Leaders across
the world are responding with mediation efforts and
peace plans. Now is the time to invest in inclusive and
imaginative diplomacy by truly leveraging the global
majority for peace. We must reinforce the SecretaryGeneral’s offered role as a mediator with consistent,
robust and determined backing. The post-war vision
must also incentivize Russia and Ukraine to come
to the negotiating table, not the battlefield. The war
will not end if either side is more threatened by the
alternative. Steered by the Charter and by history, we
can dedicate ourselves to working for a peace that is
neither vindictive nor callous. We are under no illusions
that such efforts will be easy — too much blood has
been spilled and too much damage done — but all of us
should dread, with equal certainty, what looms in the
wake of its failure.

S/PV.9269

Richard Holbrooke once described an effort to end
another war in Europe as something like a combination
of chess and mountain climbing. Reaching the summit
at which this war ends will require a series of small
moves — renewing the Black Sea Grain Initiative;
realizing the memorandum of understanding on
Russian fertilizer and food products; preserving the
non-proliferation regime; enhancing humanitarian
assistance; continuing prisoner exchanges; and
refraining from turning multilateral institutions into
a battlefront. To achieve all of that, we must aspire to
coordination in our approaches, not conformity, and
we must encourage — and indeed nurture — all efforts
motivated by a genuine desire to peacefully resolve
this war. To do so, we must value, not vilify, open lines
of communication. That is the path the United Arab
Emirates has chosen and the path we have pursued in
defence of the Charter for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in Ukraine, preserving its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for re-establishing the significance
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and for outlining the terrible state of affairs of the war
in Ukraine, 12 months after its outbreak.
It is a year to the day since the war in Ukraine
began — an entire year of a deadly war that has shaken
and tested the entire international system and whose
shockwave has impacted most of the world’s nations.
In the past year, the dead have been numbered in their
thousands and civilian infrastructure has suffered
immeasurable destruction. It has been an entire year
of distress, fear and exodus, as the number of refugees
and displaced persons continues to grow in the wake of
the bombings and the rattle of weapons. Every day that
passes in this terrible war brings with it the risk of a
spillover and the globalization of hostilities. Each day
of war raises the spectre of nuclear risk, which would
undoubtedly lead us down a path of no return towards
irreparability and chaos. The war is unsustainable and
must be stopped immediately.
When the hostilities broke out, my country
expressed its opposition to the war and condemned
the violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity. Gabon
unequivocally reaffirms the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations as the cement that holds the
coexistence of the international community in place.
Above all, my country has repeatedly called for an

23-0586317/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

immediate ceasefire and good faith negotiations
between the parties in order to silence the weapons
in Ukraine.
For the past 12 months, the members of the Council
have talked loudly around this table without listening
to one another. For the past 12 months, every United
Nations forum and organ has been a theatre of invective
and antagonism that has been of no help or recourse to
those who fall in the trenches or are crushed under the
rubble on the battlefields and in cities and villages. It is
time to pause before the torrent of blood and the waves
of human distress that stir our conscience. It is time to
mobilize in order to end the war in Ukraine.
As members of the Security Council, we owe a
response to all those wounded in the war. We owe a
response to the countless victims who wonder when
the war will end. We owe a response to the countless
refugees who wonder when they will be able to return
home. We must, without delay, reconcile ourselves with
the spirit of the United Nations Charter, which sets out
to save this generation from the scourge of war.
My country reiterates its call to the parties to
negotiate in good faith, with a view to ending this war.
The hope raised by the Black Sea Grain Initiative must
be revived — not only to renew said agreement but also
to build bridges for a frank dialogue capable of bringing
about the cessation of hostilities.
We call on the parties to show restraint and to
assume responsibility before history, which will always
be greater than the vainglory of hegemonies without
virtue or tomorrow.
I repeat my country’s opposition to the war in
Ukraine and to all wars in the world, especially
the numerous, chronic and cyclical wars in Africa.
Rejecting the logic of war is not a form of escape or
cowardice or, much less, an opportunistic posture.
Above all, it is certainly not a rhetoric of impotence
or indifference. Rather, it is to remember the indelible
lessons of the history of unjust wars, which hammer
home the fact that those who cause, maintain or unleash
those wars are rarely the victors. Extracting ourselves
from the logic of war, the options of which are so
narrow and so poor in the belligerence of Powers, is to
remain attuned to the ideals that underpin and ennoble
the United Nations.
War is contrary to the values on which the United
Nations Organization and the Security Council are
18/35

24/02/2023

founded. Every day of war calls into question our
mission, our mandate and our credibility.
In conclusion, I would like to once again call for
peace in Ukraine. Because we are for peace, we will
support every step towards dialogue and every initiative
that seeks to activate the channels of diplomacy in order
to silence the weapons in Ukraine.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today is the end of a difficult week for the
United Nations. It will be remembered by everyone
for the information hype created by Ukraine and its
Western sponsors on the anniversary of Russia’s launch
of a special military operation in Ukraine. It would
seem that this is exactly what Mr. Kuleba promised in
January — to hold a peace summit in New York.
We could, without exaggeration, dedicate an entire
political science conference to analysing what our
former Western partners have said this week. Perhaps
that will happen in future, when people wish to cast a
retrospective eye on the situation. We would suggest
the following title for the conference: “Yet another
missed opportunity for a peaceful resolution to the
Ukrainian crisis.”
That would be correct, because any expression
using the word “peace”, used disingenuously, including
today, by high-ranking representatives of Ukraine
and Western countries, means something completely
different in fact, namely, the capitulation of Russia and
inflicting a strategic defeat on it, ideally followed by
the disintegration of the country and the redrawing of
its constituent territories.
These true goals of Western interference in
Ukrainian affairs, which most clearly manifested
themselves, by the way, almost exactly nine years
ago, on the day of the Maidan anti-constitutional coup
of 21 February 2014, were laid bare from the very
beginning. And it is those same goals that led to the
formation on our borders of a hostile nationalistic
Russophobic regime, which zealously rushed to solve
the “Russian issue” in Ukraine.
Yesterday, our British colleague, speaking in the
General Assembly (see A/ES-11/PV.19), criticized the
draft amendments proposed by Belarus to the draft
resolution. She argued that the draft amendments equate
the aggressor and the victim. Is she not concerned
that the “victim” is up to its elbows in blood and Nazi
tattoos? And what of the nine years of elimination of the
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Russian-speaking residents of Donbas? Why does she
think it is normal for Ukraine to send guns and tanks
against unarmed civilians in the east of the country
and bomb them simply because they do not want to
abandon their own identity? That is exactly what the
Kyiv regime did in the summer of 2014, and it was
then that the intra-Ukrainian armed conflict broke out.
Does she think that we should have resigned ourselves
to that situation?
Let me remind the Council that NATO justified
its aggression against Yugoslavia with the phrase
“campaign of terror” and the need for the Kosovars to
“live in security and enjoy universal human rights and
freedoms on an equal basis”. These are quotes from a
NATO statement issued on 23 April 1999.
It turns out that she and her colleagues are denying
Russian-speaking Ukrainians universal rights and
freedoms if she presents the Kyiv authorities that
attacked them as a victim. And she is silent about the
campaign of terror unleashed against them. For us, it is
obvious that Ukraine is not a victim, because if it had
not gone to war against the inhabitants of Donetsk and
Luhansk, with the consent of her and her colleagues,
but rather heeded their aspirations, then there would
have been no need for our special military operation.
Crimea would have probably remained part of Ukraine,
because the people of Crimea chose reunification with
Russia only after they heard direct threats from the
Kyiv authorities.
I would like to take advantage of the fact that
Ms. Colonna and Ms. Baerbock are participating in
today’s meeting to raise another very inconvenient topic
for our Western colleagues — the Minsk agreements.
We all recently heard the confessions made by François
Hollande, Angela Merkel and Boris Johnson that neither
France, Germany nor the United Kingdom ever took
those agreements seriously, had no intention of urging
the Ukrainian authorities to implement them and used
the agreements only to buy time for Kyiv to prepare for
war with Russia. Even if we disregard the moral side of
the issue — and we have long had no illusions about the
moral qualities of some of our Western colleagues — the
point is that the leaders of those States, in fact, openly
admitted that they knowingly violated resolution 2202
(2015), which enshrined the Minsk agreements. But
that does not prevent the Foreign Ministers of those
same States from lecturing other Member States here
in the Council today.

S/PV.9269

Furthermore, a trite cliché bandied about this
week, which appeared much earlier, was the assertion
that if Russia stops hostilities, the war would end,
but if Ukraine would stop fighting, there would be
no Ukraine. It sounds nice, but it is completely false.
Where, when and from whom did anyone hear that the
goal of our military operation was the destruction of
Ukraine, to de-Ukrainize it? We have never declared
such a goal. We have always wanted to have what
we had before — a friendly neighbour who does not
threaten us, does not discriminate against anyone and
is not trying to resurrect Nazism.
Their slogan should therefore really be: if Russia
stops the hostilities, the discrimination against and
persecution of the Russian-speaking population, who
do not want to break with Russia, the violation of
their rights and freedoms and the glorification of Nazi
criminals will continue in Ukraine. If Ukraine stops
the hostilities, it will have a chance to rebuild itself as
a normal, peace-loving, independent State and to save
many thousands of human lives. That is why we have
repeatedly stated that we are ready to negotiate on
how the goals of our special military operation can be
implemented peacefully. Of course, we will not even
consider plans that involve other scenarios.
This week, we have repeatedly said that it is
only the collective West that is not interested in the
cessation of hostilities. As we all now reliably know, it
did not allow the Kyiv regime to make peace in March
and April last year. Our Western colleagues are now
happy: Russians and Ukrainians are killing each other,
Western defence companies are making enormous
profits and getting access to testing grounds for new
weapons, and, by getting rid of old weapons, NATO
is slowly rearming. At the same time, Washington is
weakening its European rivals, which are showing an
unprecedented degree of servility and impotence. We
spoke about that in detail in this Chamber yesterday
(see S/PV.9268). Most important, the West gleefully
hopes that, by having weakened Russia and threatened
China, it will maintain its monopolistic position in the
world and remain the only flourishing garden on the
jungle planet, in the words of Mr. Borrell. Then the
golden billion can continue to enrich themselves at
the expense of others, unchecked and with impunity,
pitting countries against each other, managing their
natural resources and exploiting their populations.
That is called the rules-based international order, on
which Russia has encroached by not being willing to

23-0586319/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

put up with a Russophobic hornet’s nest on its borders.
We want developing countries to have no illusions as to
what this conflict is really about.
Of course, the solution to this conflict is inseparable
from issues related to a fair and indivisible Euro-Atlantic
security system. It now only works for the United
States and its NATO allies. They have appropriated for
themselves the right to interfere in any international
matters and the internal affairs of other States. Ukraine
is a prime example of that. Their bases are located on
our borders in violation of key understandings that
ended the Cold War era. Western leaders deceived us
then, and they want to continue to deceive us now by
positing NATO’s absolute right to expand unchecked
and trying to bamboozle the entire world with tales
of how much money they spend on the Sustainable
Development Goals, as United States Secretary of State
Blinken just did. I would like to recall that, since the
Cold War alone, the United States has conducted 251
military operations overseas, inflicting tremendous
damage on such countries. Even if one pays 100 times
over, it will not make up for that damage.
The collective West must accept the fact that there
are other actors on our planet that have their own
interests. One must coexist with them, and it is even
quite possible to cooperate in our mutual interest, but
on an equal and mutually respectful basis. The unipolar
world is a thing of the past, and it is in our common
interest to make the transition to a multipolar world
with the least amount of turmoil. I would like to believe
that the hot phase of that transition will limit itself to
the the Ukrainian crisis alone.
That in fact is what a real conversation about peace
should look like, including perhaps within the United
Nations, and the sooner it starts, the better. We tried to
start it on the eve of the beginning of the special military
operation, at the end of 2021, but the West arrogantly
rejected all our proposals for such a dialogue. It was
the Ukrainian people who paid the ultimate price for
that, and whom the Kyiv regime was happy to sacrifice
for Western geopolitical interests. We welcome sincere
efforts towards peace, such as China’s proposals.
The choice is up to our former Western partners,
above all Washington. After all that we have learned
about them this year, after the boundless and abhorrent
Russophobia and attempts to abolish Russia, after the
weapons supplied to the Zelenskyy regime that killed
peaceful women, children and elderly people in Donbas,
20/35

24/02/2023

after their Ukrainian adventure through the attempt to
create problems for us on our borders, it is clear that our
relations will no longer be the same. We no longer trust
their words, and it will be difficult, if not impossible, to
regain our trust. It is not words, but deeds that matter
now. But it is in their interest to try to do something. So
far, they are only making matters worse by continuing
to pump weapons into the Kyiv regime and helping it on
the battlefield. Meanwhile, they leave us no choice but
to militarily eliminate threats to Russia from Ukraine’s
territory. They should think about that when they come
up with new anti-Russian initiatives within the United
Nations and pass them off as evidence of global support
for Ukraine.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes to
thank the presidency of Malta for having convened this
important meeting. We express our profound gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his enlightening briefing.
A year has elapsed since the outbreak of the
conflict in Ukraine. Its tragic consequences, spillover
effects and ramifications continue to reverberate at the
local, regional and global levels, and no end is in sight.
As with every conflict, civilians, especially women
and children, are bearing the brunt of the violence, and
those alive remain traumatized forever.
Meanwhile, the conflict has had a negative impact
on the world trade and supply chains. It has brought
about economic damage, with global trade disruptions
affecting transportation costs and virtually all global
value chains. The socioeconomic impact on developing
countries, especially in Africa, has been grave.
The International Monetary Fund has found that,
while the African continent had been slowly emerging
from the coronavirus disease pandemic, the conflict in
Ukraine is now threatening that recovery. Many of our
countries are vulnerable owing to the higher energy and
food prices, reduced tourism and potential difficulty
accessing international capital markets.
From an African perspective, we are all too familiar
with the devastating effects of conflicts. We know that
wars result only in the suffering of the people, and it
is our collective duty — the duty of the international
community as a whole — to work towards resolving
conflict through peaceful and negotiated solutions. We
must uphold the fundamental principle of collective
security enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
according to which the security of one is the security
of all.
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In the past, the global community has shown that
it is possible to overcome hate and mutual suspicion
and find the path to the negotiating table. It is therefore
imperative that the international community support all
diplomatic efforts to end the conflict in Ukraine. That
requires the support of all nations, particularly those
that occupy seats on the Security Council. We need to
assist the parties involved to engage in negotiations and
reach a negotiated solution. That means building on
the few bright spots of this year-long conflict, such as
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, the regular exchanges
of prisoners and the Secretary-General’s Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance. More
importantly, Mozambique believes that we need to
strongly support the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and tap into his reservoir of moral authority in
the quest for a settlement of the conflict.
Mozambique has a long-standing commitment to
promoting peace and security in our region and beyond.
As a country that has experienced numerous conflicts
in the past, we understand the importance of supporting
diplomatic efforts and respecting humanitarian law in
order to bring about peace. The anniversary of this
conflict must serve as a reminder for the international
community to work together to find a negotiated
solution to it, guided by the purposes and principles of
the Charter.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his statement. A year
after the start of the conflict, we see an armed stalemate
on the ground, triumphalist rhetoric on both sides and
prospects of new military offensives. We should put
aside illusions about a military solution to this crisis.
We need to discuss the return of the parties to the
negotiating table. President Lula has made Brazil’s
position clear, faithful to our diplomatic tradition. We
condemn Russia’s invasion and territorial violation of a
sovereign State, Ukraine. But a year later, we understand
that the time has come to also give voice to those who
want to speak of ways to build peace. The violence,
which affects the most vulnerable, should stop, with
no preconditions. International humanitarian law and
its principles are not optional. They are mandatory at
all times and under all circumstances. Respecting and
ensuring respect for international humanitarian law are
essential to the protection of civilians.
Brazil has not come here with the intention of
presenting a ready-made solution. We need to explore
paths that seek to create conditions for the end of the

S/PV.9269

conflict. We are convinced that countries like Brazil
that are not directly involved in the conflict have a
constructive role to play in fostering dialogue. We
took action along those lines during the discussions
on the General Assembly’s adoption yesterday of its
most recent resolution, resolution ES-11/6, in which
Member States call for “a cessation of hostilities”,
an expression that appears for the first time and was
added at the suggestion of Brazil. The resolution also
reaffirmed the resolute commitment of the international
community to upholding the core principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
while underscoring the need to achieve peace. We also
encouraged careful consideration of the causes of the
conflict so that mutual resentments and suspicions do
not manifest themselves in future violence. We should
never lose sight of the human tragedy. Nor should
we ignore the global economic impact of the war, in
particular with regard to the rising input costs for
agricultural and food production.
Brazil will continue to persevere on this path.
We are convinced that there is sufficient will among
Member States to prevent future, new anniversaries of
the duration of the war like the sad mark of one year
completed today.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing. A year has
passed since the full outbreak of the Ukraine crisis,
and the situation is of great concern to all of us. The
international community, while deeply concerned
about the prospect of the expansion and prolongation
of the conflict, should think coolly about how to stop
the fighting as soon as possible and achieve long-term
peace and stability in Ukraine and Europe. Earlier
today, China issued a position paper on the political
settlement of the Ukraine crisis. We have always
taken an objective and impartial stance based on the
merits of the issue and are ready to continue to play a
responsible and constructive role in easing the situation
and resolving the crisis. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, when handling and solving international
disputes, universally recognized international law,
including the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, must be upheld. The sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of all countries
must be effectively guaranteed. The observation of
universally recognized international law and the
basic norms governing international relations has a

23-0586321/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

bearing on the stability of the international system and
on international fairness and justice. They should be
equally and uniformly applied in every place and on
every issue, without exception. Some countries, while
emphasizing sovereignty and territorial integrity with
regard to Ukraine, are blatantly interfering in other
countries’ internal affairs and undermining their
sovereignty and territorial integrity, putting their
double standards on full display, and the international
community sees that clearly.
Secondly, if we are to facilitate a political solution
to the issue of Ukraine, we need to pursue shared
security. Security is not an exclusive right to be enjoyed
by some countries alone. One country’s security should
not be pursed at the expense of another’s. Strengthening
and even expanding military blocs will only undermine
regional security and will never bring about peace.
Russia, Ukraine and the countries of Europe are
neighbours that cannot physically move away. To achieve
long-term peace and stability in Europe, the Cold War
mentality and bloc confrontation must be abandoned,
and the legitimate security concerns of all countries
must be taken seriously and addressed properly so as
to build a balanced, effective and sustainable regional
security architecture.
Thirdly, conflicts have no winners. Launching
diplomatic negotiations is the right way, and the only
way, to resolve the Ukraine crisis. The international
community should promote peace and talks with the
highest sense of urgency and work to create enabling
factors and platforms for a resumption of negotiations.
Bringing the parties to the conflict back to the
negotiating table is not going to be easy, but it is the
first step towards a political solution. This morning
Secretary-General Guterres called for giving peace a
chance, and we call on Russia and Ukraine to resume
negotiations without preconditions. Ukraine is not
an arena for fights between major countries. No one
should seek to benefit from the conflict at the cost of
the Ukrainian people.
Fourthly, it is imperative to ensure that the red
line of nuclear security is never crossed under any
circumstances. Nuclear weapons must never be used,
and a nuclear war must never be fought. Faced with the
risk that the Ukraine crisis could lead to an escalation
of the conflict, major countries have a special and
important responsibility to maintain communications
and coordination and do everything they can to prevent
a nuclear crisis. The international community should
22/35

24/02/2023

jointly oppose armed attacks on nuclear power plants
and other peaceful nuclear facilities, ensure strict
compliance with the Convention on Nuclear Safety,
among other instruments, and support the International
Atomic Energy Agency in playing a constructive
role in promoting the safety and security of peaceful
nuclear facilities.
Fifthly, the humanitarian crisis is worsening
and should be proactively and properly addressed.
International humanitarian law is a code of conduct
that must be strictly observed in conflict situations.
The parties concerned should avoid attacking civilians
and civilian facilities, protect the vulnerable, including
women and children, ensure humanitarian access
and respect the basic rights of prisoners of war. The
international community should step up its humanitarian
assistance, help restore civilian infrastructure and
ensure basic livelihoods for refugees and displaced
persons, with a view to preventing a larger-scale
humanitarian crisis. At the same time, humanitarian
operations should adhere in earnest to the principles of
neutrality and impartiality and avoid politicization.
Lastly, every country is responsible for the
important task of promoting its people’s livelihoods
and development. Efforts should be made to manage the
spillover effects of the crisis. The Ukraine crisis has
far-reaching ramifications, but developing countries
are not parties to the conflict and should not have to
pay an excessively high price for it. Some of the parties
concerned have resorted to unilateral sanctions and
exerting maximum pressure, which will not solve any
problems and will only undermine the stability of the
global industrial supply chain and exacerbate the global
food, energy and financial crises. We hope that the
parties concerned will act responsibly and stop abusing
unilateral sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction. The
Black Sea Grain Initiative, and the memorandum of
understanding signed by the United Nations and Russia
on food and fertilizer exports, are very important in
terms of ensuring global food security and should be
fully, effectively and equitably implemented.
The road to peace will not be smooth, but no matter
how complicated the situation is, we must never give up
hope for peace or abandon efforts for peace. With regard
to the Ukraine issue, China has always stood and will
continue to stand on the side of peace and dialogue. We
are ready to work with all parties to promote a political
solution to the Ukraine crisis and bring about peace as
soon as possible.
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Borrell
Fontelles.
Mr. Borrell Fontelles: On this day, exactly one
year ago, Russian tanks rolled into Ukraine, starting
a massive invasion of a peaceful neighbour. For a
year, we have all seen the Ukrainian people fighting
to defend their country. They deserve the solidarity of
every person and country around the world. I will make
just two essential points. The first is why Russia’s war
of choice matters to all of us. The second is how we get
to peace.

S/PV.9269

European Union and its member States have contributed
to alleviating the burden of war-related consequences
over the past year. In Africa, for example, more than
€1.6 billion has been earmarked for activities related
to food security in the most affected countries of the
Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa.
(spoke in English)

We need to be clear. I say “war of choice”, because
President Putin chose war. And for a year we have seen
its horrors — 13 million people homeless; 21 million in
need of humanitarian assistance; and tens of thousands
of Ukrainians forced to leave their country and seek
refuge across Europe. Families have been torn apart.
In a catalogue of crimes, the forced deportation of
tens of thousands of Ukrainian children stands out for
its depravity. The abduction of innocent children and
alteration of their personal status, including nationality,
so that they can be adopted by Russian families, is a
clear violation of human rights and international
law, as well as a violation of the Geneva Convention.
Those Ukrainian children need to be returned to
Ukraine immediately.

This war matters a lot both because of the principles
at stake and the shock waves that it is creating. It needs
to stop, and it needs to stop now. That brings me to
my second, and maybe most important, point. How
do we get to peace? Everyone is asking for peace. But
how do we get there? Here at the United Nations and
around the world, there is a growing clamour for peace.
That was the clear message that the General Assembly
sent yesterday (see ES-11/PV.19). While the Security
Council has been blocked, the General Assembly
made it clear in General Assembly resolution ES-11/6,
adopted by an overwhelming majority of 141 to 7 votes,
that the world condemns the aggression; that Russia
must withdraw its troops; and that the world wants and
needs peace, but not just any peace. No, we want a just
peace, based on international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. It is urgent for the Kremlin to heed that
message and act on it. Looking to the future, we need to
build on that resolution and make it happen.

With regard to crimes against humanity, I have
been to Bucha and have seen for myself the civilians
killed, with some having their hands tied behind their
backs before being executed. And who can forget
Mariupol? I would once again like to pay tribute to
the United Nations for its efforts in securing the safe
passage of civilians trapped inside the Azovstal steel
plant. Russian forces have been shelling Ukrainian
cities and civilian infrastructure for months. Air-raid
sirens have become a disturbingly regular feature of
Ukrainian lives, as many of those here have witnessed,
and as I did myself when I was in Kyiv 10 days ago.

We support the 10-point peace plan that President
Zelenskyy has presented. We the European Union
will remain ready to work with all genuine partners
and ideas that support Ukraine’s effort to secure a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace, in line with the
resolution adopted by the General Assembly, based
on the Charter and international law. Meanwhile, we
will continue to support Ukraine in defending itself
and protecting its people. The quest for peace and our
support for Ukraine go hand in hand. They go together.
It is not either/or. It is the quest for peace and support
for Ukraine.

(spoke in French)
One year later, the toll that the war has taken on the
Ukrainian people has been catastrophic. But the war has
also had effects on a global scale, with food and energy
insecurity leading to price increases that have had a
terrible impact on the most vulnerable populations. The
increase in the prices of food and essential goods has
added to the burdens on many countries throughout the
world, already struggling with the difficulties of daily
life. That is why this war is affecting everyone. The

With that, I want to make a final point. Our
principled support for Ukraine does not come at the
expense of our engagement elsewhere in the world.
On the contrary, the European Union remains fully
mobilized to promote sustainable peace elsewhere
because we know that there are many more wars,
tragedies and problems around the world that need our
support and require our concern. It is not “instead of”;
it is “on top of”. We will continue doing the same thing
that we have been doing. And we have a strong track

23-0586323/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

record of engagement around the world, financially
and politically, with more than 5,000 women and men
deployed in 21 crisis-management operations. Just
this week, we launched two more — one in Armenia
and another in the Niger. Yes, there are many other
problems, many other wars, many other causes of
suffering around the world. We will take care of them.
We will work for peace in Ukraine and be a reliable
partner for peace around the world, wherever peace is
in danger and people are suffering.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
European and Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic.
Mr. Káčer (Slovakia): One year ago, the Security
Council met in this very Chamber (see S/PV.8974),
around this very table, with the main purpose of the
meeting to discuss an unprecedented military build-up
of Russian forces, which posed a threat to international
peace and security. The last hopes for persuading Russia
to de-escalate the situation and engage constructively
in negotiations were shattered by the words of the
then Ambassador of Ukraine, warning members of
the Security Council that it was already too late to
speak about de-escalation, as the Russian President
had declared war. And as we all know, that happened
despite Russia’s numerous assurances claiming that it
had no intention of invading its neighbour. That was
the night when the whole international community
learned of Russia’s decision to begin an unprovoked
and unjustified military aggression against Ukraine in
violation of all the fundamental values and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Yes, it was the Russian Federation, which holds
a permanent seat in this Chamber and is one of those
primarily responsible for maintaining peace and
security. Needless to say, at that moment, our faith in
multilateralism was shaken to its foundations.
Despite the pain and suffering that have ensued
since this senseless war started, the Russian Federation
has ignored the international community’s calls for
ending the agony. And I do not really understand in
which parallel universe depriving millions of innocent
people of electricity, heat and water and plunging a
country into darkness can be justified on the pretext
of a so-called special military operation. Russia’s
systematic and thorough spreading of propaganda
and distortion of the facts is quite cynical. It seems
to be promoting some kind of alternative reality — a
behaviour that we continue to condemn.
24/35

24/02/2023

We reiterate our call for an immediate cessation
of Russia’s military activities in Ukraine and the
unconditional withdrawal of all Russian troops from
the entire territory of Ukraine. That also concerns
temporarily occupied Crimea, as well as other parts of
Ukraine, including those where the Russian Federation,
together with local puppet authorities, orchestrated socalled referendums in a blatant breach of international
rules. We are extremely concerned about the numbers
of civilian casualties that have resulted since the
beginning of the invasion of Ukraine. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, more than 8,000 people have been killed
and more than 13,000 injured. Needless to say, we all
know that the real numbers are much higher than that.
Slovakia has stood by Ukraine since the very
beginning of its defence against Russia’s aggression.
And we will continue our steadfast support, including
for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, until this shameless war is over. And there is
also one fact that is undeniable. The war will be over one
day, and those responsible for all the crimes committed
will be held accountable and brought to justice.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Romania.
Mr. Aurescu (Romania): I commend the Maltese
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s debate.
For a year now, Romania, a direct neighbour of
Ukraine, has been at the forefront in helping Ukraine
and countering the multifaceted consequences of
the atrocious, illegal and unprovoked war waged
by the Russian Federation, a permanent member of
the Security Council, against Ukraine, a sovereign,
independent country. The impact of that irrational war
of aggression has reached far and wide. Violations
of international humanitarian law and attacks on
critical civilian infrastructure have made millions
of Ukrainians flee. Grain and energy chains have
been disrupted, leading to a sharp increase in energy
prices and the threat of famine all over the globe and
especially for the most vulnerable in the South. Fear
of a nuclear catastrophe daunts us once again. Hybrid
tactics test or try to intimidate us, putting pressure on
Ukraine and its neighbours such as the Republic of
Moldova, as well as others in the Black Sea region and
the wider European continent and the Euro-Atlantic
security area as a whole. The war represents a direct
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

attack on the integrity of the rules-based international
system, on our security, prosperity and core values.
But in the face of that threat, nothing is clearer than
this. We will stand united and strong for as long as it
takes, Ukraine will win, and the Russian Federation
will bear the responsibility for what it has done. Our
call is also clear. Russia must abide by the rules of
international law. It must unconditionally cease its use
of force and withdraw completely and immediately
from the territory of Ukraine, within its internationally
recognized borders.
We are here today in the Chamber of the Security
Council, the guarantor of international peace and
security, to stand in support of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and to reiterate that there
is only one way to end this aggression.
I welcome General Assembly resolution ES-11/6,
which the Assembly adopted yesterday by a very
large majority, putting the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations above all, including national or
regional interests.
It is in our power to mitigate the effects of the war
on the future. From day one of the war, Romania has
acted in full solidarity with the brave Ukrainian people.
We have made considerable investments in food, energy
and transportation infrastructure and have welcomed
the more than 3.6 million Ukrainian refugees who have
transited our territory. So far, we have facilitated the
delivery of more than 13 million tons of Ukrainian
grain, contributing to global food security efforts. We
hope for a positive outcome in the long run and the
continuation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Romania has also been a strong supporter of
the efforts to seek accountability for all serious
crimes committed in Ukraine, including the crime of
aggression. We have joined the core group of States
that is working alongside Ukraine to identify the
most appropriate legal basis to establish a tribunal for
that purpose.
The ongoing war in Ukraine has a major impact
on the region. We have extended a helping hand to our
neighbour, the Republic of Moldova, the country most
affected by the war besides Ukraine itself. And I want
to inform the Council that we are concerned about
Russia’s most recent plans to destabilize that country,
which we have condemned. In that respect, it is
absolutely unacceptable to see threatening rhetoric such
as that in the statement of the Russian Foreign Ministry

S/PV.9269

today, by which it announced that the Russian Army
would “adequately respond” to so-called provocations
or attacks on its Russian compatriots or on military
personnel and people in the Transnistrian region of
the Republic of Moldova. Such provocative behaviour,
which is based on nothing, on ungrounded allegations,
is completely unacceptable, and we fully support the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Moldova within its internationally recognized borders.
As we have approached the one-year milestone
since the war began, all of us, including Romania,
have witnessed Russian propaganda intensifying and
spreading fake narratives in an attempt to undermine
the unity of our societies and our efforts to support
Ukraine. We must combat those malign influences
and continue to stand united to defend our values. The
Romanian people must be mindful about the Russianinspired stories they read and hear, but they should not
question our support for Ukraine. Support for Ukraine
means support for Romania.
As was said before, this is the test of our generation.
We have to work together at all the different layers of
this conflict to bring peace back to the place where it
belongs. Our message is straightforward: peace in full
respect of the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, peace in full respect of the United
Nations Charter and of its fundamental principles of
international law. And one political and moral principle
is clear: negotiations can start only when Ukraine is
ready, and what victory looks like must be defined by
Ukraine. Romania’s support for Ukraine remains solid,
for as long as it takes.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Rau (Poland): Let me begin by expressing
my gratitude to Malta for convening today’s important
meeting and to the Secretary-General for his
valuable insights.
I believe that we should focus today on three main
things: an accurate diagnosis of the situation, a search
for an adequate response, and the steps that need to
be implemented.
Let us therefore start by contrasting the truth with
disinformation and misleading propaganda. The truth
is that exactly a year ago Russia decided to start its
illegal aggression against Ukraine — period. Since
then, Russia’s war has been putting international

23-0586325/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

institutions to the test. It is testing our commitment to
the principles that protect us all.
The humanitarian costs of this war are horrifying.
The aggression has caused the greatest crisis in Europe
since the Second World War. Russia’s campaign of
terror and its deliberate targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure are utterly unacceptable. The
Kremlin’s actions are driven by the will to destroy the
Ukrainian nation, its heritage and its future. That is
why I am convinced that Russia’s barbaric aggression
against Ukraine is not a bilateral or regional issue. It is
the concern of all States. We all have a duty to bring
these atrocities to an end.
Secondly, the prohibition of aggression, of genocide,
and of crimes against humanity are jus cogens norms.
This means that no derogation from them is permitted.
Poland advocates the full accountability for all the
violations and compensation for the inflicted damage.
That being said, what should be the guiding principle
for this approach?
Nobody has any doubt whatsoever that when we
look at the domestic laws of our countries, they stand
on the premise that justice means the protection of the
vulnerable against the more powerful. The assertion
is that in a well-ordered society, the vulnerable need
to feel as secure as the powerful, and the powerful,
when they trespass the law, need to be brought fully to
account, so that others are not encouraged to commit
similar crimes in future.
If the international community is to draw any right
conclusions for future generations from this horrific
war, Poland believes that we are required to search for
analogous solutions in the international law system.
I therefore call on applying the same rule — that of
protecting the vulnerable against powerful villains — in
our international relations, in both the legal dimension
and in political practice. Let us build a well-ordered
international community.
In order to achieve that, international institutions,
with all their resources, must stand on the side of the
harmed and exact accountability and compensation
from the aggressors, no matter how strong and powerful
they are. I cannot envision the world without adhering
to this rule. Can you, Mr. President?
Thirdly, with respect to this golden rule, Poland’s
support to Ukraine is and will remain unwavering.
Millions of Ukrainians have found safe refuge in
26/35

24/02/2023

our country. In 2022, Poland spent over $9 billion,
which is 1.5 per cent of our gross domestic product,
on humanitarian assistance to Ukrainian refugees,
according to a recent estimate of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development. We provide
support and host over a dozen United Nations agencies
and international organizations helping Ukraine from
our territory.
We will remain steadfast in our support for as long
as it takes because we are motivated by the will to
protect the Ukrainians and every other nation in need.
Our actions are about safeguarding collective peace and
security. If we do not act in solidarity now and shrug
off defending the fundamental values of international
law, tomorrow it could be too late.
Poland stands firmly behind the values and
principles of the United Nations Charter. We refuse
to go back to power politics and spheres of influence.
The international community has the strength and will
to stand by Ukraine and defend the United Nations
Charter, so that the power of argument — not the
argument of power — prevails.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): I thank the President
for organizing this meeting of the Security Council
today, the first anniversary of the Russian invasion
of Ukraine. I represent a country, Hungary, which
is a direct neighbour of Ukraine. The impacts of the
war are therefore severe and immediate for us. We are
faced with the tragic consequences, basically on a daily
basis, as we are witnessing people’s suffering caused
by this war.
We have received a bit more than a million refugees
from Ukraine so far — unfortunately, mostly torn-apart
families. I have to tell you, Mr. President, that it is
heartbreaking to see mothers arriving in Hungary with
children, sometimes with grandparents, most often
with a single backpack.
We do want to help them. We are doing our best
to help them. We give equal access to refugees from
Ukraine when it comes to our education and healthcare systems. Some 1,300 schools and kindergartens
in Hungary have already enrolled refugee children
and students from Ukraine. We give incentives to
companies in Hungary to employ refugees. All of
that, together with many other measures, adds up to
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the largest humanitarian operation carried out in the
history of Hungary, and I want the Council to know
that we will continue humanitarian action on that large
scale for as long as it is needed.
From the perspective of a country in the
neighbourhood, we see very clearly that the war brings
great suffering. The war does not have winners. It has
only losers, and the longer it lasts, the more losers
there will be. More damage will be caused, and more
people will be killed. I should point out that I represent
a nation that has also had a number of casualties
in the war, given the fact that there is a Hungarian
community living in the western part of Ukraine, some
of whose members are Ukrainian citizens and many
of whom have been conscripted into the Ukrainian
army. They are fighting on the front lines, and many
of them have died. Let me emphasize that we do not
want more people to die in the war. In that regard, I
would like to underline Hungary’s position, which is
that in these circumstances, we would consider the
international community’s number-one duty to be that
of saving people’s lives and preventing more casualties.
How could that be possible? The answer is that we can
save lives with peace. With deliveries of weapons and
further sanctions packages, I do not see how we can
save people’s lives, but with peace we definitely could.
I am well aware that we are usually very heavily
criticized for our position on this. Not only are we
heavily criticized, but on many occasions totally
insane accusations are being directed at Hungary
and its Government. But unlike us Hungarians,
those who criticize, educate and judge us have not
lost any lives in the war. That is why we are calling
for an immediate ceasefire and for peace talks to be
launched and hopefully the outcome of sustainable
peace reached. It is obvious that peace cannot be made
if there are no open channels of communication. From
our perspective, if the channels of communication are
being cut, jammed or closed, it means that even the
hope of peace is being abandoned. Once again, as a
representative of a neighbouring country witnessing
the suffering on a daily basis, I humbly ask Council
members to concentrate on how to stop the war, prevent
more people from dying and make peace.
Together with many others, we represent a
generation that, thank God, did not have to experience
life during the world wars. A world war is a global war.
We hope that neither we, our children or our future
grandchildren will have to experience such a life. So

S/PV.9269

far, as we know, the war has had global impacts, but
that is not the question. The question is whether we can
prevent the war from becoming a global war — a world
war. The question is whether we can avoid measures,
decisions and sometimes statements that bring with
them the risk of the escalation and prolongation of the
war. All of us should refrain from measures, decisions
and statements of that kind, which prolong and escalate
the war. A third world war would be a real tragedy. A
third world war would bring us to where we hope none
of us would like to go. In that regard, it is key to ensure
that there is no direct confrontation between NATO and
the Russian Federation. Within NATO, we have a clear
decision that NATO is not party to the conflict, and we
hope that that decision of ours will be respected by all.
The Hungarian people are not responsible for
the war, but Hungary and the Hungarian people have
already paid a high price. That is why we all know that
we are in the twenty-fifth hour. We are in the twentyfifth hour. Let us therefore try to concentrate on how
to stop the war, end the war, establish an immediate
ceasefire and launch peace talks, which we hope will
bring us to a sustainable and fair peace.
The President: I now call on the Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
Ms. Baerbock (Germany): In Bucha, Kharkiv,
Mariupol, Bahkmut, Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine is causing nothing but destruction, suffering
and death. Yesterday, the General Assembly sent a
powerful message about this ruthless war (see A/ES11/PV.19). An overwhelming majority of 141 States
stood united for peace in Ukraine — a peace that is
just, comprehensive and lasting. And the Assembly
presented a peace plan that is based on the principles of
our Charter of the United Nations.
Today the eyes of the world are on the Security
Council — the body that bears primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security in the world.
From my point of view, every effort to move towards
peace by a member of the Council is valuable. But
peace must mean peace. Peace must not mean that we
ignore which the aggressor is and which the victim,
because subjugation is not peace. Not naming the
aggressor would mean accepting a world in which the
mighty rule. It would mean accepting a world in which
bombing schools, kidnapping children and shooting
people off their bicycles is part of foreign policy. Not
standing on the side of the victim would mean a world

23-0586327/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in which none of us would be able to sleep peacefully
because we would all have to fear an attack by a
stronger neighbour. The United Nations was founded to
prevent such a world. That is why we cannot stand idly
by. The Charter obliges us, the nations of the world,
to act. Some members now claim that by imposing
sanctions on the aggressor, standing by Ukraine’s side
and supporting Ukraine’s right to self-defence, we are
adding fuel to the fire.
I would like to ask the Council where
Ukraine — which voluntarily gave up its nuclear
weapons because it believed in peace — would be
today if we had not supported its right to defend
itself and its people — the elderly, mothers, fathers
and children — together with so many international
partners? Can we imagine what it would mean to have
more events such as those in Bucha, Kharkiv, Mariupol
and Bahkmut, more atrocities against civilians or more
children drawing pictures of a house where their loved
ones once lived? Can we imagine what it would mean
to have more war crimes and crimes against humanity
while we stood idly by?
I do not want to imagine such a world. I do not want
to be responsible for such a world. I believe that most
of us do not want to be responsible for such a world.
I would therefore like to underline what Secretary
Blinken said. He said that if Ukraine stopped defending
itself, Ukraine would end. If we stopped standing
beside Ukraine, Ukraine would end. Just a few minutes
ago, here in the Council, the Russian representative
asked why we think that Ukraine would end. We think
that because one year ago, his President told us that
he would like to demilitarize Ukraine, and because
over 365 nights and days since we have seen what that
meant. Russia’s tanks did not bring water. Russia’s
planes did not drop nutrition for babies. Rather, its
tanks and planes have brought nothing but death and
destruction, night and day, for thousands of mothers,
fathers and children. And they have also brought death
and destruction around the world — not directly, by
missiles and bombs, but through a food crisis. Russia’s
representatives, and anyone else, may be able to deceive
themselves, but they cannot deceive the whole world.
All of us who sincerely and honestly believe in a
peace that means peace — a peace based on our Charter
of the United Nations — must show our true colours
now and stand by the General Assembly’s peace plan
in its resolution ES-11/6. President Putin is gambling
on the possibility that at some point our clear stance
28/35

24/02/2023

against the war will weaken. He is speculating that
if he stays the course, his war of aggression will be
rewarded. That war is also causing great suffering to
his own people. Some 200,000 Russians have already
been killed or wounded. Hundreds of thousands of
Russians have left their country because they do not
want to be part of the war. Russian children are going
to schools in Germany, and I am very happy about
that. More than 1,000 international companies have
pulled out of Russia, taking with them a crucial part
of Russia’s prosperity and intelligence. This war is not
the world’s war, nor is it the war of the Russian people.
It is Putin’s war. The Russian President is risking the
future of his own country, his own soldiers and his own
children. That is why a just peace, as contained in the
peace plan presented yesterday by 141 States to the
General Assembly, is also in the interests of the people
of Russia.
When I look around this table, I am under
no illusions. We will not convince the Russian
representative today — he is not even listening. But
what we can do is ensure that the Council does not turn
a blind eye to Bucha, Kharkiv, Mariupol and Bakhmut,
or to the people and the children of Ukraine. What we
can do is stand up for a world where peace means peace.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Latvia.
Mr. Rinkēvičs (Latvia): I am speaking on behalf
of Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Lithuania,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Latvia.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
Malta’s presidency for the opportunity to address the
Security Council.
A year has passed since Russia started its brutal,
unjustified, unprovoked, full-scale war of aggression
against Ukraine, aided by Belarus. It is a clear violation
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. We admire the bravery and persistence of
the Ukrainians in the fight for their freedom and
independence. We want to pay our respects to all
Ukrainians who have died defending their homeland.
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol
and its full-scale invasion of Ukraine have trampled
on international norms and the rules-based order.
Russia, a permanent member of the Security Council,
is seeking to change the borders of a neighbouring
sovereign country by military force. That constitutes
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

a serious threat to international peace and security. We
will never accept Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea,
Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya oblasts.
We call on the Russian Federation to abide by the
provisional measures order of the International Court
of Justice of 16 March 2022 to immediately suspend the
military operations that it commenced on 24 February
2022 in Ukraine. Russia is cynically disregarding its
obligations as a permanent member and hampering the
Security Council’s ability to implement its mandate.
Russia started the war and Russia can and must end
it immediately by withdrawing its troops from the
internationally recognized territory of Ukraine. To
make that happen, we must provide Ukraine with all
necessary means. Under the Charter, Ukraine has an
inherent right to self-defence. The Nordic and Baltic
States are determined to enhance Ukraine’s military
capabilities and to provide all necessary support.
Unable to defeat Ukraine on the battlefield, Russia
is terrorizing Ukraine’s civilian population. The mass
killings, rape and torture in Bucha and Izyum, and the
illegal deportation of children, are only some of the most
horrifying atrocity crimes of the Russian armed forces.
We condemn in the strongest terms Russia’s deliberate
attacks on civilians, critical infrastructure and civilian
objects in Ukraine. To alleviate the suffering and to
facilitate reconstruction, we are providing economic,
political, humanitarian, financial and legal assistance
to Ukraine and its people.
Russia must and will be held accountable for
its crimes. We support the work of the International
Criminal Court in investigating atrocity crimes. In
addition, the crime of aggression must be addressed
to bring to justice the Russian political and military
leadership who have masterminded and unleashed the
war of aggression against Ukraine. We believe that the
United Nations should play a meaningful role in securing
broad international support for the establishment of a
tribunal for the prosecution of the crime of aggression.
Russia uses disinformation and propaganda to
mobilize domestic and international support for its
aggression against Ukraine. It is extremely worrisome
that Russia is using food and energy as instruments
in its warfare, resulting in suffering for the most
vulnerable nations and people all over the world. Russia
is cynically covering that up with false narratives and
disinformation, including by dishonestly blaming
sanctions. It is Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine that has aggravated an already existing food-

S/PV.9269

security crisis and helped to increase energy prices. We
support the Black Sea Grain Initiative and urge Russia
to extend it, as well as to stop delaying the work of
inspection teams.
Yesterday the General Assembly once again
reaffirmed the international support for Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We urge the
Security Council to uphold the Charter, which forms the
basis for just and lasting peace in Ukraine. We welcome
President Zelenskyy’s 10-point peace formula, and we
strongly support his vision for peace, which rests on
international law and the principles of the Charter. We
will stand by Ukraine for as long as necessary.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Bolbocean (Republic of Moldova): The
Republic of Moldova strongly condemns Russia’s
illegal and unfounded aggression against Ukraine.
We also categorically reject its attempts to annex
Ukrainian territories. As we commemorate a year of
that brutal war, we mourn the enormous human losses,
the significant destruction of civilian infrastructure and
the displacement of the countless Ukrainians who have
been forced to flee their homes to escape the horrors of
war. Moldova is one of the countries that have sheltered
hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian people, and we
will continue to provide support to Ukraine for as long
as it takes.
Ukraine is defending its land and its freedom, and,
by doing so, it defends our freedom and democracy
too. We appreciate Ukraine’s incredible resistance. We
stand in solidarity with our neighbours and friends. We
stand with Ukraine.
Moldova, Ukraine’s most fragile neighbour,
has been greatly impacted by Russia’s unprovoked
aggression. And while Ukraine is resisting a military
invasion, Moldova is on the front line of a hybrid war
that includes gas blackmail, cyberattacks, propaganda
and disinformation. On several occasions our airspace
has been violated by Russia’s missiles, and its
missile debris has landed on our territory, which is
absolutely unacceptable.
Let me also stress that the breakaway Transnistrian
region of the Republic of Moldova has been in the
spotlight regularly, including in recent days. Our
country is firmly committed to maintaining stability
and peace in the region in this complicated context

23-0586329/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and to promoting a political settlement of the conflict
based on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Moldova within its internationally
recognized borders. We reiterate our call for the
complete withdrawal of Russian military forces and
munitions storage sites illegally present in the region.
All of these challenges are real, but so is our resolve
to stay strong. The Republic of Moldova expresses its
deep gratitude to all partners that have supported us
in this time of crisis. Despite those risks, Moldova
remains committed to its path towards European Union
integration, which represents the best way to ensure
peace, stability and prosperity for the country.
Over the past year, Ukraine has faced an
unprecedented attack against its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Throughout that time, the
international community has stood firmly with Ukraine
in condemning the aggression and supporting Ukraine’s
efforts to defend its people and territory.
We
have
seen
remarkable
displays
of
solidarity — from the provision of humanitarian
assistance to the diplomatic efforts to bring about a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. The large support
extended yesterday by the General Assembly (see A/ES11/PV.19) to resolution ES-11/6, outlining the principles
for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine,
is another remarkable sign of strong support in that
regard. Moldova supports Ukraine’s efforts to achieve
a just peace and accountability.
We join the calls for an immediate cessation
of hostilities and the complete and unconditional
withdrawal of the Russian military troops and
ammunition from the territory of Ukraine.
In conclusion, the Republic of Moldova reaffirms
its unwavering support for Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.
The President: I now call on the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Netherlands.
Mr. Hoekstra (Netherlands): I am here today
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Accountability,
following the aggression against Ukraine — a Group of
49 Member States and the European Union that share
one strong conviction: that the power of justice should
always prevail over the power of force.
30/35

24/02/2023

Today marks exactly one year since Russia’s fullscale invasion of Ukraine. The people of Ukraine have
shown extraordinary courage and resilience in their
continued fight for freedom and independence.
We have seen horrendous images and reports of
indiscriminate killings of civilians — men, women,
children. We have seen unlawful attacks on civilian
infrastructure — houses, schools and hospitals. And
we have seen horrendous reports of sexual and genderbased violence and abductions of children.
Such actions are unacceptable. They violate
international law. Wherever they occur, they must be
met with the same strong response: this cannot stand.
Accountability and justice for Ukraine, for Ukrainians
and for the international community, as a whole, is of
the utmost importance to ensure a sustainable peace.
Yesterday the General Assembly resumed its
emergency special session on Ukraine (see A/ES-11/
PV.19). Once again the General Assembly took a strong
stance in defence of the Charter of the United Nations
by adopting a resolution on the Charter principles,
underlying a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine (General Assembly resolution ES-11/6). In that
resolution, the General Assembly emphasizes the need
to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes
under international law committed on the territory
of Ukraine.
Our quest for justice, our fight against impunity,
our fight against violations of international law, should
not, must not and cannot be pursued without taking
a firm, collective stand against the aggressor. We
commend the efforts and initiatives already taken to
ensure accountability. That includes the deployment
of forensic missions to Ukraine, the opening of an
investigation by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, the creation of an International Centre
for Prosecution of the Crime of Aggression and Register
of Damages Caused to Ukraine by Russian Aggression,
to be located in The Hague.
We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine and the establishment of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Moscow Mechanism. We commend the ongoing work
of the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine,
which has documented violations since 2014.
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Of particular concern are the reports of conflictrelated sexual violence, including rape as a tactic
of war. Those crimes constitute serious violations
of international humanitarian law. Conflict-related
sexual violence must be countered through effective
accountability measures that will contribute to the
deterrence and prevention of such horrendous crimes.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine violates the
United Nations Charter, which underpins peaceful
coexistence and global security. We call on the Russian
Federation to abide by the order on provisional measures
by the International Court of Justice of 16 March 2022.
The Court stated that Russia shall immediately end the
military operations that it commenced on 24 February
2022 in the territory of Ukraine.
That is the first step to putting an end to the all-toolong list of crimes that require accountability and justice
and the first step to putting an end to human suffering
in Ukraine and easing the human suffering caused by
Russia’s war in Ukraine, but clearly also globally.
The violation of the United Nations Charter we
are witnessing today is an attack on the international
community as a whole. We should not just seek
accountability for what has already taken place. We must
strive to prevent anyone — and I mean anyone — from
committing such a violation ever again, in Ukraine
or elsewhere.
The President: I now call on the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Italy.
Mr. Tajani (Italy): On this day, exactly one year
ago, a permanent member of the Security Council
unilaterally violated the basic principles and norms on
which the peaceful coexistence among States and this
very Organization are founded.
Far from bearing a greater sense of duty and
responsibility as a permanent member, with its
unacceptable behaviour Russia has profoundly shaken
and challenged the roots of the international order.
On this anniversary, Ukraine still stands, and,
together with the great majority of the international
community, Italy stands alongside Ukraine in full
solidarity with its people.
(spoke in French)
But, when I hear someone talking about Europe
being a slave of the United States, I must say that we

S/PV.9269

are slaves to freedom, democracy and international law.
It is therefore necessary to give up the idea of Europe
as someone’s slave. We are the home of freedom and
democracy in the world. What I heard here this morning
is unacceptable.
(spoke in English)
Russia’s illegal, unprovoked and unjustified act of
aggression against Ukraine is not only a gross violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and a threat to
international security and stability, but is also causing
global systematic disruption with multiple harmful
consequences that severely affects the most vulnerable
countries in the global South.
We need more diplomacy, and, as the Secretary
General said, the Black Sea Grain Initiative is a sign
of hope to address global concerns over such harmful
consequences and to show that the ground for dialogue
can, and must, be found.
In the first place, Italy strongly calls for the
renewal of the Black Sea Grain Initiative and the
swift establishment of a nuclear safe zone around the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
(spoke in Spanish)
We also call for a stronger United Nations that
is more representative, democratic and transparent,
because the United Nations can do more by involving
more countries of the world, as the world since the
Second World War until today has greatly changed. It is
therefore necessary to include many countries in such
a reform.
(spoke in English)
The daily attacks on Ukrainian people and critical
infrastructure, with devastating humanitarian costs, are
completely unacceptable and must immediately stop.
We want to work for peace. We are not against Russian
citizens. We are in favour of democracy and freedom.
We want to respect Europe’s international roots. That is
our commitment. To that end, we are strongly involved
in the defence of Ukraine. But we want to achieve peace
with justice, freedom and the independence of Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of North Macedonia.
Mr. Osmani (North Macedonia): I am grateful to
the Maltese presidency for the opportunity to address
the Security Council today as we mark one year since the

23-0586331/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

beginning of the full-scale invasion of the territory of
Ukraine. The unprovoked and brutal war of aggression
by the Russian Federation against Ukraine is a blatant
violation of international law, all principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and, above all, the
values of humankind.
At the outset, let me reaffirm our support for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Both in my national capacity and, later on, in my
capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2023,
I had the opportunity to visit Ukraine and places that
had been affected by the war and attacks carried out
by the military forces of the Russian Federation. I saw
first hand the human suffering, destruction and other
consequences of this senseless war of aggression.
Mass indiscriminate strikes on civilian sites persist.
People continue to die and suffer. Russia has continued
to conduct strikes in urban areas, leaving civilians and
cities without access to basic human needs.
The findings and investigations so far in the
various cities attacked in Ukraine lead to the conclusion
that war crimes and crimes against humanity have
been committed. The magnitude of sexual abuse
and violence committed against women and girls
is also of grave concern. The perpetrators of those
crimes and violations of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law must be held
accountable and brought to justice.
In my capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE
for 2023, on many occasions I already underscored,
and here today I would like to once again put emphasis
on, the OSCE Moscow Mechanism as an important
source invoked with the aim of establishing the facts
and circumstances of possible cases of war crimes
and crimes against humanity in order to present them
to the relevant accountability mechanisms, as well as
international courts. The second report, issued recently,
affirms what I just said.
We fully support the investigation launched by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court aimed at
looking into war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed on the territory of Ukraine. Previously,
we also welcomed the International Court of Justice’s
provisional measures ordering Russia to immediately
suspend military operations.
32/35

24/02/2023

Making full use and ensuring the sustainable
funding of the existing human rights mechanisms is
also crucial in support of the accountability processes.
North Macedonia believes that we should make better
use of the work done and information gathered by the
special procedures of the Human Rights Council in
order to investigate violations and abuses of human
rights and related crimes in the context of the war of
aggression against Ukraine.
In conclusion, in the coming period, it will
be particularly important to curtail any political
process that can undermine accountability for the
gross violations committed. We must do our utmost
to ensure access to justice for the victims of human
rights violations in this senseless aggression by the
Russian Federation.
Our motto for North Macedonia’s OSCE
chairpersonship is that it is about the people. We owe
it to them to restore peace immediately. We call on the
Russian Federation to stop the war. We reiterate our
demand for the immediate cessation of the military
aggression against Ukraine, as well as the full and
immediate withdrawal of Russia’s forces and military
equipment from Ukraine’s territory. We have to restore
peace, and accountability must prevail.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation
of Spain.
Mr. Albares Bueno (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, very much for having
convened this meeting.
Today marks one year since the tragic beginning
of the Russian Federation’s illegal aggression against
Ukraine, in flagrant violation of international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Ukraine’s existence, peace and the most fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter are at stake.
Such a violation is all the more unacceptable as
it comes from a permanent member of the Security
Council, an organ to which the United Nations Charter
entrusts the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and upholding
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Every day that Russian troops remain on sovereign
and independent Ukrainian territory undermines
that responsibility.
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Spain strongly supports the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Like many voices here today and
in the General Assembly yesterday (see A/ES-11/PV.18
and A/ES-11/PV.19), Spain demands the immediate,
complete and unconditional withdrawal of all military
forces of the Russian Federation from all Ukrainian
territory and the return to its internationally recognized
borders. No reason can justify this aggression.
Furthermore,
we
express
our
strongest
condemnation of Russia’s indiscriminate shelling of
civilian targets and infrastructure, which constitutes an
unacceptable violation of international humanitarian
law. Thousands of Ukrainian civilians have been
identified as having been killed in the war, and there
are more than 14 million displaced persons. There is
alarming evidence of massive violations of the human
rights of the Ukrainian population. Those responsible
for those very serious actions must be held accountable
for such acts, which is something that Spain will
wholeheartedly support. There must be peace and
justice in Ukraine.
The use of the veto by the Russian Federation is
preventing the Security Council from exercising its
primary role as the guarantor of international peace
and security. No country should be able to abuse that
right for its own ends and use it as carte blanche to
violate international law without consequences.
However, that veto will not prevent the international
community from reacting. Yesterday the General
Assembly once again expressed itself clearly on the
issue (see A/ES-11/PV.19), reiterating its demand that
Russia withdraw from the entire territory of Ukraine,
in addition to reaffirming its commitment to Ukraine’s
independence, unity and territorial integrity and calling
for a just and lasting peace in line with the Charter of
the United Nations and international law.
Spain is here in the Council today to reaffirm that
because those of us in Ukraine and Europe are not
alone in facing this war. Russia’s unilateral actions are
also an attack on the most basic norms and principles
governing relations among States, which are a key
condition for the maintenance of international peace,
the founding purpose of the Organization. We therefore
demand an immediate cessation of hostilities, for Russia
to withdraw its troops to its internationally recognized
borders and for respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders. We want peace, both for Ukraine

S/PV.9269

and the Ukrainian people and for all of us who defend
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Czechia.
Mr. Lipavký (Czechia): I greatly appreciate the
opportunity to participate in this Security Council
debate. Czechia hosts the highest number of Ukrainian
war refugees per capita — nearly half a million — most
of them women and children. We are one of the countries
most affected by the direct consequences of Russia’s
unprovoked and unjustified war of aggression
against Ukraine.
Russia’s cruel full-scale aggression started one
year ago, and its illegal annexation of Crimea began
nine years ago. Russia sees other countries, along with
their freedom, democracy and even their statehood,
as nothing but spoils up for grabs in its colonialist
and imperialist ambition. Yet the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders is non-negotiable.
The consequences of Russia’s aggression reach far
beyond Europe. They are truly global. The war it wages
has sent shock waves throughout the world commodity
markets, threatening to drive 50 million people to the
brink of famine across Africa and other continents.
Russia’s massive air strikes, deliberately conducted
in densely populated areas, are destroying critical
civilian infrastructure and innocent lives. Entire
towns and villages have been wiped out. The evidence
of Russia’s atrocities and ferocious attacks against
Ukraine’s civilian population, including children,
is overwhelming.
Just a few days ago, President Putin announced
Russia’s suspension of the New Start Treaty. For him,
escalation is the order of the day. We must collectively
stop Russia from dragging us into the horrors similar to
those of the World Wars. Together, we have to defend
the Charter of the United Nations. Accountability for
all-crimes under international law must be ensured.
Yesterday the General Assembly adopted resolution
ES-11/6, entitled “Principles of the Charter of the
United Nations underlying a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in Ukraine” with a huge majority of votes.
The international community has spoken clearly about
its strong wish for peace in line with the Charter. The
peace formula plan presented by President Zelenskyy is
the one to be built on. We have stood with Ukraine from
the outset and remain committed to its wish for a just

23-0586333/35

S/PV.9269

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

peace, as well as its undeniable right in line with Article
51 of the Charter to defend itself against the aggression.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs of Croatia.
Mr. Grlić-Radman (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself
with statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union, and I would like to add some remarks
in my national capacity.
One year ago, the Russian Federation sent more
than 100,000 of its soldiers, tanks and warplanes
to invade Ukraine, with more following after.
Russia’s troops marched from the east, the north and
neighbouring Belarus in an attempt to break Ukraine’s
resistance in one swift move. That full-scale invasion
is in fact a dramatic escalation of the aggression that
began in 2014 with the Russian occupation of Crimea
and parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of
Ukraine. The war has brought nothing but loss of life,
countless injuries, suffering and destruction. It also
brought with it a series of atrocities, accompanied by
the targeted destruction of civilian infrastructure and
mass displacement of people. Accountability for those
crimes is important to provide at least some comfort
and a sense of justice to the victims and their families,
but it would also serve as a warning and a deterrent to
other potential perpetrators.
The misery brought about by the Russian aggression
has not been confined to the borders of Ukraine. Its
poisonous effects have been felt around the world as
food and energy insecurity become widespread globally.
This deadly war aims not just to conquer Ukraine and
strip it of its independence; it aims to invalidate the
Charter of the United Nations and the very tenets of
international law. It aims to dismantle global security
and usher in an age in which brute force and land grabs
are the accepted norm.
The Russian army invaded Ukraine, not the other
way around. Nothing can hide that obvious fact.
Although each country here at the United Nations
has its own concerns and aspirations and turns to its
different friends for help, in this war there is only one
side we can stand on: the side protecting the right of
a country to defend itself. It is our duty to support
that just cause. Not so long ago, Croatia was victim to
a very similar war with almost the same pretext and
cynical justification. In that difficult situation, every
kind of help mattered, even if it amounted to mere
acknowledgment of the enduring tragedy and even if
34/35

24/02/2023

it was just words recognizing victimization. One such
resolution (General Assembly resolution ES-11/6)
acknowledging the tragedy and injustice visited on
Ukraine was adopted overwhelmingly yesterday by the
General Assembly.
With some exceptions, the world continues to
support Ukraine and its people’s right to self-defence.
After a year, the Ukrainians have not tired, and so
shall not we in our support. However, we do not
accept the normalization of this cruel war deliberately
targeting civilians. Russia started this war and Russia
is the only one that can stop it by removing its troops
from Ukraine. Until that moment comes, Croatia
will continue to stand with Ukraine and its people
and for its independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We admire the bravery and dignity of Ukrainians
defending their country and their homes, and we owe
them gratitude for standing for the crucial principles
of the Charter and the rules-based international order.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Estonia.
Mr. Reinsalu (Estonia): Estonia is a neighbour of
the aggressor State, Russia, and this war has impacted
my country significantly. We have received tens of
thousands of Ukrainian refugees. During the course
of the war, we have been on the receiving end of
systematic cyber attacks coming from Russia. Russia
has been waging its full-scale brutal, unprovoked and
genocidal war of aggression against Ukraine for 12
months now. The Kremlin’s goal — to erase a sovereign
and democratic Ukraine from the map — has not
changed. After a year of courageous fighting, Ukraine
deserves peace more than ever. However, it cannot be
a peace at all costs. We need a just and lasting peace
in full conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations; a peace that upholds and reinforces the rulesbased international order, with the United Nations at
its core; and a peace that prevents the use of force to
redraw international borders. Those are exactly the
same parameters that the overwhelming majority of
United Nations Member States voted in favour of in
their adoption of General Assembly resolution ES11/6 yesterday. The United Nations membership firmly
supports a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine that rests on international law and the Charter.
The Ukrainian peace plan is based on the same universal
values and principles, and I therefore call on the United
23-05863

24/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Nations membership to support President Zelenskyy’s
10-point peace plan.
Secondly, Article 51 of the Charter grants
every country the right to self-defence, and we need
collectively to ensure that Ukraine can defend itself
against its aggressor. We have seen the heinous
atrocities that Russia has committed, and unfortunately
still is committing today in Ukraine. That must stop,
and that is the reason that Estonia’s military aid to
Ukraine has reached 1 per cent of its gross domestic
product. We want a sovereign Ukraine to survive the
brutal aggression and win. Then peace and justice will
be established. We call on all peoples of the world to
rise up and support Ukraine.
Thirdly, in order to achieve lasting peace, full
accountability must be ensured. It includes our obligation
to discredit aggression completely as an instrument of
international relations. We owe it to the thousands of
Ukrainians being killed, raped and forcibly displaced
to hold Russia’s political and military leadership to
account for the crime of aggression. Therefore, an
international special tribunal for the crime of aggression
in Ukraine within the United Nations system must be
established. We cannot let Mr. Putin hide in a judicial

S/PV.9269

loophole. The time will come, and Mr. Putin will sit
before such a tribunal. It is high time to learn from the
past. The horrors of war we are witnessing today are the
tragic consequences of the fact that the atrocity crimes
committed by the Soviet Union during the Second
World War, including against my country and people,
were left unpunished. Not only would a tribunal serve
justice to the victims of this horrendous crime, it would
also serve as a deterrent and would help prevent future
conflicts.
Lastly, today, on the 105th anniversary of my
country, Estonia’s, Declaration of Independence, our
Independence Day, my thoughts are with our brave
countrymen and women who fought for our freedom
and independence. Yet I also pray for Ukraine and
Ukrainians, who are the bravest people I know. Ukraine
is not only defending its country, people and right to
exist, but Ukraine is also defending the common values
of a united humankind, the international legal order
and the Charter. Peace rises from truth. The Russian
Federation is a terrorist regime, which is committing
genocide against the Ukrainian people. The world
needs to recognize that.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

23-0586335/35
