UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/34
25 July 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3557th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 July 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned about the situation in and
around the safe area of Zepa in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Council notes the letter of 25 July 1995 from the President of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the President of the Security Council
(S/1995/611).
"The Security Council reaffirms its previous relevant resolutions and
its statement of 20 July 1995 (S/PRST/1995/33). It reiterates in the
strongest possible terms its condemnation of the Bosnian Serb offensive
against the safe area and demands that the Bosnian Serbs comply fully with
the requirements set out in that statement as well as its earlier
resolutions. The Council further demands that Bosnian Serb forces withdraw
from the safe areas of Srebrenica and Zepa.
"The Security Council remains particularly concerned at the plight of
the civilian population and other persons protected under international
humanitarian law in the Zepa area. It welcomes and supports the efforts
being made by UNPROFOR and the international humanitarian agencies, as
requested by the President of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
achieve a safe evacuation of those civilians who wish to leave and stresses
the importance it attaches to the success of these efforts. It requests
the Secretary-General to use all resources available to him to that end and
calls on the parties to cooperate.
"The Security Council demands that UNPROFOR and the international
humanitarian agencies be provided with immediate and unhindered access to
the population of the area and, in particular, that the Bosnian Serb party
provide access to representatives of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) to all civilians who decide to remain and permit the ICRC to
register any persons detained against their will and visit them
immediately."
----95-22212 (E)

250795
